THE REVISED ORDINANCES OF
HONOLULU
2021
Comprising the Ordinances of the CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU
Supplement 9, 6-2025
Ordinance No. 25-1 through Ordinance No. 25-39
June 30, 2025
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
Effective
June 30, 2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
800-445-5588
www.amlegal.com
 
MAYOR
Rick Blangiardi
COUNCIL
Radiant Cordero Scott Nishimoto      Val Aquino Okimoto
Andria Tupola   Tyler Dos Santos-Tam Tommy Waters
Esther Kia‘āiAugusto Tulba        Matt Weyer
 
PREFACE
   The Revised Ordinances of Honolulu 2021, enacted as Ordinance 22-21
(effective November 18, 2022), is the culmination of a four-year effort by the
Office of Council Services, as Honolulu's Revisor of Ordinances, and American
Legal Publishing Corporation, as the publisher contracted by the Office to
assist in the recodification of the Revised Ordinances of Honolulu. The purpose
of the recodification was to more logically organize the ordinance code, delete
obsolete provisions, and update and standardize its format. The effort was
begun under the leadership of my predecessor as Director of Council Services,
Charmaine T. Doran, and I would like to thank her for getting the project
started. I would also like to thank Cynthia Ramirez and Colleen Jones, as
Revisors of Ordinances; Robert Mon and Kathy Kam as Revisor Staff; my Deputy,
Warren J. Senda, for his leadership over the effort; and the other members of
the Revision Committee, Lori M. Hiraoka and Alden Lum, for their valuable input
on the recodification. Thanks also to my entire staff for their diligent
proofreading and, of course, to the staff of American Legal Publishing
Corporation for their professional, timely, and consistent effort on this
project in the midst of a global pandemic.
   This four-volume set contains ordinances of a general and permanent nature
enacted from time to time and those other ordinances that we consider desirable
for retention.
   The Revised Ordinances of Honolulu 2021 constitutes the sixth revision and
recodification of the general ordinances of the City and County of Honolulu
since the adoption of the Charter of the City and County of Honolulu 1959. It
includes all ordinances of a general and permanent nature previously
established in the fifth revision (ROH 1990), as supplemented through
Supplement #31 (published in March 2020 and covering ordinances passed through
June 30, 2019), and ordinances passed through October 31, 2020.
   Unlike the previous Revisions, organized by "chapters," the ROH 2021 is
organized into nine broad "titles" - "Administration," "Taxation and Finance,"
"Miscellaneous Regulations," "Traffic and Vehicles," "Building and Construction
Codes," "Land Use," "Business," "Property," and "Public Health, Safety, and
Sanitation." In order to place related chapters together within the new
"titles," a number of chapters have been moved from their traditional
locations. We have tried to retain in their traditional locations certain key
chapters, particularly those for which signage is an important component of
enforcement (and renumbering would have necessitated expensive new signage);
these include Chapters 8 ("Real Property Taxation"), 10 ("Public Parks and
Recreation Facilities"), 15 ("Traffic Code"), 16 ("Building Code"), 21 ("Land
Use Ordinance"), 22 ("Subdivision of Land"), and 24 ("Development Plans").
    A new appendix was added to Chapter 21, the Land Use Ordinance, as Appendix
21-I, to list Transit-Oriented Development Resolutions.
   In parentheses following the text of each section is a legislative history
note identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This
legislative history is complemented by a Prior Code Cross-Reference Table and
an Ordinance Disposition Table, following the text of the code. The Prior Code
Cross-Reference Table lists all sections of ROH 1990 through Ordinance 20-35,
any legislative history information appearing in those volumes and supplements,
and the disposition (redesignation) of the sections in this edition. The
Ordinance List and Disposition Table lists by number all ordinances enacted
since Ordinance 87-97 (October 1987), their subjects, and where they appear in
the codification applicable at the time of their enactment.
   Footnote references to applicable statutory provisions are located
throughout the text. A subject-matter index provides for location of specific
provisions by individual section numbers.
   The Revised Charter of Honolulu (Amended 2017 Edition), as amended, is
available in an online version prepared by the Department of the Corporation
Counsel as the Revisor of the Charter.
   The Revised Ordinances of Honolulu 2021 is being supplemented by American
Legal Publishing. The current supplement contains ordinances through Ordinance
25-39.
James S. Williston,
Director of Council Services
Rm. 207 Honolulu Hale
530 S. King St.
Honolulu, HI 96813
TITLE I: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapters
      
1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2.   THE MAYOR AND EXECUTIVE AGENCIES–ADDITIONAL POWERS, DUTIES, AND FUNCTIONS
      
3.   ADDITIONAL BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES
      
4.   ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF COUNCIL AND LEGISLATIVE AGENCIES
      
5.   SALARIES, EMPLOYMENT, AND BONDING REQUIREMENTS OF ELECTED OFFICIALS AND
NON-CIVIL SERVICE OFFICERS
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Editor’s note:
   The biennial training described in §
1-26.3 shall be developed, implemented, and monitored by January 1, 2024.
Articles
   
1.   Title of Volume
   
2.   Construction of Ordinances
   
3.   Penalties and Interest
   
4.   Definitions
   
5.   Repeal of Resolutions or Ordinances
   
6.   Severability
   
7.   Continuity in Government
   
8.   Intergovernmental Agreements and Private Grant Agreements
   
9.   Authority of Executive Agency to Adopt Rules
   
10.   Limitation of Service on County Boards and Commissions
   
11.   Nondiscrimination Policy
   
12.   Purchase of Recycled Paper Products
   
13.   Seal and Motto of the Department of the Prosecuting Attorney
   
14.   Personal Names on Signs Relating to Public Projects and Governmental
Activities
   
15.   Online Access to City Forms
   
16.   Codification of Ordinances
   
17.   Sexual Harassment Policy for City Officer or Employee
   
18.   Sexual Harassment Policy for Employer Having a Contract with the City
   
19.   Additional Standards of Conduct
   
20.   Drug and Alcohol Abuse Training Program
   
21.   City Advertisements
   
22.   Hawaiian Language Signs of the City and County of Honolulu
   
23.   City Seal
   
24.   Public Records
   
25.   Commemorations and Celebrations
   
26.   Anti-Bias and Inclusion Policy
   
27.   Purple Heart City
   
28.   Resident Preference in City Housing Programs
ARTICLE 1: TITLE OF VOLUME
Section
   
1-1.1   Title
§ 1-1.1 Title.
   This volume shall be known as “the Revised Ordinances of Honolulu 2021,” and
its official abbreviated designation shall be “ROH.”
(Sec. 1-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 1, § 1-1.1)
ARTICLE 2: CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCES
Sections
   
1-2.1   Construction
   
1-2.2   When construction shall apply
   
1-2.3   Reference to articles, chapters, or sections—Conflicting provisions
   
1-2.4   Passage of ordinances
   
1-2.5   Adoption of resolutions
§ 1-2.1 Construction.
   In the construction of ordinances, resolutions having the effect of law, or
rules having the effect of law, the following rules shall be observed, unless
it shall be apparent from the context that a different construction is
intended.
(a)   General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood
according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar
and appropriate meaning.
(b)   Construction of ambiguous words. Where the words are ambiguous:
(1)   The meaning of the ambiguous words may be sought by examining the
context, with which the ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences may be
compared, to ascertain their true meaning;
(2)   The reason and spirit of the ordinance, resolution, and rules and the
cause which induced enactment or adoption may be considered to discover its
true meaning; and
(3)   Every construction that leads to an absurdity shall be rejected.
(c)   Ordinances in pari materia. Ordinances in pari materia, or upon the same
subject matter, shall be construed with reference to each other. What is clear
in one ordinance may be called in aid to explain what is doubtful in another.
(d)   Number and gender. Words in the masculine gender signify both the
masculine and feminine gender, those in the singular or plural number signify
both the singular and plural number, and words importing adults include youths
or children.
(e)   Tenses. Every word used in the present tense shall include the future.
(f)   Acts by subordinate officer. When any provision herein requires an act to
be done, which may by law as well be done by a subordinate officer as by the
superior officer, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts
when done by an authorized subordinate officer.
(g)   Ordinance, resolution, or rules not retrospective. No ordinance,
resolution, or rule has any retrospective operation, unless otherwise expressed
or obviously intended.
(h)   Persons and property subject to ordinance, resolution, or rules. The
ordinances, resolutions, and rules are obligatory upon all persons and property
within the jurisdiction of the city.
(i)   Prohibitory ordinance—effect. Whatever is done in contravention of a
prohibitory ordinance is void, although the nullity be not formally directed.
(j)   References apply to amendments. Whenever reference is made to any portion
of the Revised Ordinances of Honolulu or of any other law of the city or State,
the reference applies to all amendments thereto.
(k)   References inclusive. Whenever reference is made to a series of sections
in the Revised Ordinances of Honolulu by citing only the numbers of the first
and last sections connected by the word “to,” the reference includes both the
first and last sections.
(l)   Citations of ordinance or resolution included in supplements. Any act of
the council may be cited in any subsequent enactment of ordinances or in any
other proceeding by reference to the chapter or section numbers as set forth in
the supplement published pursuant to Charter § 3-205.
(m)   Service of notice by mail. Wherever an ordinance provides for the giving
of notice or service of legal process by registered mail, the sending of such
notice or service of such legal process may be made by means of certified mail,
return receipt requested and deliver to addressee only.
(n)   Computation of time. The time, in which any act is to be done, is
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day
is a Sunday or holiday and then it is also excluded. When so provided by the
rules of court, the last day also shall be excluded if it is a Saturday.
(o)   Acts to be done on holidays. Whenever any act of a secular nature other
than a work of necessity or mercy is appointed by law or contract to be
performed upon a particular day, that day falls upon a Saturday, Sunday, or
holiday, the act may be performed upon the next business day with the same
effect as if it had been performed upon the appointed day.
(Sec. 1-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 2, § 1-2.1)
§ 1-2.2 When construction shall apply.
(a)   All provisions of this article relating to construction of ordinances,
resolutions, and rules shall apply not merely to those now in force, but to all
enacted, unless otherwise expressed or obviously intended.
(b)   The rules of construction set forth in §
1-2.1 shall not be applied to any provision of the Revised Ordinances of
Honolulu that shall contain any express provision excluding such construction,
or when the subject matter or context of a provision of the Revised Ordinances
of Honolulu may be repugnant thereto.
(Sec. 1-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 2, § 1-2.2)
§ 1-2.3 Reference to articles, chapters, or sections—Conflicting provisions.
   In addition to the rules of construction specified in §
1-2.1, the following rules shall be observed in the construction of the
provisions of the Revised Ordinances of Honolulu.
(a)   All references to chapters, articles, or sections are to the chapters,
articles, and sections of the Revised Ordinances of Honolulu unless otherwise
specified.
(b)   If the provisions of different chapters of the Revised Ordinances of
Honolulu conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter
shall prevail as to all matters and questions growing out of the subject matter
of such chapter.
(c)   If conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the same
chapter the provisions of the section that are enacted later in time shall
prevail unless such construction is inconsistent with the meaning of such
chapter.
(Sec. 1-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 2, § 1-2.3)
§ 1-2.4 Passage of ordinances.
   No ordinance shall be passed, except by a bill that must pass three readings
on separate days and within two years of its introduction. If a bill fails to
pass third reading within the two-year period, it shall be deemed filed.
(Sec. 1-2.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 2, §
1-2.4) (Am. Ord. 96-58)
§ 1-2.5 Adoption of resolutions.
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a resolution requiring one
reading for adoption shall be deemed filed if it fails to be adopted by the
council within one year of its date of introduction. Any resolution requiring
three readings on separate days for adoption shall be deemed filed if it fails
to be adopted by the council within two years of its date of introduction.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 2, § 1-2.5) (Added by Ord. 89-29)
ARTICLE 3: PENALTIES AND INTEREST
Sections
   
1-3.1   Where no penalty provided
   
1-3.2   Refusal to provide identification
   
1-3.3   Interest on debts owed the city
§ 1-3.1 Where no penalty provided.
   In any case where there shall be a violation of the Charter or ordinances or
rules for which no criminal penalty or sanction is provided, the person
violating the same, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $1,000 for each offense or by imprisonment of not more than one year, or
to both such fine and imprisonment; provided that if such offense by the same
person shall continue after due notice, each day’s continuance of the same
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Sec. 1-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 3, § 1-3.1)
§ 1-3.2 Refusal to provide identification.
   In any case where the Revised Ordinances of Honolulu provide for the
issuance of a summons or citation, a person so summoned or cited shall not
wilfully refuse to provide such person’s name, address, and any proof thereof
upon the lawful order or direction of any police officer, or other officer
lawfully empowered to issue a summons or citation, in the course and scope of
the officer’s duties pursuant to the ordinances.
(Sec. 1-3.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 3, § 1-3.2)
§ 1-3.3 Interest on debts owed the city.
(a)   In any case where existing ordinances do not provide for interest to be
charged against a debt owed to the city, interest at the rate of 1 percent for
each month or fraction thereof shall be assessed against the outstanding debt,
beginning 30 days after the date of the bill.
(b)   For the purposes of this section, “debt” includes any loan, fee, charge,
or other liquidated sum that is past due to the city, regardless of whether
there is an outstanding judgment for that sum, and whether the sum has accrued
through contract, subrogation, tort, operation of law, or judicial or
administrative judgment or order.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 3, § 1-3.3) (Added by Ord. 94-50)
ARTICLE 4: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
1-4.1   Words
§ 1-4.1 Words.
   For the purposes of the Revised Ordinances of Honolulu, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
Agency. Any office, department, board, commission, or other governmental unit
of the city.
Charter. The Revised Charter of the City and County of Honolulu.
City. The City and County of Honolulu.
Council. The council of the City and County of Honolulu.
County. Includes the City and County of Honolulu.
Employee. Any person, except an officer, employed by the city or any agency
thereof, but shall not include an independent contractor.
Executive Agency. Any agency of the executive branch of the city government,
excluding the board of water supply.
Month. A calendar month.
Oath. Includes a solemn affirmation.
Officer. Includes the following:
(1)   Mayor, members of the council and the managing director;
(2)   Any person appointed as administrative head of any agency of the city or
as a member of any board or commission provided for in the Charter;
(3)   Any person appointed by a board or commission as the administrative head
of such agency;
(4)   The first deputy or a division chief appointed by the administrative head
of any agency of the city; or
(5)   Deputies of the corporation counsel and the prosecuting attorney.
Or and And. May be construed to mean the other.
Person. Or words importing persons, for instance, “another,” “others,” “any,”
“anyone,” “anybody,” and the like, signify not only individuals, but
corporations, firms, associations, societies, communities, assemblies,
inhabitants of a district, or neighborhood, or persons known or unknown, and
the public generally, where it appears, from the subject matter, the sense and
connection in which such words are used, that such construction is intended.
Year. A calendar year.
(Sec. 1-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 4, § 1-4.1)
ARTICLE 5: REPEAL OF RESOLUTIONS OR ORDINANCES
Sections
   
1-5.1   Repeal of ordinances
   
1-5.2   Repeal of resolutions
   
1-5.3   No revivor on repeal—Exception
   
1-5.4   Express or implied repeal
   
1-5.5   Effect of repeal on accrued rights
   
1-5.6   Effect of repeal on pending suit or prosecution
§ 1-5.1 Repeal of ordinances.
   Ordinances may be repealed either entirely or partially by other ordinances.
(Sec. 1-5.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 5, § 1-5.1)
§ 1-5.2 Repeal of resolutions.
   Resolutions may be repealed either entirely or partially by other
resolutions.
(Sec. 1-5.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 5, § 1-5.2)
§ 1-5.3 No revivor on repeal—Exception.
   The repeal of any resolution or ordinance shall not be construed to revive
any other resolution or ordinance that has been repealed, unless it is clearly
expressed.
(Sec. 1-5.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 5, § 1-5.3)
§ 1-5.4 Express or implied repeal.
   The repeal of a resolution or ordinance is either express or implied. It is
express when it is literally declared by a subsequent resolution or ordinance.
It is implied when the new resolution or ordinance contains provisions contrary
to, or irreconcilable with, those of the former resolution or ordinance.
(Sec. 1-5.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 5, § 1-5.4)
§ 1-5.5 Effect of repeal on accrued rights.
   The repeal of any resolution or ordinance shall in no case affect any act
done, or any right accruing, accrued, acquired, or established, or any suit or
proceedings had or commenced in any civil case, before the time when the repeal
takes effect.
(Sec. 1-5.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 5, § 1-5.5)
§ 1-5.6 Effect of repeal on pending suit or prosecution.
   No suit or prosecution pending at the time of the repeal of any resolution
or ordinance, for any offense committed, or for the recovery of any penalty or
forfeiture incurred under the resolution or ordinance so repealed, shall in any
case be affected by such repeal.
(Sec. 1-5.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 5, § 1-5.6)
ARTICLE 6: SEVERABILITY
Section
   
1-6.1   General provisions
§ 1-6.1 General provisions.
   If any provision of the Revised Ordinances of Honolulu, or the application
thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of the
Revised Ordinances of Honolulu, or the application of the provision to other
persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby.
(Sec. 1-6.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 6, § 1-6.1)
ARTICLE 7: CONTINUITY IN GOVERNMENT
Sections
   
1-7.1   Purpose
   
1-7.2   Definitions
   
1-7.3   Determination as to unavailability
   
1-7.4   Succession to office of mayor
   
1-7.5   Succession to office of councilmember
   
1-7.6   Succession to office of chair or vice-chair
   
1-7.7   Term of office
   
1-7.8   Effect of succession to office
   
1-7.9   Standby officers—Compensation
   
1-7.10   Absence of the mayor
§ 1-7.1 Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide for an order of succession and the
designation of standby officers to the offices of the mayor and councilmembers
in the event of any vacancy in such offices, or in the event of unavailability
of any councilmember, resulting from a civil defense emergency.
(Sec. 1-8.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 7, § 1-7.1)
§ 1-7.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Civil Defense Emergency. Any disaster or emergency of great destructiveness
resulting from enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, upon the basis
of which the existence of a state of civil defense emergency is proclaimed.
Standby Officers. Persons who shall function with all the powers,
responsibilities, and duties of the office for which they have been designated
in the event of the unavailability of the officers for whom they stand by,
during a period of a civil defense emergency as in this article provided.
(Sec. 1-8.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 7, § 1-7.2)
§ 1-7.3 Determination as to unavailability.
   The determination as to whether a particular officer is unavailable during a
civil defense emergency period shall be made by the city council or the
remaining available members of the council.
(Sec. 1-8.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 7, § 1-7.3)
§ 1-7.4 Succession to office of mayor.
(a)   If the office of the mayor becomes vacant during a civil defense
emergency period, the vacancy will be filled as provided by Charter § 5-106.
(b)   If the vacancy referred to in subsection (a) cannot be filled in
conformity with Charter § 5-106, the following will serve as standby officers
for the office of mayor in the following order of succession:
(1)   The chair of the city council;
(2)   The vice-chair of the city council;
(3)   Other councilmembers, in order of longest to shortest continuous tenure
on the council; provided that if there is more than one councilmember with the
same length of tenure, then their relative order will be in accordance with the
number of votes received by each councilmember in the preceding election at
which they were elected or reelected, from the greatest to the least number of
votes; and
(4)   The managing director.
(c)   Pending the assumption of the office of mayor by any councilmember as
provided in this section, during the mayor’s temporary absence from the State,
or during the mayor’s temporary disability or unavailability, the managing
director will act as mayor. If the managing director should resign or be unable
to act, the director of budget and fiscal services will then act as mayor.
(Sec. 1-8.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 7, § 1-7.4) (Am.
Ord. 25-9)
§ 1-7.5 Succession to office of councilmember.
(a)   If a vacancy occurs in the office of a councilmember during a civil
defense emergency period, the vacancy shall be filled as provided by Charter §
3-105.
(b)   If the vacancy referred to in subsection (a) cannot be filled in the
manner prescribed therein, the remaining members of the council shall appoint a
successor possessing the requisite qualifications to fill the vacancy.
(c)   If subsections (a) and (b) cannot be complied with within seven calendar
days after the occurrence of a civil defense emergency, the mayor shall appoint
the successor to the office of any councilmember that is vacant or for which a
councilmember is otherwise unavailable; provided that any person so appointed
shall have the requisite qualifications specified by Charter § 3-104.
(Sec. 1-8.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 7, § 1-7.5)
§ 1-7.6 Succession to office of chair or vice-chair.
(a)   In the event of a vacancy in the office of chair or vice-chair of the
council, the council shall elect one of its members as the successor to such
office as provided by Charter § 3-105.
(b)   If both the chair and vice-chair are unavailable during a civil defense
emergency period, the council shall appoint a presiding officer pro tempore
from its membership.
(Sec. 1-8.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 7, § 1-7.6)
§ 1-7.7 Term of office.
(a)   Any person who assumes the office of mayor or of a councilmember due to a
vacancy in such office shall continue in office for the unexpired term, if such
unexpired term is for less than one year. If the unexpired term is for one year
or more, such person shall continue in office until a successor is chosen
pursuant to the Charter; provided that if the existence of the civil defense
emergency prevents compliance with the provisions of the Charter, the person
filling the vacancy shall continue in office until a successor has been chosen
as provided by law.
(b)   Any person who assumes the office of a councilmember during a civil
defense emergency period, other than to fill a vacancy, shall continue in
office until the original incumbent becomes available or, if the original
incumbent remains unavailable, then for the duration of the civil defense
emergency period and thereafter, until a successor has been chosen as provided
by Charter § 3-105.
(Sec. 1-8.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 7, § 1-7.7)
§ 1-7.8 Effect of succession to office.
   If any councilmember or the managing director assumes the office of mayor
because of a vacancy in the office of the mayor, then a vacancy shall exist in
the office of councilmember or the managing director, as the case may be.
(Sec. 1-8.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 7, § 1-7.8)
§ 1-7.9 Standby officers—Compensation.
(a)   Persons designated as standby officers for the mayor or councilmembers
shall receive no compensation for such designation as standby officers.
(b)   In the event of a vacancy in any such office, the person filling the
vacancy shall be entitled to the compensation attaching to such office.
(c)   In the event any person assumes the office of a councilmember during a
civil defense emergency, other than to fill a vacancy, such person shall be
entitled to compensation, as may be provided by ordinance, while performing the
duties and functions of such office.
(Sec. 1-8.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 7, § 1-7.9)
§ 1-7.10 Absence of the mayor.
(a)   Consistent with Charter § 5-106.2, the mayor shall provide written notice
to the council and file the notice with the city clerk before any anticipated
absence from the city. The notice shall provide the date of the mayor’s
anticipated departure from the city, the date of the mayor’s anticipated return
to the city, and the name of the city officer who will be acting as mayor
during the mayor’s anticipated absence.
(b)   If the mayor must be absent from the city due to an unanticipated
emergency, the mayor or the mayor’s designee shall provide the notice to the
council and file the notice with the city clerk as soon as is practicable after
the mayor’s departure, stating the date on which the mayor departed from the
city, the date of the mayor’s anticipated return to the city, and the name of
the city officer who is acting as mayor during the mayor’s absence.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 7, § 1-7.10) (Added by Ord. 04-41)
ARTICLE 8: INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS AND
PRIVATE GRANT AGREEMENTS
Sections
   
1-8.1   Definitions
   
1-8.2   Intergovernmental and private grant agreement reporting requirements
   
1-8.3   Approval of Consolidated Plan and Annual Action Plans
   
1-8.4   Penalties
   
1-8.5   Separability
   
1-8.6   Approval of Honolulu High Capacity Transit Corridor Project agreements
   
1-8.7   Approval of agreements with significant fiscal impacts
§ 1-8.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Agreement. An intergovernmental agreement or a private grant agreement.
Annual Action Plan. An annual application for funding under the HUD CPD formula
grant for the CDBG, HOME, ESG, and HOPWA programs. The Annual Action Plan is
submitted to HUD on a yearly basis and identifies projects and activities for
HUD review and approval.
CDBG. HUD’s Community Development Block Grant program and any successor
program.
Conditional Gift. Any voluntary contribution of money, securities, other
personal property, or of real estate or any interest in real estate to the city
for a public purpose, which imposes an obligation on the city.
Consolidated Plan. A three- or five-year plan prepared in accordance with HUD
CPD requirements submitted to HUD that serves as a planning document that
describes needs, resources, priorities and proposed activities to be undertaken
with respect to CDBG, HOME, ESG, and HOPWA programs.
CPD. The Community Planning and Development programs of HUD.
ESG. HUD’s Emergency Shelter Grants program and any successor program.
HART. The Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation.
HOME. HUD’s HOME Investment Partnership program and any successor program.
HOPWA. HUD’s Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS program and any
successor program.
HUD. The United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Intergovernmental Agreement. Any instrument in the nature of a contract,
compact, memorandum of understanding, or agreement that is intended to be
executed between the city and either the federal government, the State
government, the government of any other state, any political subdivision of any
state, any combination thereof, or with a quasi-governmental agency.
Intergovernmental agreement also includes any arrangement between the city and
a governmental entity listed above, or between the city and a nongovernmental
entity under contract with a governmental agency listed above, to provide
training to city personnel, alone or in combination with travel and lodging for
the city personnel to participate in the training. To be deemed an
intergovernmental agreement, such an arrangement need not be formalized in a
contract, compact, memorandum of understanding, or agreement that is executed
between the city and governmental entity.
Obligation. Any commitment, promise, or similar representation contained in an
agreement that the city or any agency thereof will provide either funds,
documents, statistical data, or any professional or technical services to
another party, send personnel to training provided by another party, or to
expend city funds as required by that party. An obligation does not include the
duty to acknowledge a gift, or to report to the donor on the use of a gift.
Private Grant Agreement. Any instrument in the nature of a contract, compact,
memorandum of understanding, or agreement that is intended to be executed
between the city and a private party where the private party agrees to furnish
assistance, financial or otherwise, to support a city program or function in
exchange for the city incurring an obligation. To be deemed a private grant
agreement, such assistance shall be valued at $2,500 or more. The term includes
a conditional gift or an agreement providing for a private party to provide
training to city personnel, alone or in combination with travel and lodging for
the city personnel to participate in the training, provided the gift or
agreement meets all of the elements of this definition. To be deemed a private
grant agreement, such an arrangement need not be formalized in a contract,
compact, memorandum of understanding, or agreement that is executed between the
city and private party. Private grant agreement shall not include any
procurement or procurement contract as defined by the Hawaii Public Procurement
Code, or any sponsorship agreement executed pursuant to
Chapter 2, Article 47.
Private Party. A person or entity who is neither an officer or employee of any
governmental or quasi-governmental body nor a governmental or quasi-
governmental body.
Project. A CPD-funded activity in which an applicant requests CPD funding
assistance. The term does not include the portion of CPD funding set aside for
program administration and planning.
(Sec. 1-9.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 8, § 1-8.1) (Am.
Ords. 05-040, 06-14, 08-33, 11-18, 16-35, 25-21)
§ 1-8.2 Intergovernmental and private grant agreement reporting requirements.
(a)   Each department shall submit an annual report to the council by September
30 detailing all agreements placing obligations upon the department that were
entered into or used during the previous fiscal year. The annual report need
not include agreements subject to council approval in §§
1-8.3,
1-8.6, and 1-8.7.
(b)   Agreements for the rental of a facility for the purpose of holding a
public meeting or a public hearing are exempted from the requirements of this
section.
(Sec. 1-9.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 8, § 1-8.2) (Am.
Ords. 06-14, 07-40, 08-24, 11-2, 11-18, 16-35, 19-22)
§ 1-8.3 Approval of Consolidated Plan and Annual Action Plans.
(a)   Any Consolidated Plan or Annual Action Plan prepared by a city agency
relating to CPD formula entitlement moneys requires council approval before
submittal to HUD and must be submitted to council for its review and approval a
minimum of 90 days before its HUD-required transmittal date. The council shall
review and approve the Consolidated Plan, Annual Action Plan, or both, no later
than 15 days before the HUD-required plan transmittal date. The council may
approve the Consolidated Plan, Annual Action Plan, or both, by resolution.
(b)   Amendments to the Consolidated Plan and Annual Action Plan will not be
subject to the 90- and 15-day transmittal and approval periods, but rather may
be transmitted to HUD at any time per HUD regulations subject to council
approval.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 8, § 1-8.3) (Added by Ord. 05-040; Am. Ords. 13-2, 16-
35)
§ 1-8.4 Penalties.
   Penalty for violations of this article shall be a fine not to exceed $1,000
or one year’s imprisonment, or both. Prosecutions in such cases shall be as
provided by law for the prosecution of misdemeanors.
(Sec. 1-9.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 8, § 1-8.4) (Am.
Ord. 05-040)
§ 1-8.5 Separability.
   It is the intention of the council that this article and every provision
thereof shall be considered separable, and the invalidity of any section,
clause, provision, or part thereof, shall not affect the validity of any other
portion of this article.
(Sec. 1-9.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 8, § 1-8.5) (Am.
Ord. 05-040)
§ 1-8.6 Approval of Honolulu High Capacity Transit Corridor Project agreements.
   Any agreements or amendments to agreements concerning the Honolulu High
Capacity Transit Corridor Project that place an obligation on the city (other
than HART or the board of water supply) will require prior council consent and
approval. The final or draft version of the agreement or amendment to the
agreement must be provided to the council for its review before the council’s
approval. In the event a draft agreement or draft amendment to an agreement is
provided, if a material change is made to the draft agreement or draft
amendment to the agreement after council approval, such change will require
additional council review and approval.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 8, § 1-8.6) (Added by Ord. 16-35)
§ 1-8.7 Approval of agreements with significant fiscal impacts.
   Any intergovernmental agreements or amendments to intergovernmental
agreements that place an obligation on the city requiring or anticipated to
require the city to expend more than $30,000,000, either as a one-time payment
or cumulatively as payments made over any number of fiscal years, require prior
council consent and approval. When the agreement calls for the city to acquire
infrastructure, including but not limited to sewerage, drainage, or roadway
infrastructure, the calculation shall include capital, operating and
maintenance expenditures over the expected useful life of the infrastructure.
(Added by Ord. 19-22)
ARTICLE 9: AUTHORITY OF EXECUTIVE AGENCY TO ADOPT RULES
Sections
   
1-9.1   Adoption of rules
   
1-9.2   Format of rules
§ 1-9.1 Adoption of rules.
   The head of any executive agency whose power or function as prescribed by
law directly affects the public, may adopt rules having force and effect of law
pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, setting forth procedures that are necessary for
such agency in dealing with the public concerning such power or function.
(Sec. 1-10.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 9, § 1-9.1)
§ 1-9.2 Format of rules.
(a)   The department of the corporation counsel shall prescribe a uniform
format for the preparation and publication of the rules of the executive
departments and agencies of the city. The uniform format must provide that each
rule published will be accompanied by a reference to the authority pursuant to
which the rule has been adopted, the law implemented by the rule, if any, and
the effective date of the rule. The uniform format must further provide that,
whenever possible, applicable law should be incorporated by reference and not
be reprinted in the rule.
(b)   If a uniform format is no longer prescribed pursuant to subsection (a),
the rules of the executive departments and agencies of the city must be
prepared and published in the form prescribed in the most recent edition of the
Hawaii Administrative Rules Drafting Manual prepared by the State legislative
reference bureau; provided that references therein to the Hawaii Revised
Statutes will be deemed references to the Revised Ordinances of Honolulu, when
appropriate, and other such adjustments will be made as necessary to give the
drafting manual a reasonable interpretation when applied to the city.
(Sec. 1-10.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 9, §
1-9.2) (Am. Ord. 25-9)
ARTICLE 10: LIMITATION OF SERVICE ON COUNTY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
   
1-10.1   Limitation
§ 1-10.1 Limitation.
   Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, no person shall
be allowed to serve on more than one county board or commission expressly
created by State or county law; provided that this provision shall not apply to
prohibit county officers and employees from serving on more than one county
board or commission when such service is required by the Charter or the Revised
Ordinances of Honolulu.
(Sec. 1-11.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 10, §
1-10.1)
ARTICLE 11: NONDISCRIMINATION POLICY
Sections
   
1-11.1   Definitions
   
1-11.2   Nondiscrimination in city employment practices and in the provision of
city programs and services
   
1-11.3   Local adoption of the principles of the United Nations Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW)
§ 1-11.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Discriminatory Practices. Practices that discriminate on the basis of a
classification protected by any federal, State, or city law, including
retaliation for opposing discrimination or participation in an investigation or
proceeding that alleges discrimination.
Discriminatory Practices in City Employment. Discriminatory practices that
discriminate against a city employee, or applicant for city employment, on the
basis of a classification protected by any federal, State, or city law,
including practices that discriminate on the basis of race, sex, sexual
orientation, age, religion, color, ancestry, handicapped status, marital
status, or arrest and court record. The term further includes practices that
discriminate on the basis of a classification protected by any federal or State
law, including but not limited to laws that prohibit discrimination based on an
individual’s: citizenship; ethnicity; disability; credit history or credit
report; domestic or sexual violence victim status; gender identity or
expression; transgender status; genetic information or refusal to submit to a
genetic test; income assignment for child support; military or veteran status;
national guard or military reserve participation; national origin; politics;
pregnancy status; limitations related to pregnancy, childbirth or related
medical conditions; reproductive health decisions; or because the employee is
breastfeeding or expressing breast milk at work.
Discriminatory Practices in the Provision of City Programs and Services.
Discriminatory practices that discriminate against a person accessing city
programs and services or a person awarded, or being considered for the award
of, a contract to provide services under a city program on the basis of a
classification protected by any federal, State, or city law, including laws
associated with the applicable city program or service.
Nonability-Based Criteria. Criteria that are not substantially related to the
ability of an individual to competently perform the duties of a position.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 11, § 1-11.1) (Added by Ord. 88-16; Am. Ord. 24-28)
§ 1-11.2 Nondiscrimination in city employment practices and in the provision of
city programs and services.
The city shall refrain from:
(1)   Engaging in discriminatory practices in city employment, including any
practice that discriminates on the basis of nonability-based criteria.
(2)   Engaging in discriminatory practices in the provision of city programs
and services.
(3)   Retaliating against applicants, employees, or individuals who
participate, or seek to participate, in city programs or services, or who
oppose discrimination or participate in an investigation or proceeding that
alleges discrimination.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 11, § 1-11.2) (Added by Ord. 88-16; Am. Ord. 24-28)
§ 1-11.3 Local adoption of the principles of the United Nations Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW).
(a)   Findings and purpose. The city finds and declares as follows.
(1)   The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women (CEDAW), an international human rights treaty, provides a universal
definition of discrimination against women and brings attention to a whole
range of issues concerning women’s human rights. Countries that ratify CEDAW
are mandated to condemn all forms of discrimination against women and girls and
to ensure equality for women and girls in the civil, political, economic,
social, and cultural arenas. The United Nations General Assembly adopted CEDAW
in 1979 and President Carter signed the treaty on behalf of the United States
in 1980, but the United States Senate has not yet ratified CEDAW.
(2)   Since 1995, state and local jurisdictions have stepped up and passed
resolutions in support of CEDAW. Some have implemented ordinances establishing
CEDAW principles as law. In 2014, municipalities across the nation began
signing onto the Cities for CEDAW Initiative, pledging to step up where the
federal government has failed and implement the principles of CEDAW at the
local level.
(3)   There is a continued need for the city to protect the human rights of
women and girls by addressing discrimination, including violence, against them
and to implement, locally, the principles of CEDAW. Adherence to the principles
of CEDAW on the local level will especially promote equal access to and equity
in health care, employment, economic development, and educational opportunities
for women and girls and will also address the continuing and critical problems
of violence against women and girls. There is a need to analyze the operations
of city departments, policies, and programs to identify discrimination in but
not limited to employment practices, budget allocation, and the provision of
direct and indirect services and, if identified, to remedy that discrimination.
In addition, there is a need to work toward implementing the principles of
CEDAW in the private sector.
(4)   There is a need to strengthen effective national and local mechanisms,
institutions, and procedures and to provide adequate resources, commitment, and
authority to:
(A)   Advise on the impact of all government policies on women and girls;
(B)   Monitor the situation of women comprehensively in recognition of the
interconnectedness of discrimination based on gender, race, and other social
criteria; and
(C)   Help formulate new policies and effectively carry out strategies and
measures to eliminate discrimination.
(b)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Discrimination Against Women. Includes but is not limited to any distinction,
exclusion, or restriction made on the basis of sex that has the effect or
purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment, or exercise by
women, irrespective of their marital status and on a basis of equality of men
and women, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic,
social, cultural, civil, or any other field. The definition of discrimination
includes gender-based violence, that is, violence that is directed against a
woman because she is a woman or that affects women disproportionately. It
includes acts that inflict physical, mental, or sexual harm or suffering,
threats of such acts, coercion, and other deprivations of liberty by family,
community, or government.
Gender. The way society constructs the difference between women and men,
focusing on their different roles, responsibilities, opportunities, and needs,
rather than their biological differences.
Gender Analysis. An examination of the cultural, economic, social, civil,
legal, and political relations between women and men within a certain entity,
recognizing that women and men have different social roles, responsibilities,
opportunities, and needs and that these differences, which permeate our
society, affect how decisions and policy are made.
Human Rights. The rights every individual possesses that are intended to
improve the conditions in society that protect each person’s dignity and well-
being and the humanity of all people.
Nontraditional Jobs. Jobs that have not traditionally been filled by women.
Racial Discrimination. Any distinction, exclusion, restriction, or preference
based on race, color, descent, or national or ethnic origin that has the
purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment, or
exercise, on an equal footing, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the
political, economic, social, cultural, or any other field of public life.
(c)   Local principles of CEDAW. It is the goal of the city to implement the
principles underlying CEDAW by addressing discrimination against women and
girls in areas including economic development, violence against women and
girls, and health care. In implementing CEDAW, the city recognizes the
connection between racial discrimination, as articulated in the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, and
discrimination against women. The city shall ensure that the city does not
discriminate against women in areas including employment practices, allocation
of funding, and delivery of direct and indirect services. The city shall
conduct gender analyses, to determine what, if any, city practices and policies
should change to implement the principles of CEDAW.
(1)   Economic development.
(A)   The city shall take all appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination
against women and girls in the city in employment and other economic
opportunities, including but not limited to ensuring:
(i)   The right to the same employment opportunities, including the application
of the same criteria for selection in matters of employment and the right to
receive access to and vocational training for nontraditional jobs;
(ii)   The right to promotion, job security, and all benefits and conditions of
service, regardless of parental status, particularly encouraging the
appointment of women to decision making posts and to city revenue generating
and managing commissions and departments;
(iii)   The right to equal remuneration, including benefits and to equal pay in
respect to work of equal value; and
(iv)   The right to the protection of health and safety in working conditions,
including supporting efforts not to purchase sweatshop goods, regular
inspection of work premises, and protection from violent acts at the workplace.
(B)   The city shall encourage and, where possible, fund the provisions of the
necessary supporting social services to enable parents to combine family
obligations with work responsibilities and participation in public life, in
particular through promoting the establishment and development of a network of
child care facilities, paid family leave, family-friendly policies, and work-
life balance.
(C)   The city shall encourage the use of public education and all other
available means to urge financial institutions to facilitate women’s access to
bank accounts, loans, mortgages, and other forms of financial services.
(2)   Violence against women and girls.
(A)   The city shall take and diligently pursue all appropriate measures to
prevent and redress sexual and domestic violence against women and girls,
including but not limited to:
(i)   Police enforcement of criminal penalties and civil remedies, when
appropriate;
(ii)   Providing appropriate protective and support services for survivors,
including counseling and rehabilitation programs;
(iii)   Providing gender-sensitive training of city employees regarding
violence against women and girls, where appropriate; and
(iv)   Providing rehabilitation programs for perpetrators of violence against
women or girls, where appropriate.
The city shall not discriminate on the basis of race, ethnicity, culture,
language, or sexual orientation, when providing the above supportive services.
(B)   It is the goal of the city to take all necessary measures to protect
women and girls from sexual harassment in their places of employment, school,
public transportation, and any other places where they may be subject to
harassment. Protection must include streamlined and rapid investigation of
complaints.
(C)   Prostitutes are especially vulnerable to violence because their legal
status tends to marginalize them. It is the policy of the city that the
Honolulu police department diligently investigate violent attacks against
prostitutes and take efforts to establish the level of coercion involved in the
prostitution, in particular where there is evidence of trafficking in women and
girls. It is the goal of the city to develop and fund projects to help
prostitutes who have been subject to violence and to prevent such acts.
(D)   The city shall ensure that all public works projects include measures,
such as adequate lighting, to protect the safety of women and girls.
(E)   It is the goal of the city to fund public information and education
programs to change traditional attitudes concerning the roles and status of
women and men.
(3)   Health care.
(A)   It is the goal of the city to take all appropriate measures to eliminate
discrimination against women and girls in the field of health care to ensure,
on a basis of equity, information about and access to adequate health care
facilities and services, according to the needs of all communities, regardless
of race, ethnicity, culture, language, and sexual orientation, including
information, counseling, and services in family planning.
(B)   It is the goal of the city to ensure that women and girls receive
appropriate services in connection with prenatal care, delivery, and the post-
natal period, granting free services where possible, as well as adequate
nutrition during pregnancy and lactation.
In undertaking the enforcement of this article, the city is assuming an
undertaking only to promote the general welfare. It is not assuming, nor is it
imposing on its officers and employees, an obligation for breach of which it is
liable in money damages to any person who claims that such breach proximately
caused injury.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 11, § 1-11.3) (Added by Ord. 15-50)
ARTICLE 12: PURCHASE OF RECYCLED PAPER PRODUCTS
Sections
   
1-12.1   Definitions
   
1-12.2   Required procurement of recycled paper products
§ 1-12.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
City. Includes both the executive and legislative branches of the City and
County of Honolulu.
Nonrecycled Paper Product. A paper product that is not a recycled paper
product.
Paper Product. A paper or wood pulp product comprised of sheets or individual
units, each of which is intended to be used for printing, writing, drawing,
sanitation, or hygiene, including but not limited to bond paper, computer
paper, ledger paper, printing paper, copy machine paper, preprinted forms,
writing pads, stick-on notes, file folders, boxes, paper towels, and toilet
tissue. Paper product does not include a book, pamphlet, newspaper, or
periodical intended solely or primarily for reading.
Recycled Paper Product. A paper product, each sheet or individual unit of which
conforms to the definitions and specifications of the Paper Products Recovered
Materials Advisory Notice, as developed and updated by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 12, § 1-12.1) (Added by Ord. 89-116; Am. Ords. 93-53,
94-62, 00-01)
§ 1-12.2 Required procurement of recycled paper products.
(a)   Except as otherwise provided under subsection (b), when procuring a paper
product, the city shall procure only a recycled paper product.
The specifications for any procurement by the city of a paper product shall
conform to and implement this section.
(b)   The city may procure a type and quantity of nonrecycled paper product
under the following circumstances:
(1)   A recycled paper product of the same type and quantity as the nonrecycled
paper product is unavailable in Honolulu or cannot be supplied from elsewhere
within 30 days of placement of a purchase order;
(2)   Legal considerations prevent the procurement of a recycled paper product
of the same type and quantity as the nonrecycled paper product; and
(3)   A recycled paper product of the same type and quantity as the nonrecycled
paper product is at least 25 percent more expensive than the nonrecycled paper
product. For the purpose of this exception, the price of a type and quantity of
nonrecycled paper product shall be ascertained by the following:
(A)   Examination of a price schedule maintained by the city; or
(B)   If not included in a price schedule, an informal request for a price from
at least one supplier selling the type of nonrecycled paper product in
Honolulu. If, however, no supplier sells the type of nonrecycled paper product
in Honolulu, an informal request for a price shall not be necessary.
For the purpose of this subsection, a recycled paper product and nonrecycled
paper product shall be deemed the “same type” when both have the same intended
use, dimensions, weight, color, and, if applicable, lining, glossiness, and
inscription.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 12, § 1-12.3) (Added by Ord. 93-53; Am. Ord. 94-62)
ARTICLE 13: SEAL AND MOTTO OF THE DEPARTMENT OF THE PROSECUTING ATTORNEY
Sections
   
1-13.1   Seal and motto
   
1-13.2   Filing with city clerk
§ 1-13.1 Seal and motto.
   The prosecuting attorney is authorized to formulate and adopt a departmental
seal and motto to be displayed on the official badges issued to its
investigators and to be used for other official purposes as the prosecuting
attorney deems appropriate.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 13, § 1-13.1) (Added by Ord. 90-9)
§ 1-13.2 Filing with city clerk.
   A copy of the seal and motto adopted by the prosecuting attorney shall be
filed in the office of the city clerk.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 13, § 1-13.2) (Added by Ord. 90-9)
ARTICLE 14: PERSONAL NAMES ON SIGNS RELATING TO PUBLIC PROJECTS AND
GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES
Sections
   
1-14.1   Definitions
   
1-14.2   Signs relating to public projects and governmental activities
   
1-14.3   Enforcement
   
1-14.4   Penalty
§ 1-14.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Governmental Activity. Any of the following:
(1)   A public hearing, meeting, or other activity of the city or any agency
thereof that is subject to HRS Chapter 91 or Chapter 92; or
(2)   A hearing, meeting, or other activity of the city or any agency thereof
not subject to HRS Chapter 91 or Chapter 92, for which notice to the general
public is actually provided, such as a workshop or informational meeting.
Officer or Employee. An officer or employee as defined under §
1-4.1 or a member of a city board or commission that is created by law or
ordinance.
Public Project. An activity that the city operates, participates in with
another person or governmental agency, endorses, sponsors, or provides,
partially or totally, funding, labor, or materials. Public project includes a
project involving general construction, public improvement, housing, street or
sidewalk improvement, or beautification.
Sign. Any of the following:
(1)   A sign as defined under §
21-7.20 that:
(A)   Indicates participation by the city in the public project described on
the sign; or
(B)   Intends to notify the public of a governmental activity; or
(2)   Includes a “public sign” as defined in §
21-7.20.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 14, § 1-14.1) (Added by Ord. 91-30)
§ 1-14.2 Signs relating to public projects and governmental activities.
   A sign relating to a public project or governmental activity:
(1)   Shall display only the name of the agency responsible for the public
project or governmental activity, the name of the City and County of Honolulu,
or both; and
(2)   Shall not be signed by or indicate the personal name of any officer or
employee, unless the display on the sign of the personal name of a particular
officer or employee is required by law, ordinance, or rule or is a condition
for the receipt of State or federal funds.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 14, § 1-14.2) (Added by Ord. 91-30)
§ 1-14.3 Enforcement.
(a)   The circuit courts of the State shall have jurisdiction to enforce this
article by injunction or other appropriate remedy.
(b)   Any person may commence a suit in a circuit court for the purpose of
requiring compliance with or preventing violations of this article or to
determine the applicability of this article to a specific sign or notice. The
court may order payment of reasonable attorney fees and costs to the prevailing
party in a suit brought under this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 14, § 1-14.3) (Added by Ord. 91-30)
§ 1-14.4 Penalty.
   Any person who wilfully violates this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 14, § 1-14.4) (Added by Ord. 91-30)
ARTICLE 15: ONLINE ACCESS TO CITY FORMS
Sections
   
1-15.1   Definitions
   
1-15.2   Access to city forms
§ 1-15.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
City. Includes the departments and agencies of both the executive and
legislative branches of the City and County of Honolulu.
Forms. Refers to all city issued documents to be filled by a noncity person,
organization, or entity requesting the provision of a city service or the
issuance of a city license or permit. The term does not refer to such documents
after they have been filled out by any person, organization, or entity.
Online. Refers to being connected to the Internet or World Wide Web.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 15, § 1-15.1) (Added by Ord. 13-29)
§ 1-15.2 Access to city forms.
(a)   The city shall make all city forms available online for electronic filing
or downloading.
(b)   The city shall recognize and accept all properly filled in downloaded
forms, provided that the form is accompanied by all necessary payments and
specified supplemental materials.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 15, § 1-15.2) (Added by Ord. 13-29)
ARTICLE 16: CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES
Sections
   
1-16.1   Revisor of ordinances
   
1-16.2   Contracting for the preparation of the Revised Ordinances of Honolulu
   
1-16.3   Ordinance revision
§ 1-16.1 Revisor of ordinances.
   The office of council services shall be the revisor of ordinances of the
city. As the revisor of ordinances, the office of council services shall have
direct supervision over the contractor’s performance under any contract entered
into pursuant to §
1-16.2, subject to the oversight of the council.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 16, § 1-16.1) (Added by Ord. 93-26)
§ 1-16.2 Contracting for the preparation of the Revised Ordinances of Honolulu.
   The presiding officer of the council or the presiding officer’s designated
representative shall be authorized to contract for the revision, codification,
and printing of the ordinances of the city that are appropriate for
continuation as law. Such codification shall be known as the “Revised
Ordinances of Honolulu.”
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 16, § 1-16.2) (Added by Ord. 93-26)
§ 1-16.3 Ordinance revision.
(a)   In preparing any amendment to, revision of, or supplement to the Revised
Ordinances of Honolulu, the revisor of ordinances shall add, delete, or
substitute words and phrases as appropriate to change any ordinance term that
refers to the male or female gender to a term that is neutral in gender, as
long as the meaning or effect of the ordinance is not changed.
(b)   In preparing any amendment to, revision of, or supplement to the Revised
Ordinances of Honolulu, the revisor of ordinances may:
(1)   Replace the phrase “effective date of this ordinance” or similar phrase
used in an ordinance with the actual date on which the ordinance takes effect;
(2)   Adjust the location of table and column headings and footnotes as deemed
appropriate and may indicate that the table or column is continued;
(3)   Correct manifest clerical or typographical errors;
(4)   Number and renumber chapters, articles, parts, sections, and parts of
sections;
(5)   Rearrange sections;
(6)   Add or change reference numbers to agree with renumbered chapters,
articles, parts, or sections;
(7)   Change capitalization for the purpose of uniformity;
(8)   Change the form of numbers and of monetary sums for the purpose of
uniformity;
(9)   Delete any ordinance or part thereof that has been expressly repealed
under the terms of the ordinance; and
(10)   Prepare for submission to the city council from time to time:
(A)   Bills to make additional amendments necessary to eliminate
inconsistencies or correct technical flaws in and clarify the intent of the
Revised Ordinances of Honolulu; and
(B)   A rewriting and revision, either complete, partial, or topical of the
Revised Ordinances of Honolulu.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 16, § 1-16.3) (Added by Ord. 95-45; Am. Ord. 01-55)
ARTICLE 17: SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY FOR CITY OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE
Sections
   
1-17.1   “Sexual harassment”—Definition
   
1-17.2   Other definitions
   
1-17.3   Prohibition of sexual harassment
   
1-17.4   Complaint, investigation, and resolution procedures for departments
   
1-17.5   Complaint, investigation, and resolution procedures for council and
council offices
   
1-17.6   Use of “reasonable person of the same gender standard”
   
1-17.7   Disciplinary action
   
1-17.8   Retention of written report on complaint and investigation
   
1-17.9   Prohibition of retaliation for complaint
   
1-17.10   Malicious false complaint
   
1-17.11   Training program for equal employment opportunity officers and
management or supervisory officers and employees
   
1-17.12   Sexual harassment policy training for each officer and employee
   
1-17.13   Nonexclusiveness of provisions of article
§ 1-17.1 “Sexual harassment”—Definition.
   For the purposes of this article, sexual harassment means any of the
following:
(1)   Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal
or physical conduct or visual display of a sexual nature directed by an officer
or employee to a second officer or employee when:
(A)   Submission to the advances, requests, or conduct is a term or condition
of the second officer’s or employee’s employment;
(B)   Submission to or rejection of the advances, requests, or conduct is used
as the basis for employment decisions relating to the second officer or
employee; or
(C)   The advances, requests, conduct, or visual display has the purpose or
effect of:
(i)   Substantially interfering with the second officer’s or employee’s work
performance; or
(ii)   Creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment for
the second officer or employee;
(2)   Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal
or physical conduct or visual display of a sexual nature directed by an officer
or employee to an individual under consideration for city employment when:
(A)   Submission to the advances, requests, or conduct is used as a term or
condition for the employment of the individual;
(B)   Submission to or rejection of the advances, requests, or conduct is used
as the basis for a decision to employ or reject the individual; or
(C)   The advances, requests, conduct, or visual display has the purpose or
effect of:
(i)   Substantially interfering with the individual’s ability to display
qualifications for city employment; or
(ii)   Creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment in which the
individual seeks city employment; or
(3)   Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal
or physical conduct or visual display of a sexual nature directed by an officer
or employee to an individual engaged in business or other activity with the
city when:
(A)   Submission to the advances, requests, or conduct is a term or condition
of the individual’s engagement in business or other activity with the city;
(B)   Submission to or rejection of the advances, requests, or conduct is used
as the basis for a decision on the individual’s engagement in business or other
activity with the city; or
(C)   The advances, requests, conduct, or visual display has the purpose or
effect of:
(i)   Substantially interfering with the individual’s engagement in business or
other activity with the city; or
(ii)   Creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment in which the
individual engages in business or other activity with the city.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.1) (Added by Ord. 93-84)
§ 1-17.2 Other definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Council Office. The office of the city clerk and office of council services.
Department. Each executive department of the city. For the purpose of this
article, the office of the mayor, office of the managing director, office of
information and complaint, civil defense agency, and the municipal reference
and records center shall each be deemed a department.
Employee. Has the same meaning as defined in §
1-4.1.
Individual Engaged in Business or Other Activity with the City. An individual
who:
(1)   Is performing services as an independent contractor with the city;
(2)   Is seeking an independent contract with the city;
(3)   Is seeking to sell or has sold products or services to the city;
(4)   Is applying for or has received a permit or other ministerial or
discretionary approval from the city;
(5)   Is appealing or has appealed a decision by the city to a city department,
board, officer, or employee;
(6)   Is applying for or participating in a city program available to the
general public or a class of the general public;
(7)   Is engaged in lobbying, as defined in §
3-13.2;
(8)   Is engaged in influencing the city’s policy making process, as defined in
§
3-13.2, but is not registered as a lobbyist; or
(9)   Is working as a journalist for a news medium.
Individual under Consideration for City Employment. An individual who has
applied for and is being considered for employment with the city.
Offender. An officer or employee who has engaged in sexual harassment.
Officer. Has the same meaning as defined in §
1-4.1.
Victim. An officer, employee, or individual who has been subjected to sexual
harassment.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.2) (Added by Ord. 93-84; Am. Ord. 05-033)
§ 1-17.3 Prohibition of sexual harassment.
(a)   An officer or employee shall not engage in the sexual harassment of
another officer or employee.
(b)   An officer or employee shall not engage in the sexual harassment of an
individual who is under consideration for city employment.
(c)   An officer or employee shall not engage in the sexual harassment of an
individual engaged in business or other activity with the city.
(d)   A management or supervisory officer or employee shall not knowingly
permit a subordinate officer or employee to engage in sexual harassment
prohibited under this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.3) (Added by Ord. 93-84)
§ 1-17.4 Complaint, investigation, and resolution procedures for departments.
(a)   Each department shall comply with the procedures of this section, which
relate to the receipt, investigation, and resolution of complaints of sexual
harassment.
With respect to an alleged victim or alleged offender who is an officer or
employee covered by a collective bargaining agreement, the procedures of this
section shall be additional to any grievance or other procedures in the
agreement.
Each department shall inform its officers and employees of the procedures of
this section.
(b)   Each department shall allow an alleged victim to make an informal or
formal complaint of sexual harassment as follows:
(1)   If the alleged victim is an officer or employee, the making of a
complaint to the:
(A)   Alleged victim’s immediate supervisor or, if the immediate supervisor is
the alleged offender, to the next higher supervisor;
(B)   Alleged victim’s department director;
(C)   Alleged victim’s departmental equal employment opportunity officer; or
(D)   City’s equal employment opportunity officer; or
(2)   If the alleged victim is an individual under consideration for city
employment or an individual engaged in business or other activity with the
city, the making of a complaint to the:
(A)   Alleged offender’s immediate supervisor;
(B)   Alleged offender’s department director;
(C)   Alleged offender’s departmental equal employment opportunity officer; or
(D)   City’s equal employment opportunity officer.
(c)   Each department shall allow an alleged victim to make an informal
complaint verbally or in writing. When making the complaint, the alleged victim
shall name the alleged offender and state the nature and circumstance of the
alleged sexual harassment.
The officer or employee receiving the complaint or the departmental equal
employment opportunity officer, or both, shall promptly investigate the
complaint. The investigation shall be conducted in an unbiased, fair, and
discreet manner with appropriate safeguards to maintain confidentiality and
protection from embarrassment. During the investigation, the investigating
officer or employee shall allow the alleged offender to respond to the
complaint.
The investigation shall be completed within 10 working days after the making of
the complaint, unless additional time for completion is considered justified
and approved by the city’s equal employment opportunity officer. If the
complaint is deemed true, the offender shall be notified of the sexual
harassment and disciplined by a warning not to sexually harass or retaliate
against the victim and, if deemed warranted, other disciplinary action imposed
in accordance with §
1-17.7. If the complaint is deemed false or unsupported by the evidence, the
complaint shall be dismissed. A written report shall be prepared on each
informal complaint and the findings and results of the investigation.
(d)   Each department shall allow an alleged victim to make a formal complaint:
(1)   Without first making an informal complaint; or
(2)   While an investigation or resolution of an informal complaint is pending
if the alleged victim desires to make the formal complaint.
The complaint shall be in writing, name the alleged offender, and state the
nature and circumstance of the alleged sexual harassment.
A team of officers and employees shall promptly investigate the complaint. The
team shall be selected by the alleged offender’s department director or, if the
director is the alleged offender, by the city’s equal employment opportunity
officer. The team shall include at least one member of each gender. At least
one departmental equal employment opportunity officer shall be on the team.
Selected officers and employees may be from any department.
The investigation shall be conducted in an unbiased, fair, and discreet manner
with appropriate safeguards to maintain confidentiality and protection from
embarrassment. During the investigation, the team shall allow the alleged
offender to respond to the complaint.
The investigation shall be completed within 10 working days after the filing of
the complaint, unless additional time for completion is considered justified
and approved by the city’s equal employment opportunity officer. If the
complaint is deemed true, the offender shall be notified in writing of the
sexual harassment and disciplined by a warning not to sexually harass or
retaliate against the victim and, if deemed warranted, other disciplinary
action imposed in accordance with §
1-17.7. If the complaint is deemed false or unsupported by the evidence, the
complaint shall be dismissed. A written report shall be prepared on each formal
complaint and the findings and results of the investigation.
(e)   (1)   Each department shall maintain the confidentiality of the alleged
victim and alleged offender during an investigation of an informal or formal
complaint; provided that the names of the alleged victim and alleged offender
may be revealed to the following:
(A)   Each other;
(B)   Any officer or employee investigating a complaint;
(C)   The alleged victim’s or alleged offender’s department director;
(D)   The city’s equal employment opportunity officer;
(E)   Any witness to the alleged sexual harassment under investigation; and
(F)   Any other person to whom revealing the names is necessary to conduct the
investigation.
(2)   Each department also shall maintain the confidentiality of the written
report on a complaint and investigation. Inspection of the report shall be
permitted only by the following:
(A)   The parties to the complaint;
(B)   Officers or employees involved in the management, supervision, or
disciplining of the parties to the complaint;
(C)   The city’s equal employment opportunity officer; and
(D)   Other persons authorized by law or ordinance.
(f)   Each department may establish procedures and provisions additional to,
but consistent with, the procedures of this section. The additional procedures
and provisions may differ among the departments, unless the mayor determines
that uniform procedures and provisions are desirable. If so determined, the
additional procedures and provisions shall be uniform among all departments.
The additional procedures and provisions available to an alleged victim who is
an officer or employee need not be adopted by rules under HRS Chapter 91. The
procedures and provisions shall be established in the same manner as other
regulations concerning only the internal management of an executive agency and
not affecting private rights of or procedures available to the public.
The additional procedures and provisions available to an alleged victim who is
not an officer or employee shall be adopted by rules in accordance with HRS
Chapter 91. If directed by the mayor, one department may adopt rules
establishing uniform procedures and provisions on behalf of and applicable to
all other departments.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.4) (Added by Ord. 93-84)
§ 1-17.5 Complaint, investigation, and resolution procedures for council and
council offices.
(a)   The council and each council office shall comply with the procedures of
this section, which relate to the receipt, investigation, and resolution of
complaints of sexual harassment.
With respect to an alleged victim or alleged offender who is an officer or
employee covered by a collective bargaining agreement, the procedures of this
section shall be additional to any grievance or other procedures in the
agreement.
The council and each council office shall inform its officers and employees of
the procedures of this section.
(b)   The council and each council office shall allow an alleged victim to make
an informal or formal complaint of sexual harassment as follows:
(1)   If the alleged victim is an officer or employee, the making of a
complaint to the:
(A)   Alleged victim’s immediate supervisor or, if the immediate supervisor is
the alleged offender, to the next higher supervisor;
(B)   Councilmember employing the alleged victim;
(C)   Head or equal employment opportunity officer of the council office
employing the alleged victim;
(D)   Council chair; or
(E)   City’s equal employment opportunity officer; or
(2)   If the alleged victim is an individual under consideration for city
employment or an individual engaged in business or other activity with the
city, the making of a complaint to the:
(A)   Alleged offender’s immediate supervisor;
(B)   Councilmember employing the alleged offender;
(C)   Head or equal employment opportunity officer of the council office
employing the alleged offender;
(D)   Council chair; or
(E)   City’s equal employment opportunity officer.
(c)   The council and each council office shall allow an alleged victim to make
an informal complaint verbally or in writing. When making the complaint, the
alleged victim shall name the alleged offender and state the nature and
circumstance of the alleged sexual harassment.
The officer or employee receiving the complaint or the council office equal
employment opportunity officer, or both, shall promptly investigate the
complaint. The investigation shall be conducted in an unbiased, fair, and
discreet manner with appropriate safeguards to maintain confidentiality and
protection from embarrassment. During the investigation, the investigating
officer or employee shall allow the alleged offender to respond to the
complaint.
The investigation shall be completed within 10 working days after the making of
the complaint, unless additional time for completion is considered justified
and approved by the city’s equal employment opportunity officer. If the
complaint is deemed true, the offender shall be notified of the sexual
harassment and disciplined by a warning not to sexually harass or retaliate
against the victim and, if deemed warranted, other disciplinary action imposed
in accordance with §
1-17.7. If the complaint is deemed false or unsupported by the evidence, the
complaint shall be dismissed. A written report shall be prepared on each
informal complaint and the findings and results of the investigation.
(d)   The council and each council office shall allow an alleged victim to make
a formal complaint:
(1)   Without first making an informal complaint; or
(2)   While an investigation or resolution of an informal complaint is pending
if the alleged victim desires to make the formal complaint.
The complaint shall be in writing, name the alleged offender, and state the
nature and circumstance of the alleged sexual harassment.
A team of officers and employees shall promptly investigate the complaint. The
team shall be selected by the council chair if the chair received the
complaint. Otherwise, the team shall be selected by the officer employing the
alleged offender or, if that officer is the alleged offender, by the city’s
equal employment opportunity officer. The team shall include at least one
member of each gender. At least one council office or departmental equal
employment opportunity officer shall be on the team. Selected officers and
employees may be from the council, any council office, or any department.
The investigation shall be conducted in an unbiased, fair, and discreet manner
with appropriate safeguards to maintain confidentiality and protection from
embarrassment. During the investigation, the team shall allow the alleged
offender to respond to the complaint.
The investigation shall be completed within 10 working days after the filing of
the complaint, unless additional time for completion is considered justified
and approved by the city’s equal employment opportunity officer. If the
complaint is deemed true, the offender shall be notified in writing of the
sexual harassment and disciplined by a warning not to sexually harass or
retaliate against the victim and, if deemed warranted, other disciplinary
action imposed in accordance with §
1-17.7. If the complaint is deemed false or unsupported by the evidence, the
complaint shall be dismissed. A written report shall be prepared on each formal
complaint and the findings and results of the investigation.
(e)   (1)   The council and each council office shall maintain the
confidentiality of the alleged victim and alleged offender during an
investigation of an informal or formal complaint; provided that the names of
the alleged victim and alleged offender may be revealed to the following:
(A)   Each other;
(B)   Any officer or employee investigating a complaint;
(C)   If the alleged victim or alleged offender is employed by a councilmember,
the council chair and that councilmember;
(D)   If the alleged victim or alleged offender is employed by a council
office, the council chair and head of that council office;
(E)   The city’s equal employment opportunity officer;
(F)   Any witness to the alleged sexual harassment under investigation; and
(G)   Any other person to whom revealing the names is necessary to conduct the
investigation.
(2)   The council and each council office also shall maintain the
confidentiality of the written report on a complaint and investigation.
Inspection of the report shall be permitted only by the following:
(A)   The parties to the complaint;
(B)   Officers or employees involved in the management, supervision, or
disciplining of the parties to the complaint;
(C)   The city’s equal employment opportunity officer; and
(D)   Other persons authorized by law or ordinance.
(f)   The council and each council office may establish procedures and
provisions additional to, but consistent with, the procedures of this section.
The additional procedures and provisions shall be established separately by the
council and each council office, unless the council chair determines that
uniform procedures and provisions are desirable. If so determined, the
additional procedures and provisions shall be uniform among the council and
each council office.
Adoption of the additional procedures and provisions by rules under HRS Chapter
91 shall not be required.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.5) (Added by Ord. 93-84)
§ 1-17.6 Use of “reasonable person of the same gender standard.”
(a)   In determining whether an alleged conduct constitutes sexual harassment,
an officer, employee, or team investigating a complaint of sexual harassment
pursuant to §
1-17.4 or 1-17.5 shall use the “reasonable person of the same gender standard.”
Under the standard, sexual harassment shall be deemed to have occurred if the
alleged offender’s conduct would be considered sexual harassment from the
perspective of a reasonable person of the same gender as the alleged victim. If
the alleged victim is a woman, the “reasonable person of the same gender
standard” shall be equivalent to and may be called the “reasonable woman
standard.”
(b)   The investigating officer, employee, or team shall look at the record as
a whole and at the totality of the circumstances, such as the nature of the
sexual advance, sexual favor request, or visual display and the context in
which the alleged conduct occurred.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.6) (Added by Ord. 93-84)
§ 1-17.7 Disciplinary action.
(a)   An officer or employee who is found, after an informal complaint and
investigation, to be an offender shall be disciplined by the warning required
under §
1-17.4(c) or 1-17.5(c) and may be otherwise appropriately disciplined if deemed
warranted.
An officer or employee who is found, after a formal complaint and
investigation, to be an offender shall be appropriately disciplined.
(b)   Any disciplinary action, additional to the warning required under §
1-17.4(c), (d) or 1-17.5(c), (d), shall be determined:
(1)   In accordance with just cause standards; and
(2)   On a case-by-case basis, with consideration of the severity of the sexual
harassment and, if any, other incidents of sexual harassment by the offender.
(c)   Disciplinary action against an offender may include but is not limited to
one or more of the following:
(1)   Written reprimand;
(2)   Suspension without pay;
(3)   Disciplinary demotion; or
(4)   Dismissal from employment.
A particular disciplinary action shall not be taken against an offender if not
permitted by law, ordinance, or collective bargaining agreement relevant to
that particular offender.
(d)   For an offender who is an elected officer of the executive branch, the
appropriate disciplinary action shall be determined by the investigating
officer or team.
(e)   For an offender who is a department director, the appropriate
disciplinary action shall be determined by the director’s appointing authority.
This subsection shall not apply to the prosecuting attorney, who shall be
subject to subsection (d).
(f)   For an offender who is an officer or employee of a department, but not
its director, the appropriate disciplinary action shall be determined by the
department director.
(g)   For an offender who is a councilmember or head of a council office, the
appropriate disciplinary action shall be determined by the council.
(h)   For an offender who is an officer or employee employed by a councilmember
or council office, the appropriate disciplinary action shall be determined by
the councilmember or head of the office employing the offender.
(i)   All disciplinary actions, before implementation, shall be given final
review and approval by the city’s equal employment opportunity officer.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.7) (Added by Ord. 93-84)
§ 1-17.8 Retention of written report on complaint and investigation.
(a)   This section applies to each written report on an informal or formal
complaint and investigation required under §§
1-17.4 and 1-17.5.
(b)   The written report on a complaint against an officer or employee of an
executive department shall be retained by that department.
The written report on a complaint against a councilmember or employee of a
councilmember shall be retained by the council.
The written report on a complaint against an officer or employee of a council
office shall be retained by that office.
(c)   The written report on a complaint deemed true shall be retained for at
least five years after the offender terminates service as a city officer or
employee. After the five-year period, the report may be discarded.
The written report on a dismissed complaint shall be retained for a two-year
period, commencing from the date the report is completed. Upon termination of
the period, the report shall be expunged, unless its retention is requested by
the officer or employee, the complaint against whom was dismissed. When the
officer or employee requests retention, the report shall be retained at least
until the officer or employee terminates service with the city. After the
termination of service, the report may be discarded.
This subsection shall be subordinate to collective bargaining agreement
provisions concerning the retention and expungement of information on an
officer or employee covered by the agreement. Accordingly, the collective
bargaining agreement provisions, rather than this subsection, shall apply with
respect to the retention and expungement of the written report on a complaint
against the officer or employee.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.8) (Added by Ord. 93-84)
§ 1-17.9 Prohibition of retaliation for complaint.
(a)   An officer or employee shall not retaliate against another officer,
employee, or individual who has complained of sexual harassment, conducted an
investigation of a complaint, or acted as a witness during an investigation of
a complaint.
(b)   An officer or employee who retaliates against another officer, employee,
or individual in violation of subsection (a) shall be appropriately
disciplined. The disciplinary action may consist of:
(1)   Any of the disciplinary actions listed under §
1-17.7; or
(2)   Any other disciplinary action authorized by law, ordinance, or rule.
If the officer or employee is covered by a collective bargaining agreement, the
disciplinary action against the officer or employee shall not be contrary to
the agreement.
(c)   Disciplinary action against an officer, employee, or individual making a
malicious false complaint shall not be considered retaliation prohibited under
this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.9) (Added by Ord. 93-84)
§ 1-17.10 Malicious false complaint.
(a)   An officer, employee, or individual shall not make a malicious false
complaint of sexual harassment.
(b)   An officer or employee who has made a malicious false complaint shall be
appropriately disciplined or sanctioned in accordance with law, ordinance, or
rule. The disciplinary action may consist of:
(1)   Any of the disciplinary actions listed under §
1-17.7; or
(2)   Any other disciplinary action authorized by law, ordinance, or rule.
(c)   An individual, other than an officer or employee, who has made a
malicious false complaint shall be subject to appropriate sanctions authorized
by law, ordinance, or rule. The sanctions may include the termination of the
individual’s business or other activity with the city or disqualification of
the individual from participating in any business or other activity with the
city.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.10) (Added by Ord. 93-84)
§ 1-17.11 Training program for equal employment opportunity officers and
management or supervisory officers and employees.
(a)   The following persons shall complete a training program on sexual
harassment: the city’s equal employment opportunity officer, each council
office equal employment opportunity officer, each departmental equal employment
opportunity officer, and each management or supervisory officer and employee.
The program shall provide each equal employment opportunity officer and each
management or supervisory officer and employee with training to properly:
(1)   Identify and investigate sexual harassment;
(2)   Interact with an alleged victim, alleged offender, and witness during an
investigation; and
(3)   Apply and interpret this article and other pertinent laws on sexual
harassment.
(b)   The training program shall be formulated and provided by the department
of human resources.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.11) (Added by Ord. 93-84)
§ 1-17.12 Sexual harassment policy training for each officer and employee.
(a)   Each officer and employee shall receive training of the highest standards
on the sexual harassment policy at least once every two years in accordance
with this section.
(1)   An officer or employee who enters city employment after July 1, 1997
shall receive the training during the orientation provided upon entering
employment.
(2)   An officer who enters city service, other than employment, after July 1,
1997 shall receive the training within the one-month period following entrance
into service.
(3)   An officer or employee who is in city employment or service on July 1,
1997 shall receive the training within the two-year period following that date.
(4)   For the duration of city employment or service after the training
described in subdivision (1), (2), or (3), an officer or employee shall again
receive the training at least once within each two-year period following the
immediate previous training.
(b)   The department of human resources shall be responsible for scheduling and
enrolling an officer or employee for the training on the sexual harassment
policy. In doing so, the department of human resources shall consult with the
officer’s or employee’s appointing authority to set a training date and time
which will cause the least possible disruption to the officer’s or employee’s
work, service, or department or office of employment. After the department of
human resources enrolls an officer or employee for training, the officer’s or
employee’s appointing authority shall require the officer or employee to attend
the training on the scheduled date and time.
The department may excuse an enrolled officer or employee from attending for
legitimate reason, but shall again enroll the excused officer or employee for
training on another date and time in accordance with this section.
(c)   The department of human resources shall be responsible for providing the
training on the sexual harassment policy to officers and employees. The
training shall be designed to make officers and employees aware of the policy,
actions that constitute sexual harassment, and impacts of violating the policy.
For management or supervisory officers or employees, the training required
under this section shall be integrated with that required under §
1-17.11.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.12) (Added by Ord. 93-84; Am. Ord. 97-25)
§ 1-17.13 Nonexclusiveness of provisions of article.
(a)   The complaint, investigation, resolution, and disciplinary provisions of
this article shall not be exclusive. This article shall not be construed as
preventing:
(1)   An officer, employee, or individual from filing a complaint of sexual
harassment with any other government agency authorized to receive the
complaint;
(2)   An officer, employee, or individual from filing a civil action in court
based on sexual harassment; or
(3)   An officer or employee covered by a collective bargaining agreement from
filing a grievance based on sexual harassment in accordance with the agreement.
(b)   Nor shall an officer, employee, or individual be required to exhaust the
procedures and remedies of this article before filing a complaint with any
other government agency, grievance under a collective bargaining agreement, or
civil action in court.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.13) (Added by Ord. 93-84)
ARTICLE 18: SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY FOR EMPLOYER
HAVING A CONTRACT WITH THE CITY
Sections
   
1-18.1   “Sexual harassment”—Definition
   
1-18.2   Other definitions
   
1-18.3   Applicability of article
   
1-18.4   Sexual harassment policy required of employer
   
1-18.5   Pledge of compliance—Prohibition on contract without
pledge—Revocation, termination, or suspension of contract for noncompliance
with pledge
   
1-18.6   Debarment for violation
   
1-18.7   Rules
§ 1-18.1 “Sexual harassment”—Definition.
For the purposes of this article, sexual harassment means any of the following:
(1)   Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal
or physical conduct or visual display of a sexual nature directed by an officer
or employee to a second officer or employee when:
(A)   Submission to the advances, requests, or conduct is a term or condition
of the second officer’s or employee’s employment;
(B)   Submission to or rejection of the advances, requests, or conduct is used
as the basis for employment decisions relating to the second officer or
employee; or
(C)   The advances, requests, conduct, or visual display has the purpose or
effect of:
(i)   Substantially interfering with the second officer’s or employee’s work
performance; or
(ii)   Creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment for
the second officer or employee;
(2)   Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal
or physical conduct or visual display of a sexual nature directed by an officer
or employee to an individual under consideration for employment with an
employer when:
(A)   Submission to the advances, requests, or conduct is used as a term or
condition for the employment of the individual;
(B)   Submission to or rejection of the advances, requests, or conduct is used
as the basis for a decision to employ or reject the individual; or
(C)   The advances, requests, conduct, or visual display has the purpose or
effect of:
(i)   Substantially interfering with the individual’s ability to display
qualifications for employment; or
(ii)   Creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment in which the
individual seeks employment; or
(3)   Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal
or physical conduct or visual display of a sexual nature directed by an officer
or employee to an individual engaged in business with an employer when:
(A)   Submission to the advances, requests, or conduct is a term or condition
of the individual’s engagement in business with the employer;
(B)   Submission to or rejection of the advances, requests, or conduct is used
as the basis for a decision on the individual’s engagement in business with the
employer; or
(C)   The advances, requests, conduct, or visual display has the purpose or
effect of:
(i)   Substantially interfering with the individual’s engagement in business
with the employer; or
(ii)   Creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment in which the
individual engages in business with the employer.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 18, § 1-18.1) (Added by Ord. 93-84)
§ 1-18.2 Other definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
City Officer in Charge. The city executive officer having the final authority
to enter into or renew a contract with an employer.
Employee. An individual employed by an employer.
Employer. A sole proprietorship, partnership, profit or nonprofit corporation,
or any other private person employing at least one individual.
Individual Engaged in Business with an Employer. An individual who:
(1)   Is performing services as an independent contractor with an employer;
(2)   Is seeking an independent contract with an employer;
(3)   Is seeking to sell or has sold products or services to an employer;
(4)   Is engaged or seeking to engage in a business activity jointly with an
employer;
(5)   Is a customer or seeking to become a customer of an employer; or
(6)   Is a client or seeking to become a client of an employer.
Individual under Consideration for Employment with an Employer. An individual
who has applied for and is being considered for employment with an employer.
Officer. An individual serving as a director, officer, partner, or proprietor
of an employer.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 18, § 1-18.2) (Added by Ord. 93-84)
§ 1-18.3 Applicability of article.
   This article shall apply to the following employers having contracts with
the city:
(1)   An employer under contract to provide products or services to or on
behalf of the city;
(2)   An employer with a contract to lease real property from the city; and
(3)   An employer with a contract to operate a concession on city property.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 18, § 1-18.3) (Added by Ord. 93-84)
§ 1-18.4 Sexual harassment policy required of employer.
(a)   Each employer to which this article applies shall have and enforce a
policy prohibiting sexual harassment that sets forth the same or greater
protections than those contained in
Article 17 that are correspondingly applicable to the employer’s business and
including the following:
(1)   Prohibitions against an officer’s or employee’s sexual harassment of the
following:
(A)   Another officer or employee of the employer;
(B)   An individual under consideration for employment with the employer; or
(C)   An individual doing business with the employer;
(2)   A provision prohibiting a management or supervisory officer or employee
from knowingly permitting a subordinate officer or employee to engage in the
sexual harassment prohibited under subdivision (1);
(3)   A prohibition against retaliation towards an officer, employee, or
individual who has complained of sexual harassment, conducted an investigation
of a complaint, or acted as a witness during an investigation of a complaint;
(4)   A prohibition against a malicious false complaint of sexual harassment by
an officer, employee, or individual;
(5)   Provisions allowing an officer, employee, or individual to make a sexual
harassment complaint to an appropriate management, supervisory, or personnel
officer or employee;
(6)   Procedures for investigating a sexual harassment complaint in an
unbiased, fair, and discreet manner with appropriate safeguards to maintain
confidentiality and protection from embarrassment;
(7)   A provision requiring the use of the “reasonable person of the same
gender standard,” as described under §
1-17.6, to determine if sexual harassment has occurred;
(8)   Disciplinary actions that may be imposed on an officer or employee who
committed a prohibited act; and
(9)   For an employer with at least five employees, a provision requiring the
annual viewing of a video on the sexual harassment policy by each management or
supervisory officer or employee.
(b)   The policy required under this section shall be in effect for at least
the duration of the employer’s contract with the city.
(c)   The department of budget and fiscal services shall prepare a standard
form of the policy required under this section. The standard form shall set
forth a policy containing minimum requirements which conform to this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 18, § 1-18.4) (Added by Ord. 93-84)
§ 1-18.5 Pledge of compliance—Prohibition on contract without
pledge—Revocation, termination, or suspension of contract for noncompliance
with pledge.
(a)   When entering into or renewing a contract with an employer, the city
officer in charge shall require the employer to pledge compliance with:
(1)   This article; and
(2)   The sexual harassment policy set forth in the standard form prepared by
the department of budget and fiscal services.
A provision in the contract or renewal document shall express the pledge.
Approval of the contract or renewal document by the employer shall be deemed an
agreement with the pledge.
(b)   A city officer in charge shall not enter into or renew a contract with an
employer unless the employer agrees to the pledge required by this section.
A city officer in charge may revoke, terminate, or suspend a contract with an
employer if finding that the employer is not in compliance with the pledge
required by this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 18, § 1-18.5) (Added by Ord. 93-84)
§ 1-18.6 Debarment for violation.
(a)   The director of budget and fiscal services may debar an employer who,
contrary to a pledge made pursuant to §
1-18.5, has violated this article or the sexual harassment policy set forth in
the standard form prepared by the department of budget and fiscal services.
The director of budget and fiscal services shall have discretion in determining
whether to debar an employer for a violation. When making a debarment decision,
the director of budget and fiscal services shall consider the seriousness of
the violation and any remedial measures taken by or mitigating factors
applicable to the employer.
(b)   The debarment of an employer:
(1)   Shall extend to the employer’s divisions or other organizational
elements; and
(2)   May extend to a business affiliate of the employer if so ordered by the
director of budget and fiscal services. A “business affiliate of the employer”
means a business concern, organization, or individual that, directly or
indirectly:
(A)   Has the power to control the employer;
(B)   Is subject to the control of the employer; or
(C)   Is subject, along with the employer, to the control of a third party.
Any provision of this section applicable to a “debarred employer” also shall be
applicable to a division or other organizational element of the debarred
employer and, if so ordered by the director of budget and fiscal services, a
business affiliate of the debarred employer.
(c)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall set the debarment period
for a debarred employer. The debarment period shall be commensurate with the
seriousness of the employer’s violation, but not more than three years.
(d)   Unless the director of budget and fiscal services orders otherwise for a
compelling reason, a debarred employer shall not be eligible for the following
during the debarment period:
(1)   The award or renewal of a contract with the city; or
(2)   A subcontract to another person’s contract with the city.
(e)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall establish procedures for
making a decision on the proposed debarment of an employer. The procedures
shall include but not be limited to the following:
(1)   Notice to the employer proposed to be debarred; and
(2)   An opportunity for the employer to present arguments against debarment.
The director of budget and fiscal services also may establish rules or policies
deemed necessary to implement this section.
The procedures, rules, and policies shall be in conformance with HRS § 103D-702
and any rules of the State procurement policy office.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 18, § 1-18.6) (Added by Ord. 93-84)
§ 1-18.7 Rules.
   The department of budget and fiscal services may adopt rules pursuant to HRS
Chapter 91 to carry out the purposes of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 18, § 1-18.7) (Added by Ord. 93-84)
ARTICLE 19: ADDITIONAL STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
Sections
   
1-19.1   Definitions
   
1-19.2   Additional standards of conduct
   
1-19.3   Restrictions relative to post employment
   
1-19.4   Financial disclosures
   
1-19.5   Violation—Penalty
   
1-19.6   Additional standards of conduct concerning campaign contributions and
campaign assistance
   
1-19.7   Gifts to officers and employees—Prohibition under certain
circumstances
   
1-19.8   Reserved
   
1-19.9   Additional standards of conduct concerning campaign contributions and
campaign assistance from lobbyists
Editor’s note:
   *See also Chap. 3, Art. 6.
§ 1-19.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Agency. Any of the following:
(1)   The City and County of Honolulu;
(2)   The council and its committees;
(3)   All departments, offices, boards, commissions, and committees;
(4)   All independent commissions and other similar establishments of the city
government;
(5)   The board of water supply;
(6)   The Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation; and
(7)   Any other governmental unit of the city.
Business. Any of the following:
(1)   A corporation;
(2)   A partnership;
(3)   A sole proprietorship;
(4)   Institutions;
(5)   Trusts;
(6)   Foundations; or
(7)   Any other individual or organization carrying on a business, whether or
not operated for profit.
Compensation. Any of the following:
(1)   Any money;
(2)   Thing of value; or
(3)   Economic benefit conferred on or received by any person in return for
services rendered or to be rendered by such person or another.
Controlling Interest. An interest that is sufficient in fact to control,
whether the interest be greater or less than 50 percent.
Financial Interest. An interest held by an individual, the individual’s spouse
or minor children that is:
(1)   An ownership interest in a business;
(2)   A creditor interest in an insolvent business;
(3)   An employment, or prospective employment for which negotiations have
begun;
(4)   An ownership interest in real or personal property;
(5)   A loan or debtor interest; or
(6)   A directorship or officership in a business.
Former Employee. Any person who has served the city in a position involving the
taking of official action, as hereinafter defined.
Officers and Employees. Shall be given the meaning as prescribed in subsections
3 and 4 of Charter § 13-101 and shall include officers and employees of the
board of water supply and the Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation;
provided that the term officers and employees shall also include officers and
employees under a personal services contract with the executive branch of the
city as prescribed in subsections (f) and (g) of Charter § 6-1103, or under
equivalent contracts with the legislative branch of the city as prescribed in
subsection (f) of Charter § 6-1104 and shall also include officers and
employees under a personal services contract with the board of water supply and
the Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation, but excluding independent
contractors.
Official Act or Official Action. A decision, recommendation, approval,
disapproval, or other action, including inaction, which involves the use of
discretionary authority.
(Sec. 6-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 8, §
3-8.1) (Am. Ords. 94-49, 12-31)
§ 1-19.2 Additional standards of conduct.
   No officer or employee of the city, except as hereinafter provided, shall:
(1)   Participate, as an agent or representative of a city agency, in any
official action directly affecting a business or matter in which:
(A)   Such person has a substantial financial interest; or
(B)   By or for which a firm of which such person is a member, an associate or
an employee has been engaged as a legal counsel or advisor or consultant or
representative in a matter directly related to such action; provided that a
councilmember is not precluded from voting on such matter before the council so
long as a written disclosure has been made in the event there is a conflict of
interest involving this subsection and relating to such matter;
(2)   Acquire financial interest in business enterprises which such person has
reason to believe may be directly involved in official action to be taken by
such person;
(3)   Appear in behalf of private interests before any agency other than a
court of law, nor shall such person represent private interests in any action
or proceeding against the interests of the city in any litigation to which the
city is a party; provided that a member of any board, commission, or committee
may appear in behalf of private interests before agencies other than the board,
commission, or committee on which such person serves; provided further, that no
officer or employee shall be denied the right to appear before any agency to
petition for redress of grievances caused by any official act or action
affecting such person’s personal rights, privileges, or property, including
real property. This prohibition shall not apply to any architect, landscape
architect, surveyor, or engineer registered as such under HRS Chapter 464, who
is a city employee or officer, with respect to the affixing by such registered
professional of such person’s registered stamp to any plans, specifications,
drawings, etc., to be submitted to the city for permits for such person’s
principal residence or that of members of such person’s immediate family;
provided that the stamp is accompanied by a signed statement that the work was
prepared by the person stamping the document or under such person’s
supervision; and provided further, that the registered professional may not, in
the capacity of a city employee or officer, review, approve, or otherwise act
upon the plans, specifications, drawings, etc., such person has stamped. For
the purposes of this section, “immediate family” means the employee’s or
officer’s spouse, siblings, children, or parents; spouse’s children or parents;
or children’s spouses;
(4)   Accept a retainer, compensation, or election campaign contribution that
is contingent upon action by an agency;
(5)   Enter into any contract in behalf of the city with an officer or employee
or with a business in which an officer or employee has a controlling or
substantial financial interest, involving the furnishing of services,
materials, supplies, and equipment, unless the contract is made after
competitive bidding; provided that this subsection shall not apply to personal
contracts of employment with the executive branch of the city as prescribed in
Charter § 6-1103(f) and (g) or equivalent contracts with the legislative branch
of the city as prescribed in Charter § 6-1104(f); and
(6)   Order any person to violate, or aid or abet any person in the violation
of the provisions of Charter § 6-1112.2 relating to prohibition on political
activities of persons in the civil service.
(Sec. 6-1.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 8, §
3-8.2) (Am. Ords. 96-58, 02-11)
§ 1-19.3 Restrictions relative to post employment.
(a)   No former officer or employee of the city shall disclose any information
that by law or practice is not available to the public and that the former
officer or employee acquired in the course of the former officer’s or
employee’s official duties or use the information for the former officer’s or
employee’s personal gain or the benefit of anyone.
(b)   No former officer or employee of the city shall within a period of one
year after termination of city service or employment and for compensation
appear before any city agency in relation to any case, proceeding, or
application with respect to which such person was directly concerned or that
was under the person’s active consideration while employed or in the service of
the city.
(c)   (1)   A former officer or employee of the city may, within a period of
one year after termination of city service or employment and for compensation:
(A)   Appear before any city agency in any case, proceeding, or application,
with respect to which knowledge or information in relation to such case,
proceeding, or application, was made available to the former officer or
employee during the term of employment or service; or
(B)   Assist another person or business, including but not limited to one in
which such person is an officer or employee, in any official act or action by
the city; provided that in either instance the former city officer or employee
shall first file an affidavit as provided below.
(2)   Such former officer or employee of the city shall file a sworn affidavit
with the city agency involved stating that the former officer or employee:
(A)   Was not directly concerned with;
(B)   Did not actively consider;
(C)   Did not participate in; and
(D)   Was not given access to knowledge or information not readily available to
the public during the period of active service or employment;
with respect to such case, proceeding or application or other matter before the
city agency. All city agencies that receive such an affidavit shall forward a
copy to the ethics commission.
(d)   For the purposes of this section, the term “appear before any city
agency” includes acting as an agent or attorney for, or otherwise representing,
any other person or business in any formal or informal appearance.
   “Appear” also includes making any oral or written communications, including
letters or telephone calls, to any city agency or personnel with the intent to
influence on behalf of any other person or business. The date of termination of
city service or employment shall be defined as the date upon which a person’s
resignation, dismissal, or retirement takes effect.
(e)   No officer or employee of the city shall do business with any former
officer or employee who falls within the scope of this section, unless such
former officer or employee first files a sworn affidavit as provided herein.
(f)   Any former officer or employee who falls within the scope of this section
and who makes a false statement in the person’s sworn affidavit or files a
false affidavit has committed perjury and is thereby subject to HRS Chapter 710
(Penal Code), § 710-1060, and will be punished as provided in HRS Chapter 710.
(g)   This section shall not prohibit any city agency from contracting with a
former officer or employee to act on a matter on behalf of the city within the
period of limitation stated herein and shall not prevent such officer or
employee from appearing before any city agency in relation to such employment.
(Sec. 6-1.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 8, § 3-8.3) (Am.
Ords. 90-96, 96-58)
§ 1-19.4 Financial disclosures.
(a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Business. Includes a corporation, a partnership, a sole proprietorship, a trust
or foundation, or other individual organization carrying on a business, whether
or not operated for profit.
Candidate. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 11-302.
Elective. All elective offices of the City and County of Honolulu.
Employee. All full-time employees of the executive and legislative branches of
the City and County of Honolulu and all full-time employees of the board of
water supply and the Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation who are exempt
from civil service pursuant to Charter §§ 6-1103 and 6-1104, but excluding all
persons hired under the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act and under
Charter § 6-1103(e), (f), (g), and (h).
Income. Gross income as defined by § 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954.
Officer. Has the same meaning as defined in Charter § 13-101.4 and shall
include officers of the board of water supply and the Honolulu Authority for
Rapid Transportation.
(b)   Filing of financial disclosures.
(1)   Candidates to office. Any candidate for nomination or elective office for
the City and County of Honolulu shall file within 10 working days after the
deadline for filing as a candidate for office, a financial disclosure as
provided herein.
(2)   (A)   Officers. Any officer of the executive or legislative branch shall
file a financial disclosure as prescribed herein within 20 working days after
taking the oath of office and annually thereafter on or before January 31 of
each year until the end of the term of office.
(B)   If an officer is reelected or reappointed for a new term, the foregoing
prescription of filing financial disclosures shall be observed.
(3)   Employees. Employees of the executive or legislative branches shall file
financial disclosures as prescribed herein within 20 working days after the
effective date of this section and file financial disclosures annually
thereafter on or before January 31 of each year.
(c)   The disclosure of financial interests shall state, in addition to the
financial interests of the person disclosing, the financial interests of the
person’s spouse and dependent children, and shall include:
(1)   The source and amount of all income of $1,000 or more received, for
services rendered, by the person in such person’s own name or by any other
person for such person’s use or benefit during the preceding calendar year and
the nature of the services rendered; provided that information that may be
privileged by law or individual items of compensation that constitute a portion
of the gross income of the business or profession from which the person derives
income need not be disclosed;
(2)   The name of each creditor to whom the value of $3,000 or more was owed
during the preceding calendar year and the original amount and amount
outstanding; provided that debts arising out of retail installment transactions
for the purchase of consumer goods need not be disclosed;
(3)   The amount and identity of every ownership or beneficial interests held
during the disclosure period in any business incorporated, regulated, or
licensed to carry on business in the State having a value of $5,000 or more or
equal to 10 percent of the ownership of the business and, if the interest was
transferred during the preceding calendar year, the date of the transfer;
provided that an interest in the form of an account in a federal or State
regulated financial institution, an interest in the form of a policy in a
mutual insurance company, or individual items in a mutual fund or a blind
trust, if the mutual fund or blind trust has been disclosed pursuant to this
paragraph, need not be disclosed;
(4)   Every officership, directorship, trusteeship, or other fiduciary
relationship held in a business during the preceding calendar year, the term of
office and the annual compensation;
(5)   The street address, if any, the tax map key number, if any, and the value
of any real property in the City and County of Honolulu in which the person
holds an interest whose value is $10,000 or more, and if the interest was
transferred or obtained during the preceding calendar year, a statement of the
amount and nature of the consideration received or paid in exchange for such
interest, and the name of the person furnishing or receiving the consideration;
provided that public disclosure shall not be required of the street address and
tax map key number of the person’s residence;
(6)   The amount and identity of every creditor interest in an insolvent
business held during the preceding calendar year having a value of $5,000 or
more; and
(7)   The names of clients personally represented before city agencies, except
in ministerial matters, for a fee or compensation during the preceding calendar
year and the names of the city agencies involved.
(d)   Filing requirements.
(1)   All public financial disclosures shall be filed with the office of the
city clerk and a copy shall be transmitted by that office to the ethics
commission. All confidential disclosures shall be filed with the city ethics
commission.
(2)   The form for all public financial disclosures shall be as prescribed by
the city clerk; provided that the person’s residence address, including tax map
key number, is disclosed on a separate form for “internal use only” and shall
not be publicly disclosed by the city clerk or city ethics commission. The
forms for confidential disclosures shall be as prescribed by the city ethics
commission.
(3)   When leaving office or employment with the city. Any officer or employee
of the city shall file a financial disclosure as prescribed herein 10 working
days before an officer is to leave such person’s office or an employee is to
terminate such person’s employment with the city. This requirement will also
include transfer of an officer or employee from the city to either the State or
federal governments.
(e)   The financial disclosure statements of the following persons shall be
public record and may be opened for inspection by the public during office
hours of the city clerk:
(1)   All candidates for elective office;
(2)   All elected officers; and
(3)   The directors of the city agencies and their first deputies.
All other financial disclosure statements required to be filed under this
section shall be confidential.
(f)   Penalty.
(1)   Officers and employees.
(A)   Late filing. Any officer or employee of the city whose required financial
disclosure is not received by the ethics commission or the city clerk,
whichever applies, by the close of business on the deadline date specified in
subsection (b), shall be given a notice of violation of this section by the
ethics commission or the city clerk, whichever applies. The notice shall state
that the city officer or employee has 10 days from receipt of the notice in
which to file the required financial disclosure or be subject to the penalties
provided in this paragraph and §
1-19.5. Any city officer or employee, who has received this notice and fails to
file the required disclosure within 10 days of receipt of the notice, shall be
subject to a civil fine according to the following schedule:
(i)   $100 for the first late filing;
(ii)   $200 for the second late filing; and thereafter;
(iii)   For each additional late filing, the fine imposed for the previous late
filing plus $200.
Any penalty or fine shall be imposed after an opportunity for a hearing
conducted by the ethics commission under HRS Chapter 91.
(B)   Failure to file. Any officer or employee of the city who fails to file a
financial disclosure as required in this section within 30 days from receipt of
the notice of violation referred to in paragraph (A), shall, in addition to any
civil fines imposed under paragraph (A), be subject to:
(i)   The provisions of §
1-19.5 relating to noncompliance; or
(ii)   A criminal penalty of a fine of not more than $2,000 or of imprisonment
for not more than one year, or of both such fine and imprisonment; or
         to both (i) and (ii).
(2)   Candidates.
(A)   Late filing. Any candidate whose required financial disclosure is not
received by the city clerk by the close of business on the deadline date
specified in subsection (b), shall be given a notice of violation of this
section by the city clerk. The notice shall state that the candidate has 10
days from receipt of the notice in which to file the required financial
disclosures or be subject to the penalties provided in this paragraph. Any
candidate, who has received this notice and fails to file the required
disclosure within 10 days of receipt of the notice, shall, upon election to
office, be subject to the provisions of §
1-19.5 and a civil fine according to the following schedule:
(i)   $100 for the first late filing;
(ii)   $200 for the second late filing; and thereafter;
(iii)   For each additional late filing, the fine imposed for the previous late
filing plus $200.
   Any penalty or fine shall be imposed after an opportunity for a hearing
conducted by the ethics commission under HRS Chapter 91.
(B)   Failure to file. Any candidate who fails to file a financial disclosure
as required in this section within 30 days from receipt of the notice of
violation referred to in paragraph (A), shall, in addition to any civil fines
imposed under paragraph (A), be subject to a criminal penalty of a fine of not
more than $2,000 or of imprisonment for not more than one year, or of both such
fine and imprisonment.
(3)   Rules. The ethics commission shall have the authority to establish rules
to implement subdivisions (1) and (2).
(Sec. 6-1.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 8, §
3-8.4) (Am. Ords. 95-23, 96-58, 07-43, 09-9, 12-31, 14-1)
§ 1-19.5 Violation—Penalty.
(a)   The failure to comply with or any violation of the standards of conduct
of this article or of Charter Article XI shall be grounds for impeachment of
elected officers and for the removal from office or from employment of all
other officers and employees. The appointing authority may, upon the
recommendation of the ethics commission, reprimand, put on probation, demote,
suspend, or discharge an employee found to have violated the standards of
conduct established by this article. Nothing contained herein shall preclude
any other remedy available against such officer or employee.
(b)   In addition to any other penalty provided by law, any contract entered
into by the city in violation of Charter Article XI or of this article is
voidable on behalf of the city; provided that in any action to void a contract
pursuant to this article the interest of third parties who may be damaged
thereby shall be taken into account, and the action to void the official act or
action is initiated within six months after the matter is determined by the
ethics commission.
(c)   The city, by the corporation counsel, may recover any fee, compensation,
gift, or profit received by any person as a result of a violation of the
standards in this article or in Charter Article XI by an officer or employee or
former officer or employee. Action to recover under this subsection shall be
brought within four years of such violation.
(d)   In addition to any other penalty, sanction, or remedy provided by law,
the ethics commission may impose a civil fine against a former or current
officer or exempt employee of the city who has been found by the ethics
commission to have violated the standards of conduct in Charter Article XI or
this article. For the purposes of this section, “officer” has the same meaning
as in Charter § 13-101.4 and shall include officers of the board of water
supply and the Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation and “exempt
employee” means all employees of the executive and legislative branches of the
City and County of Honolulu and all full-time employees of the board of water
supply and the Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation who are exempt from
civil service pursuant to Charter §§ 6-1103(a) through (d), (i), and (k) and 6-
1104(a) through (d), but shall not mean exempt employees in clerical positions
or employees within a bargaining unit as described in HRS § 89-6.
(1)   Where a civil fine has not otherwise been established in this article,
the amount of the civil fine imposed by the ethics commission for each
violation shall not exceed the greater of $5,000 or three times the amount of
the financial benefit sought or resulting from each violation.
(2)   In determining whether to impose a civil fine and the amount of the civil
fine, the ethics commission shall consider the totality of the circumstances,
including but not limited to:
(A)   The nature and seriousness of the violation;
(B)   The duration of the violation;
(C)   The effort taken by the officer or exempt employee to correct the
violation;
(D)   The presence or absence of any intention to conceal, deceive, or mislead;
(E)   Whether the violation was negligent or intentional;
(F)   Whether the officer or exempt employee demonstrated good faith by
consulting the ethics commission staff or another government agency or an
attorney;
(G)   Whether the officer or exempt employee had prior notice that the
officer’s or the exempt employee’s conduct was prohibited;
(H)   The amount, if any, of the financial or other loss to the city as a
result of the violation;
(I)   The value of anything received or sought in the violation;
(J)   The costs incurred in enforcement, including reasonable investigative
costs and attorney fees;
(K)   Whether the officer or exempt employee was truthful and cooperative in
the investigation; and
(L)   Any other relevant circumstance.
(3)   No civil fine shall be imposed unless the requirements of HRS Chapter 91
and HRS § 46-1.5(24), have been met.
(4)   The ethics commission may recover any civil fines imposed pursuant to
this section and may, through the corporation counsel, institute proceedings to
recover any civil fines.
(5)   Pursuant to
Chapter 1, Article 19, the ethics commission shall have executive authority to
add unpaid fines by administrative order to any taxes, fees, or charges.
(6)   Notwithstanding §
3-6.3(c), no civil fine may be imposed under this subsection:
(A)   If the applicable complaint or request for advisory opinion is submitted
more than four years after the alleged violation occurred; or
(B)   For an investigation commenced by the commission on its own initiative,
if the investigation is commenced more than four years after the alleged
violation occurred.
(Sec. 6-1.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 8, § 3-8.5) (Am.
Ords. 90-96, 02-15, 07-43, 09-9, 12-31)
§ 1-19.6 Additional standards of conduct concerning campaign contributions and
campaign assistance.
(a)   This section applies to the conduct of an exempt officer or employee.
This section is additional to the prohibitions of Charter § 6-1112(2) and (3),
both of which are directed at an officer or employee in the civil service.
(b)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Campaign Assistance. Any service, including donating time or anything of value,
to assist:
(1)   The campaign of a person seeking nomination or election to a public
office;
(2)   The effort to:
(A)   Place a question on an election ballot; or
(B)   Approve or reject a question which is on an election ballot;
(3)   The effort to recall an officer; or
(4)   The activities of a political party or campaign committee by:
(A)   Serving as a member;
(B)   Soliciting members;
(C)   Performing administrative or other duties;
(D)   Raising funds;
(E)   Campaigning for the political party’s or campaign committee’s candidate
or position on an issue; or
(F)   Volunteering on a campaign or campaign committee.
Campaign Committee. Has the same meaning as a “candidate committee” as defined
in HRS § 11-302.
Campaign Contribution. Has the same meaning as a “contribution” as defined in
HRS § 11-302.
Exempt Officer or Employee. An officer or employee, including officers and
employees of the board of water supply and the Honolulu Authority for Rapid
Transportation, exempt from the civil service pursuant to Charter §§ 6-1103, 6-
1104, or any other provision.
Officer or Employee. Any of the following:
(1)   An officer or employee as defined in §
1-19.1; or
(2)   An independent contractor with the city, the board of water supply or the
Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation, whether or not contracted pursuant
to competitive bidding procedures, and including without limitation a municipal
bond dealer.
Political Party. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 11-61.
(c)   An exempt officer or employee shall not:
(1)   Coerce, demand, or otherwise require a campaign contribution or campaign
assistance from another officer or employee;
(2)   Deny employment to a person who will not agree, as a condition of the
employment, to:
(A)   Make a campaign contribution or request a campaign contribution from
another person; or
(B)   Render campaign assistance or request another person to render campaign
assistance;
(3)   Discharge, demote, decrease the compensation of, harass, or otherwise
punish another officer or employee because that officer or employee:
(A)   Refused to make a campaign contribution or render campaign assistance
when requested or demanded by the exempt officer or employee or a third person;
(B)   Sought or received an advisory opinion from the ethics commission on a
possible violation of this subsection; or
(C)   Filed with a public agency or officer a complaint alleging a violation of
this subsection;
(4)   Promise or threaten to discharge, demote, decrease the compensation of,
harass, or otherwise punish another officer or employee, unless that officer or
employee:
(A)   Makes a campaign contribution or renders campaign assistance as requested
or demanded by the exempt officer or employee or a third person;
(B)   Refrains from seeking an advisory opinion from the ethics commission on a
possible violation of this subsection; or
(C)   Refrains from filing with a public agency or officer a complaint alleging
a violation of this subsection;
(5)   Promote or increase the compensation of another officer or employee
because that officer or employee made a campaign contribution or rendered
campaign assistance when requested or demanded by the exempt officer or
employee or a third person;
(6)   Solicit or request a specified or minimum campaign contribution amount
from another officer or employee;
(7)   Request another officer or employee to provide a specified or minimum
amount of campaign assistance; or
(8)   Solicit or receive any campaign contribution from a person, including
another officer or employee, in a building or facility during its use for
official city functions.
An exempt officer or employee also shall not request or direct another exempt
officer or employee to engage in an activity prohibited under this subsection.
(d)   The activities prohibited under subsection (c) shall not preclude an
exempt officer or employee from:
(1)   Voting as the exempt officer or employee chooses;
(2)   Voluntarily expressing an opinion on any political candidate, question,
or issue;
(3)   Voluntarily serving as a member of a political party, campaign committee,
or other political organization;
(4)   Voluntarily making a campaign contribution or rendering campaign
assistance; or
(5)   Voluntarily soliciting or requesting a campaign contribution or campaign
assistance from another person, so long as the solicitation or request does not
violate subsection (c).
(e)   An exempt officer or employee who violates subsection (c) shall be guilty
of a petty misdemeanor.
The prosecution of a violation pursuant to this subsection shall be commenced
within two years after commitment of the violation. No violation shall be
prosecuted after the expiration of the two-year period.
The prosecuting attorney shall be responsible for prosecution of a violation.
If the prosecuting attorney becomes disqualified, the State attorney general
shall have the responsibility for prosecution.
The penalty of this subsection shall be in addition to the penalty provided
under §
1-19.5(a). Both penalties may be imposed for the same violation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 8, § 3-8.6) (Added by Ord. 93-113; Am. Ords. 94-54, 12-
31)
§ 1-19.7 Gifts to officers and employees—Prohibition under certain
circumstances.
(a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Body. The council, a council committee, or a city board or commission.
Domestic Partner. A person with whom another person maintains a household and
an intimate relationship, other than a spouse or a civil union partner.
Financial Relationship with the City. A financial relationship with the city in
which the person with the financial relationship receives or may receive funds
from the city, including via current city contracts, commercial leases within
the city, and city concessions, or receives or may receive income from third
parties as a result of the financial relationship. The term includes lobbying,
but does not include the employer and employee relationship of a city officer
or employee with the city, nor does it include financial transactions with the
city such as the receipt of a refund or rebate or a similar minimal contact
with the city.
Fiscal Year. The one-year period beginning on July 1 of one calendar year and
ending on June 30 of the following calendar year.
Gift. Any gift, whether in the form of money, goods, a service, a loan, travel,
entertainment, hospitality, thing of value, favor, gratuity, commission, or
promise of a gift in such form or any other form.
Lobbying and Lobbyist. Have the same meaning as defined in §
3-13.2.
Negligible Value. Valued at $50 or less.
Official Action. A decision, recommendation, approval, disapproval, or other
action, including inaction, which involves the use of discretionary authority.
Official Authority. Includes administrative or legislative powers of decision,
recommendation, approval, disapproval, or other discretionary action.
Person. Has the same meaning as defined in §
1-4.1.
Prohibited Source. Any lobbyist or any person with a financial relationship
with the city to whom subsection (b) applies.
(b)   A city officer or employee shall not solicit, accept, or receive,
directly or indirectly through a third party, any gift under circumstances in
which it can be reasonably inferred that the gift is intended:
(1)   To influence the solicitor or recipient in the performance of an official
duty that involves the exercise of official authority;
(2)   As a reward or gratuity for any official action taken on the solicitor’s
or recipient’s part; or
(3)   To secure for oneself or others any unwarranted privilege, exemption,
advantage, contract, or treatment that is not established by law or rule.
(c)   A city officer or employee shall not solicit, and, unless exempted by
subsection (d), a city officer or employee shall not accept or receive, either
directly or indirectly through a third party, any gift if the city officer or
employee knows or has reason to know that it is from a prohibited source. A
city officer or employee is deemed to have reason to know that a gift is from a
prohibited source if the gift is given, directly or indirectly, from any
prohibited source who has appeared before the city officer or employee, or a
body of which the city officer or employee is a member, in connection with the
prohibited source’s lobbying activities, financial relationship with the city,
or both.
(d)   Exempted from the prohibition of subsection (c) are the following:
(1)   Gifts received by will or intestate succession;
(2)   Gifts received by way of a distribution of any inter vivos or
testamentary trust established by a spouse, domestic partner, civil union
partner, fiancé, or fiancée, ancestor, any relative within four degrees of
consanguinity, or the spouse, domestic partner, civil union partner, fiancé, or
fiancée of such a relative;
(3)   Gifts from a spouse, domestic partner, civil union partner, fiancé,
fiancée, ancestor, any relative within four degrees of consanguinity, or the
spouse, domestic partner, civil union partner, fiancé, or fiancée of such a
relative. A gift from any such person is not exempt from subsection (c) if the
person is acting as an agent or intermediary for any person not covered by this
subdivision;
(4)   Anything available or distributed to the public generally without regard
to the official status of the recipient;
(5)   Unsolicited gifts that, within 30 days after receipt, are returned to the
donor or donated to a public entity or to a bona fide educational or charitable
organization without the donation being claimed by the city officer or employee
as a charitable contribution for tax purposes. In the event the gift is donated
to a public entity or to a bona fide educational or charitable organization,
the donor shall send, along with the gift, documentation acknowledging the
initial donor of the gift;
(6)   Exchanges of negligible or approximately equal value on holidays,
birthdays, or other special occasions;
(7)   Typical beverages, meals, or snacks given when attending a conference or
a meeting; provided that the value of a meal may exceed a negligible value if
the meeting or conference is open to individuals from throughout a given
industry or profession, or is attended by individuals who represent a range of
persons interested in a given matter;
(8)   Items of negligible value customarily given to express condolences or
sympathy, such as flowers, food items, or cards, given to a city officer or
employee in connection with the death or significant injury or illness of the
city officer or employee or an immediate family member of the city officer or
employee; provided that such expressions of condolences or sympathy may include
monetary gifts of negligible value;
(9)   Items customarily given from a single source within a fiscal year that do
not exceed the negligible value; provided that items will be deemed to be from
a single source if they are being given by owners, partners, officers,
directors, lobbyists, representatives, or agents of a single person;
(10)   Culturally appropriate lei of no resale value given at a celebration;
(11)   Awards, plaques, certificates, mementos, novelties, culturally
significant items, or similar non-monetary items of no resale value given in
recognition of or in gratitude for the recipient city officer’s or employee’s
civic, charitable, political, professional, or public service; and
(12)   Unsolicited gifts received while visiting other cities, counties,
states, or countries; or while hosting visitors from other cities, counties,
states, or countries when it would be a breach of protocol to refuse the gift
presented by representatives of governmental bodies or political subdivisions
who are acting in their official capacities.
(e)   Political campaign contributions permitted by State law are exempt from
this section.
(f)   A violation of this section by a city officer or employee is punishable
in accordance with §
1-19.5.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 8, § 3-8.7) (Added by Ord. 94-49; Am. Ords. 02-15, 12-
31, 24-21 )
Editor’s note:
   In accordance with Ord. 24-21, amendments made to § 1-19.7 do not apply to
gifts solicited, accepted, or received prior to June 25, 2024.
§ 1-19.8 Reserved.
§ 1-19.9 Additional standards of conduct concerning campaign contributions and
campaign assistance from lobbyists.**
(a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Campaign Assistance, Campaign Committee, Campaign Contribution, Exempt Officer
or Employee and Political Party. Have the same meaning as defined in §
1-19.6.
Candidate for City Office. Any person who:
(1)   Falls within the definition of a "candidate" contained in HRS § 11-302;
(2)   Files nomination papers in accordance with HRS Chapter 12, Part I; or
(3)   Makes any public statement concerning the person’s intention to be a
candidate for a city office within two years preceding the next special
election, coinciding with a general election, for that city office.
Lobbyist. Any person:
(1)   Seeking, or having sought within two years preceding any activity
prohibited under this section, any type of discretionary approval, whether
legislative, administrative, or quasi-judicial, from the city, including
without limitation a landowner, developer, architect, engineer, planner, or
agent of the foregoing; or
(2)   Qualifying as a lobbyist under §
3-13.2.
(3)   Excluded from subdivisions (1) and (2) above are activities conducted by
neighborhood boards, community associations, coalitions, and individuals not
employed by those specified in subdivision (1), unless they engage the services
of a paid lobbyist.
(b)   An exempt officer or employee shall not:
(1)   Coerce, demand, or otherwise require a campaign contribution or campaign
assistance from a lobbyist;
(2)   Disapprove the application of or otherwise punish a lobbyist because that
lobbyist:
(A)   Refused to make a campaign contribution or render campaign assistance
when requested or demanded by the exempt officer or employee or a third person;
(B)   Sought or received an advisory opinion from the ethics commission on a
possible violation of this section; or
(C)   Filed with a public agency or officer a complaint alleging a violation of
this section;
(3)   Promise or threaten to disapprove the application of or otherwise punish
a lobbyist, unless that lobbyist:
(A)   Makes a campaign contribution or renders campaign assistance as requested
or demanded by the exempt officer or employee or a third person;
(B)   Refrains from seeking an advisory opinion from the ethics commission on a
possible violation of this section; or
(C)   Refrains from filing with a public agency or officer a complaint alleging
a violation of this section;
(4)   Approve the application of a lobbyist because that lobbyist made a
campaign contribution or rendered campaign assistance when requested or
demanded by the exempt officer or employee or third person;
(5)   Solicit or request a specified or minimum campaign contribution amount
from a lobbyist;
(6)   Request a lobbyist to provide a specified or minimum amount of campaign
assistance;
(7)   Solicit or receive any campaign contribution from a person, including a
lobbyist, in a building or facility during its use for official city functions;
or
(8)   Request or direct another exempt officer or employee to engage in an
activity prohibited under this subsection.
An exempt officer or employee shall not be prohibited from soliciting or
requesting a campaign contribution or campaign assistance from a lobbyist, so
long as the solicitation or request does not violate this subsection.
(c)   A lobbyist shall not make a campaign contribution or render campaign
assistance to any candidate for city office within two years after receipt of a
discretionary approval, whether legislative, administrative, or quasi-judicial,
from the city.
(d)   A candidate for city office shall not accept a campaign contribution from
a lobbyist within two years after the lobbyist receives a discretionary
approval, whether legislative, administrative, or quasi-judicial, from the
city.
A candidate for city office shall not accept or use campaign assistance from a
lobbyist within two years after the lobbyist receives a discretionary approval,
whether legislative, administrative, or quasi-judicial, from the city.
(e)   Any lobbyist, as defined under this section, who cannot make a campaign
contribution to a candidate for city office shall register with the clerk. A
lobbyist receiving a discretionary approval shall register within 10 days of
receipt of the approval.
A lobbyist who is not seeking a discretionary approval shall register
simultaneously with registration as a lobbyist under
Chapter 3, Article 13.
(f)   An exempt officer or employee, candidate for city office, or lobbyist who
violates this section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
The prosecution of a violation pursuant to this subsection shall be commenced
within two years after commitment of the violation. No violation shall be
prosecuted after the expiration of the two-year period.
The prosecuting attorney shall be responsible for prosecution of a violation.
If the prosecuting attorney becomes disqualified, the State attorney general
shall have the responsibility for prosecution.
The penalty of this subsection shall be in addition to the penalty provided
under §
1-19.5(a) if applicable to the violator. Both penalties may be imposed for the
same conduct.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 8, § 3-8.9) (Added by Ord. 94-54)
Editor’s note:
   **In Civil No. 96-2844-07 in the First Circuit Court, State of Hawaii,
subsections (c) and (d) (then § 3.29(c) and (d), were held to conflict with and
be preempted by HRS Chapter 11. The final judgment was entered on August 4,
1998 and was not appealed.
ARTICLE 20: DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE TRAINING PROGRAM
Sections
   
1-20.1   Definitions
   
1-20.2   Drug and alcohol abuse policy training for each officer and employee
   
1-20.3   Training program for management or supervisory officers and employees
§ 1-20.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Alcohol. The intoxicating agent in beverage alcohol, ethyl alcohol, or other
low molecular weight alcohol, including methyl and isopropyl alcohol.
Alcohol-Testing Policy. Any policy, whether established by any federal, State,
or city statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or administrative directive, or
by an applicable collective bargaining agreement, under which a city officer or
employee may be tested for the presence of alcohol in the officer’s or
employee’s system.
CFR. The Code of Federal Regulations.
Commercial Motor Vehicle. A motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles used
in commerce to transport passengers or property if the motor vehicle:
(1)   Has a gross combination weight rating of 11,794 or more kilograms (26,001
or more pounds) inclusive of a towed unit with a gross vehicle weight rating of
more than 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds);
(2)   Has a gross vehicle weight rating of 11,794 or more kilograms (26,001 or
more pounds);
(3)   Is designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver; or
(4)   Is of any size and is used in the transportation of materials found to be
hazardous for the purposes of the federal statutes on the transportation of
hazardous materials, Public Law 103-272, July 5, 1994, 108 Statutes at Large
759, as amended, codified at 49 USC Chapter 51, and that require the motor
vehicle to be placarded under the federal Hazardous Materials Regulations (49
CFR Part 172, Subpart F).
Controlled Substances Act. Public Law 91-513, October 27, 1970, 84 Statutes at
Large 1236, Titles 2 and 16, as amended, codified at 21 USC §§ 801 et seq.
Driver. Any person who operates a commercial motor vehicle. This includes but
is not limited to:
(1)   Full-time, regularly employed drivers;
(2)   Casual, intermittent, or occasional drivers; and
(3)   Leased drivers and independent, owner-operator contractors who are either
directly employed by or under lease to the city or who operate a commercial
motor vehicle at the direction of or with the consent of the city.
Drug. Any controlled substance, including marijuana, cocaine, any opiate, any
amphetamine, and phencyclidine, identified in the federal Controlled Substances
Act, as amended.
Drug-Testing Policy. Any policy, whether established by any federal, State, or
city statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or administrative directive, or by
an applicable collective bargaining agreement, under which a city officer or
employee may be tested for the presence of any particular drug or class of
drugs in the officer’s or employee’s system.
Employee. Has the same meaning as defined in §
1-4.1, provided the term shall also include any person meeting the definition
of “driver” in this section.
Officer. Has the same meaning as defined in §
1-4.1.
Reasonable Suspicion Test. A test for the presence of alcohol or drugs, or
both, in an officer’s or employee’s system, which test may be required by a
management or supervisory officer or employee under the city’s alcohol-testing
policy, the city’s drug-testing policy, or both, as applicable, based on a
specific, contemporaneous, and articulable observation of the appearance,
behavior, speech, or body odor of the tested officer or employee leading to a
reasonable suspicion of alcohol misuse or drug use.
Safety-Sensitive Functions. Include:
(1)   All time at a city or shipper plant, terminal, facility, or other
property, or on any public property, waiting to be dispatched, unless the
driver has been relieved from duty by the city;
(2)   All time inspecting equipment as required by 49 CFR §§ 392.7 and 392.8 or
otherwise inspecting, servicing, or conditioning any commercial motor vehicle
at any time;
(3)   All time spent at the driving controls of a commercial motor vehicle in
operation;
(4)   All time, other than driving time, in or upon any commercial motor
vehicle, except time spent resting in a sleeper berth (a berth conforming to
the requirements of 49 CFR § 393.76);
(5)   All time loading or unloading a commercial motor vehicle, supervising or
assisting in the loading or unloading of a commercial motor vehicle, attending
such a vehicle being loaded or unloaded, remaining in readiness to operate such
a vehicle, or in giving or receiving receipts for shipments loaded or unloaded;
and
(6)   All time repairing, obtaining assistance, or remaining in attendance upon
a disabled commercial motor vehicle.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 20, § 1-20.1) (Added by Ord. 97-70)
§ 1-20.2 Drug and alcohol abuse policy training for each officer and employee.
(a)   Each city officer and employee shall receive training of the highest
standards on the city’s drug and alcohol abuse policy by July 1, 2000, in
accordance with this section.
(1)   An officer or employee who enters city employment after July 1, 1998*
shall receive the training during the orientation provided upon entering
employment.
(2)   An officer who enters city service, other than employment, after July 1,
1998* shall receive the training within the one-month period following entrance
into service.
(3)   An officer or employee who is in city employment or service on July 1,
1998* shall receive the training within the two-year period following that
date.
(4)   For the duration of city employment or service after the training
described in subdivision (1), (2), or (3), an officer or employee shall receive
follow-up or refresher training, or both, as deemed necessary by the department
of human resources.
(b)   The department of human resources shall be responsible for scheduling and
enrolling each officer or employee for the training on the city’s drug and
alcohol abuse policy.
(c)   The department of human resources shall be responsible for providing the
training on the city’s drug and alcohol abuse policy to make officers and
employees aware of:
(1)   The policy;
(2)   What constitutes drug and alcohol abuse;
(3)   The adverse effects of drug use and alcohol misuse on an individual’s
health, work and personal life; and
(4)   The signs and symptoms of an alcohol or drug problem (the employee’s or a
co-worker’s).
For management or supervisory officers or employees, the training required
under this section shall be integrated with that required under §
1-20.3.
(d)   (1)   In addition to the training provided in subsection (c), city
drivers subject to 49 CFR Part 382 shall be provided a copy of the information
and materials specified in 49 CFR § 382.601(b) before their engaging in any
safety-sensitive function. This requirement shall be deemed to have been met
for officers and employees who were provided the materials and information
required under 49 CFR § 382.601 before July 1, 1998.* This information and
these materials shall also be provided to the exclusive bargaining
representatives of any such officers or employees.
(2)   The department of human resources may, in addition to the materials and
information required to be provided under subdivision (1), provide additional
materials or information under a statute, ordinance, rule, regulation,
administrative directive, or collective bargaining agreement; however, any
materials or information not required to be provided under 49 CFR Part 382
shall expressly state the basis on which the materials or information is
provided and shall state that it is not provided pursuant to 49 CFR Part 382.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 20, § 1-20.2) (Added by Ord. 97-70)
Editor’s note:
   * “July 1, 1998” is substituted for “the effective date of this ordinance.”
§ 1-20.3 Training program for management or supervisory officers and employees.
(a)   Each management or supervisory officer or employee of the city shall
complete a training program on the city’s alcohol and drug abuse policy. The
program shall provide each management or supervisory officer or employee with
training to properly:
(1)   Identify officers or employees under the management or supervisory
officer’s or employee’s management or supervision who exhibit the signs and
symptoms of an alcohol or a drug problem;
(2)   Refer employees identified under subdivision (1) to city, State,
community, or medical resources available for evaluation, diagnosis,
counseling, and rehabilitation of persons with drug and alcohol dependency or
addiction, as appropriate, including the names, addresses, and telephone
numbers of substance abuse professionals, and of counseling and rehabilitation
programs; and
(3)   Inform employees identified under subdivision (1) as to disciplinary and
other measures that may be taken if adverse behavior believed to be the result
of the abuse of drugs or alcohol, or both, is not corrected.
   The training program shall include information on alcohol and drug misuse
and indicators of probable misuse.
(b)   Management or supervisory officers or employees having managerial or
supervisory control over city officers or employees who are subject to city
alcohol or drug-testing policies, or both, shall, in addition to the training
provided pursuant to subsection (a):
(1)   Receive training in the alcohol- or drug-testing policies, or both,
applicable to the officers or employees under their management or supervision;
and
(2)   Receive training in the procedures and requirements for documentation of
observations that may permissibly lead to an alcohol or drug reasonable
suspicion test.
(c)   Management or supervisory officers or employees having managerial or
supervisory control over city officers or employees who are subject to 49 CFR
Part 382 shall, in addition to the training pursuant to subsection (b), receive
the materials and information enumerated in 49 CFR § 382.601(b) and any
additional training deemed necessary by the director of human resources
relating to alcohol- and drug-testing policies applicable to the officers and
employees subject to 49 CFR Part 382.
(d)   The training program provided under this section shall be formulated and
provided by the department of human resources.
(e)   (1)   For management or supervisory officers or employees who are in a
management or supervisory position on July 1, 1998,* the applicable training
program shall be provided within one year of July 1, 1998.*
(2)   For persons elected or appointed to city management or supervisory
positions following July 1, 1998,* but who are not subject to subdivision (3)
or (4), the training program described in subsection (a) shall be provided
within one year of the person’s election or appointment to the position.
(3)   For city management or supervisory officers or employees appointed to
positions with management or supervisory control over city officers or
employees subject to the city’s alcohol- or drug-testing policies, or both,
following July 1, 1998,* but who are not subject to subdivision (4), the
training program described in subsection (b) shall be provided within 60 days
of the date of the appointment.
(4)   For city management or supervisory officers or employees appointed to
positions with management or supervisory control over city officers or
employees who are subject to alcohol- or drug-testing, or both, under 49 CFR
Part 382, the training program described in subsection (c) shall be provided
within 60 days of the date of the appointment.
(5)   For the duration of the management or supervisory officer’s or employee’s
employment in the managerial or supervisory position, after the training
described in subdivision (1), (2), (3), or (4), whichever applies, the
management or supervisory officer or employee shall receive follow-up or
refresher training, or both, as deemed necessary by the department of human
resources.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 20, § 1-20.3) (Added by Ord. 97-70)
Editor’s note:
   * “July 1, 1998” is substituted for “the effective date of this ordinance.”
ARTICLE 21: CITY ADVERTISEMENTS
Sections
   
1-21.1   Definitions
   
1-21.2   Disclosure required
   
1-21.3   Penalty
§ 1-21.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Advertisement. Includes any communication paid for in whole or in part with
city funds, and publicly distributed to support, advocate for, or inform the
public about a city project, program, action, or legislation. The term does not
apply to notices of public meetings, notices of public hearings, notices of
real property tax assessments, liquor commission advertisements, and other
legal notices required by ordinance or other law. A radio or television
broadcast that differs in content from day-to-day or program-to-program shall
be treated as a separate advertisement for each day or program, respectively.
City Employee. Has the same meaning as is defined in Charter § 13-101, as
amended.
City Funds. Includes all funds appropriated in the city’s executive operating
and capital budgets and its legislative budget and include funds obtained by
the city from the State or federal government.
City Officer. Has the same meaning as is defined in Charter § 13-101, as
amended.
Liquor Commission Advertisement. Any communication paid for with fees collected
and received by, as well as all other moneys received on behalf of, the liquor
commission and deposited into the liquor commission fund, and publicly
distributed to support, advocate for, or inform the public about a liquor
commission project, program, action, or legislation. The term does not apply to
notices of public meetings, notices of public hearings, and other legal notices
required by ordinance or other law. A radio or television broadcast that
differs in content from day-to-day or program-to-program shall be treated as a
separate liquor commission advertisement for each day or program, respectively.
Publicly Distributed. To make available to the public by broadcasting on
television or radio, by publishing in a newspaper, magazine, periodical, or
other form of mass print media, or by bulk mailing a city publication.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 21, § 1-21.1) (Added by Ord. 08-18; Am. Ord. 20-8)
§ 1-21.2 Disclosure required.
(a)   No city officer, employee, or consultant, contractor, subconsultant, or
subcontractor to the city shall submit or cause to be submitted any
advertisement without including the following statement in the advertisement:
“Paid for (or paid in part) by the taxpayers of the City and County of
Honolulu.” For radio advertisements, the statement may be altered to state:
“Paid for (or in part) by city taxpayers.”
(b)   No Honolulu liquor commission officer, employee, or consultant,
contractor, subconsultant, or subcontractor to the Honolulu liquor commission,
shall submit or cause to be submitted any liquor commission advertisement
without including the following statement in the liquor commission
advertisement: “Paid for solely by fees collected and received by, as well as
all other moneys received on behalf of, the liquor commission and deposited
into the liquor commission fund.”
(c)   If an advertisement or liquor commission advertisement is in printed or
published form, the statement required in subsection (a) or (b) shall be
displayed in a prominent location in the advertisement or liquor commission
advertisement, and be of sufficient type size to be clearly readable by the
recipient or audience of the advertisement or liquor commission advertisement.
If the advertisement or liquor commission advertisement is broadcast on the
radio, the statement shall be stated orally at the end of the advertisement or
liquor commission advertisement.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 21, § 1-21.2) (Added by Ord. 08-18; Am. Ord. 20-8)
§ 1-21.3 Penalty.
   Any person who wilfully violates this article shall be subject to the
penalty provided in §
1-3.1.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 21, § 1-21.3) (Added by Ord. 08-18)
ARTICLE 22: HAWAIIAN LANGUAGE SIGNS OF THE CITY AND
COUNTY OF HONOLULU
Sections
   
1-22.1   Definitions
   
1-22.2   Hawaiian language on city signs
§ 1-22.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
City. The government of the City and County of Honolulu.
City Sign. A public sign as defined under §
21-7.20 that was prepared by or for the city.
Kahakō. A diacritical mark, which is placed above a vowel to indicate a long
sound or phonetic value in pronunciation.
‘Okina. A diacritical mark indicating an interruption of the breath stream
during speech.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 21, § 1-22.1) (Added by Ord. 08-21)
§ 1-22.2 Hawaiian language on city signs.
   All city signs that include Hawaiian language or Hawaiian names shall use
proper Hawaiian spelling, including kahakō and ‘okina.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 21, § 1-22.2) (Added by Ord. 08-21)
ARTICLE 23: CITY SEAL
Sections
   
1-23.1   Adoption and description
   
1-23.2   Unauthorized use of seal—Penalty
§ 1-23.1 Adoption and description.
(a)   The existing seal of the city, the impress, which is on file with the
city clerk’s office, and description that is shown below, is adopted as the new
seal of the city, State of Hawaii with the following modification:
   The term “Territory of Hawaii” appearing in the existing seal of the city is
deleted and the term “State of Hawaii” inserted in lieu thereof.
(b)   The impress of the city’s seal, which was included as a part of Ordinance
1730 but inadvertently omitted in the 1961 codification of ordinances, shall be
reenacted herein to provide specific information for the benefit of the general
public. The seal of the city shall be circular in shape, 3 inches in diameter,
and of the design being described, with the tinctures added as a basis for the
coat of arms as follows:
   Arms.   A heraldic shield quartered; first and fourth quarters bearing the
stripes and colors of the Hawaiian flag; second and third quarters, on a yellow
field, a white ball pierced on a staff; overall, a green escutcheon surcharge,
with a five pointed yellow star in the center.
   Supporters.   Nuuanu Pali on the dexter side and Diamond Head on the
sinister side; overall green color.
   Crest.   A rising sun irradiated in gold, surrounded by a legend “City and
County of Honolulu-State of Hawaii”
(c)   A line drawing version of the above-described city seal shall be on file
with the city clerk’s office.
(Sec. 1-7.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 1, § 41-1.1)
§ 1-23.2 Unauthorized use of seal—Penalty.
(a)   (1)   Whoever knowingly displays any facsimile of the seal of the city
in, or in connection with, any advertisement, poster, or circular, for the
purpose of conveying, or in a manner reasonably calculated to convey, a false
impression of sponsorship or approval by the city or by any city department,
agency, or instrumentality thereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(2)   Subdivision (1) will not be construed to apply to the use of a facsimile
of the seal in any newspaper, periodical, book, pamphlet, or stationery where
the facsimile of the seal is printed for informational purposes only to
indicate that any article or printed matter therein originated from authorized
sources of the city.
(b)   (1)   Whoever, except when authorized in writing by the council for
official use of the city, knowingly manufactures, reproduces, sells, or
purchases for resale, either separately or appended to any article manufactured
or sold, any facsimile of the seal of the city, or any substantial part
thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(2)   As used in this subsection, the term “sell” will be broadly construed to
include transactions involving cash donations to the seller or the seller’s
agent or representative, or both.
(c)   As used in this section, the term “facsimile” means the use of the seal
as described or impressed or the gold color replica or any combination thereof
found in §
1-23.1.
(Sec. 1-7.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 1, § 41-1.2) (Am.
Ords. 01-54, 25-9)
ARTICLE 24: PUBLIC RECORDS
Sections
   
1-24.1   Defined
   
1-24.2   Storage of public records
§ 1-24.1 Defined.
   The term “public record” has the same meaning as “government record” as
defined in HRS § 92F-3.
(Sec. 5-16.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 12, § 6-12.1) (Am.
Ord. 25-9)
§ 1-24.2 Storage of public records.
   The managing director shall adopt rules regarding the maintenance and
storage of public records for all city agencies pursuant to HRS Chapter 91. The
regulations are complementary to HRS Chapter 92F, and must provide for, but not
be limited to:
(1)   Guidelines to be used in determining which documents must remain
confidential to prevent invasions of privacy;
(2)   Segregation of all public records into confidential files and files open
to public inspection;
(3)   Maintenance of separate storage facilities for open and confidential
files;
(4)   Listing (by title) of all records in confidential files; and
(5)   Certification by the corporation counsel that each document contained in
confidential files is not a public record as defined in §
1-24.1.
(Sec. 5-16.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 12, § 6-12.2)
ARTICLE 25: COMMEMORATIONS AND CELEBRATIONS
Sections
   
1-25.1   ‘Ōlelo Hawai‘i Month
   1-25.2   Honor Our Kūpuna Month
§ 1-25.1 ‘Ōlelo Hawai‘i Month.
   The month of February is known and designated as ‘Ōlelo Hawai‘i Month to
celebrate and encourage the use of Hawaiian language. This month is not to be
construed as a city holiday.
(Added by Ord. 22-9)
§ 1-25.2   Honor Our Kūpuna Month.
   The month of May is hereby known and designated as “Honor Our Kūpuna Month”
to honor the great wisdom, generational knowledge, and immense contributions of
the beloved kūpuna of O‘ahu. This month is not to be construed as a city
holiday.
(Added by Ord. 24-25)
ARTICLE 26: ANTI-BIAS AND INCLUSION POLICY
Sections
   
1-26.1   Definitions
   
1-26.2   Policy of anti-bias and inclusion
   
1-26.3   Training program
   
1-26.4   Rules
§ 1-26.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Anti-Bias. Opposing or preventing discrimination against people based on race,
color, religion, gender, national origin, age, disability, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, pregnancy, or other protected characteristics,
including stereotyped attributions of particular qualities toward an individual
or group.
City. The City and County of Honolulu.
Department. The department of human resources.
Director. The director of human resources.
Inclusion. Creating environments in which any individual or group can, on an
ongoing basis, be welcomed, respected, supported, and valued to fully
participate.
Officer. Has the same meaning as defined under §
1-4.1.
(Added by Ord. 23-2)
§ 1-26.2 Policy of anti-bias and inclusion.
   It is the policy of the City and County of Honolulu to encourage anti-bias
and inclusion by city officers and employees. It is also city policy to ensure
that all such persons receive anti-bias and inclusion training to help provide
an environment that embraces diversity and safety within and around city
facilities.
(Added by Ord. 23-2)
§ 1-26.3 Training program.
(a)   The director of human resources shall develop, implement, and monitor an
anti-bias and inclusion training program for all city officers and employees.
(b)   The training program must include, but need not be limited to,
instruction based on best practices and information from experts in the fields
of diversity, equity, or inclusion.
(c)   The director shall periodically assess the training materials and update
them as needed.
(d)   Employing department and agency heads shall ensure that all city officers
and employees under their authority participate at least biennially in the
training provided pursuant to this article.
(e)   The director or the director’s designee shall retain records
demonstrating that the city has made training available to officers and
employees pursuant to this article. Employing department and agency heads shall
ensure that records are kept and retained confirming that the officers and
employees under their authority participated in the training.
(Added by Ord. 23-2)
§ 1-26.4 Rules.
   The director may adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 to implement,
administer, and enforce this article.
(Added by Ord. 23-2)
ARTICLE 27: PURPLE HEART CITY
Sections
   
1-27.1   Purple Heart City
§ 1-27.1 Purple Heart City.
   The city is known and designated as a “Purple Heart City” in recognition of
and to honor the extraordinary courage, service, and sacrifices, in the line of
duty, of Honolulu’s Purple Heart recipients.
(Added by Ord. 24-7)
ARTICLE 28: RESIDENT PREFERENCE IN CITY HOUSING PROGRAMS
Sections
   
1-28.1   Purpose
   
1-28.2   Definitions
   
1-28.3   Preference policy
   
1-28.4   Rules
§ 1-28.1 Purpose.
   This article establishes a preference for city residents who participate in
various housing programs offered by the city, to the extent allowed by law.
(Added by Ord. 25-5)
§ 1-28.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   City Resident. Any individual who has a stated intent to reside or be
domiciled in the city.
(Added by Ord. 25-5)
§ 1-28.3 Preference policy.
   It is the policy of the city to ensure that every program or initiative that
promotes or is intended to promote the provision of housing, and that was
created, developed, implemented, administered, required, supervised, managed,
or guided by the city must, to the greatest extent allowed by law, include a
preference for city residents. This policy instills only a preference for city
residents and does not exclude non-city residents from such programs or
initiatives. This preference must be construed broadly to effectuate the
intended purpose of installing the aforementioned preference.
(Added by Ord. 25-5)
§ 1-28.4 Rules.
   The department or agency designated by the mayor to implement this article
may adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 for the implementation,
administration, and enforcement of this article.
(Added by Ord. 25-5)
CHAPTER 2: THE MAYOR AND EXECUTIVE AGENCIES–ADDITIONAL POWERS,
DUTIES, AND FUNCTIONS
Article
   
1.   Mayor
   
2.   Officers
   
3.   Corporation Counsel
   
4.   Department of Budget and Fiscal Services
   
5.   Risk Management
   
6.   Department of Human Resources
   
7.   Department of Information Technology
   
8.   Department of Facility Maintenance
   
9.   Department of Ocean Safety
   
10.   Office of Climate Change, Sustainability and Resiliency
   
11.   Fire Department
   
12.   Department of Transportation Services
   
13.   Department of Enterprise Services
   
14.   Reserved
   
15.   Royal Hawaiian Band
   
16.   Department of Parks and Recreation
   
17.   Execution of Executive Operating Budget and Executive Capital Budget
Ordinances
   
18.   Form of Executive Operating Budget and Executive Capital Budget Bills
   
19.   Executive Branch Open Data, Strategic Data Usage, and Reporting
Requirements
   
20.   Reserved
   
21.   Department of Customer Services
   
22.   Age-Friendly City Program
   
23.   Department of Environmental Services
   
24.   Department of Planning and Permitting
   
25.   Department of Emergency Management
   
25A.   Control of and Evacuation from Disaster Areas During Potential Disasters
   
26.   Employment of Private Attorneys as Special Counsel to Represent the City,
its Agencies, Officers, and Employees
   
27.   Volunteer Services Program
   
28.   Prohibition on Take-Home Use of City Motor Vehicle by Executive Agency
Head or Deputy Head
   
29.   Department of Community Services
   
30.   Personal Services Contracts
   
31.   Seals and Logotypes of Executive Agencies
   
32.   City Video Monitoring of Public Activity
   
33.   Reserved
   
34.   Biodiesel or Renewable Fuel Converted from Commercial FOG Waste or
Commercial Cooking Oil Waste
   
35.   ENERGY STAR Products
   
36.   Light Pollution
   
37.   Zoo Sponsorship Program
   
38.   Solar Photovoltaic Systems
   
39.   Department of Design and Construction
   
40.   Reserved
   
41.   Enforcement of Water Safety Rules by Lifeguards
   
42.   Community Workforce Agreements
   
43.   “Keep Hawaii Hawaii - Promise to Our Keiki Pledge”
   
44.   Bullying of Youth Prohibited
   
45.   Reporting Requirements
   
46.   Commercial Property Assessed Financing Program
   
47.   Sponsorship of City Assets
ARTICLE 1: MAYOR*
Sections
   
2-1.1   Election and term of office
Editor’s note:
   *In general, see Charter Art. V, Chap. 1.
§ 2-1.1 Election and term of office.
   Except for the filling of a vacancy in the office of the mayor as provided
by Charter § 5-106, the electors of the city shall elect a mayor whose term of
office shall be four years beginning at 12:00 meridian on the second day of
January following the mayor’s election.
(Sec. 2-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 1, § 2-1.1)
ARTICLE 2: OFFICERS*
Sections
   
2-2.1   Additional duties
   
2-2.2   Inaugurate sound practices
   
2-2.3   Records
   
2-2.4   Acts by subordinate officer
   
2-2.5   Acting agency head
Editor’s note:
   *Civil Service exemptions, see Charter § 6-1103.
   Limitation on salary of first deputy or assistant, see HRS § 46-24.
   Officers defined, see Charter § 13-101.4; ROH §
1-4.1.
   Permitting coffee break, see HRS § 80-2.
§ 2-2.1 Additional duties.
   Each officer shall perform all duties required of such person’s office by
State law, the Charter, and ordinances of the city and such other duties not in
conflict therewith as may be required by the mayor.
(Sec. 2-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 2, § 2-2.1)
§ 2-2.2 Inaugurate sound practices.
   The heads of all executive agencies shall keep informed as to the latest
practices in their particular field and shall inaugurate, with the approval of
the mayor and managing director, such new practices as appear to be of benefit
and service to the public.
(Sec. 2-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 2, § 2-2.2)
§ 2-2.3 Records.**
   The heads of all agencies shall establish and maintain a system of filing
and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all
information necessary for proper control and audit of agency activities and to
form a basis for the periodic reports to the mayor.
(Sec. 2-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 2, § 2-2.3)
Editor’s note:
   ** Open to public inspection, see Charter § 13-105, superseding HRS §§ 92-
1 to 92-6.
§ 2-2.4 Acts by subordinate officer.
   When any provision herein requires an act to be done by an agency head, the
agency head may direct a subordinate to perform the act.
(Sec. 2-2.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 2, § 2-2.4)
§ 2-2.5 Acting agency head.
(a)   Absence due to illness, incapacity or temporary absence from the
city—when vacancy occurs. An agency head may appoint with the approval of the
mayor, an officer, or employee in such person’s department, to serve as acting
agency head during the agency head’s illness, incapacity, or temporary absence
from the city. As acting head, such person shall execute all the powers and
duties of the agency head. Vacancies resulting from death, resignation,
dismissal, or expiration of term of office of an agency head shall be filled in
accordance with applicable provisions pertaining to that agency contained in
the Charter. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, any incumbent
corporation counsel and prosecuting attorney whose term of office has expired
coterminously with that of the appointing authority shall not serve in an
acting or interim agency head capacity, unless and until their appointments
have been approved by the city council. Any person whose appointment fails to
receive council’s confirmation shall not be eligible for another appointment to
the same office during the term of the appointing authority.
(b)   Additional compensation for temporary absence of agency head. Any person
designated as acting agency head pursuant to subsection (a) of this section
shall not be entitled to the compensation received by the agency head; provided
that if an agency head’s illness, incapacity, or temporary absence from the
city exceeds 10 continuous working days involving a single occurrence, such
acting agency head shall be entitled to compensation paid to the agency head
until the agency head returns; provided further, that such additional
compensation shall be paid to the acting agency head retroactive to the
termination of the 10-day waiting period.
(c)   Additional compensation when vacancy occurs. Any person designated as
acting agency head pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall not be
entitled to the compensation received by the agency head; provided that if such
vacancy exceeds 10 continuous working days involving a single occurrence, such
acting agency head shall be entitled to compensation paid to the agency head
until the position is filled; provided further, that such additional
compensation shall be paid to the acting agency head retroactive to the
termination of the 10- day waiting period.
(Sec. 2-2.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 2, § 2-2.5)
ARTICLE 3: CORPORATION COUNSEL*
Sections
   
2-3.1   Additional powers, duties, and functions
   
2-3.2   Prohibited acts
   
2-3.3   Penalties
   
2-3.4   Procedure governing council approval for the settlement of claims
against the city
Editor’s note:
*Defense of liquor commission employees, see HRS § 281-103.
   Fees for services prohibited, see Charter § 11-102.1(d).
   In general, see Charter Art. V, Chap. 2.
   Legal counsel for board of water supply, see Charter § 7-116.
   Pay plan and organization, see Chap. 5, Art. 2.
   Pay plan for legal assistants, see Chap. 5, Art. 2.
   Private Practice Prohibited, see Charter § 11-102.2.
   Special Counsel, see Charter § 5-204.
§ 2-3.1 Additional powers, duties, and functions.
   The corporation counsel shall:
(1)   Prepare ordinances. Prepare bills for enactment into ordinances or
amendments of ordinances when so requested by the council or any committee or
member thereof or the mayor or any city officer;
(2)   Attend council meetings. Attend all council meetings in their entirety
for the purpose of giving the council any legal advice requested by its
members;
(3)   Prepare legal instruments. Prepare for execution and approve, as to form
and legality, all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party and
also approve, as to form and legality, all bonds required to be submitted to
the city;
(4)   Settle claims.
(A)   By corporation counsel. Have the power to adjust, settle, compromise, or
submit to arbitration, any action, causes of action, accounts, debts, claims,
demands, disputes, and matters in favor of or against the city or in which the
city is concerned as debtor or creditor, now existing or which may arise, not
involving or requiring payment in excess of $5,000; provided the money to
settle claims generally has been appropriated and is available therefor; and
provided further, that a quarterly report of all settlements shall be filed
with the council within 15 days after the end of each quarter;
(B)   Outstanding claims for or debts owed to the city. The corporation counsel
shall determine whether any claim for the city or any debt owed to the city not
in excess of $1,000 is collectible. If the corporation counsel determines that
any claim for the city or any debt owed to the city is not collectible, the
corporation counsel is authorized to advise the director of budget and fiscal
services that any claim for the city or any debt owed to the city shall be
stricken from the director of budget and fiscal services’ records and such
claim for the city or such debt owed to the city is extinguished; and
(C)   Private claims adjustment service. Any private claims adjustment service
that has been awarded a contract to provide coverage for liability by
established bid procedures and where the deductible amount of any insurance is
to be paid out of city funds, has the power to adjust, settle, compromise, or
submit to arbitration, any action, causes of action, accounts, debts, claims,
demands, disputes, and matters against the city for any injury or death to a
person or damage to property; provided that before such service can commit the
payment of any claim in excess of $15,000, it shall be first presented to the
corporation counsel for approval;
(5)   Make reports.
(A)   Report of decision. Report the outcome of any litigation in which the
city has an interest to the mayor and council; and
(B)   Annual report of pending litigation. Make an annual report to the mayor
and council, as of January 15, of all pending litigation in which the city has
an interest, and the status thereof;
(6)   Investigate workers’ compensation. Investigate all cases in which
workers’ compensation is involved and appear on behalf of the city before the
State workers’ compensation board;
(7)   Keep records.
(A)   Suits. Keep a complete record of all suits in which the city had or has
an interest, giving the names of the parties, the court where brought, the
nature of the action, the disposition of the case, or its status if pending;
and
(B)   Opinions and titles. Keep a complete record of all written opinions
furnished by the corporation counsel; and
(8)   Settle land acquisitions. Have the power to adjust, compromise, settle,
or submit to arbitration, any land acquisition requests referred to this office
by other city agencies or eminent domain actions, causes of eminent domain
actions in favor of or against the city or in which the city is concerned as
purchaser, seller, condemnor, or condemnee, now pending or that may arise, not
involving or requiring payment in excess of $2,500; provided that the money to
settle any specific land acquisition or eminent domain action generally has
been appropriated and is available therefor; and provided further, that a
quarterly report of all settlements shall be filed with the council within 15
days after the end of each quarter.
(Sec. 2-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 3, §
2-3.1) (Am. Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-3.2 Prohibited acts.
   The corporation counsel shall not:
(1)   Initiate, engage, or participate in any legal action or proceedings in
which any of the city, its officials, or its employees are not directly
involved in or named as a party to a contemplated or ongoing legal proceeding;
and
(2)   Other than situations where corporation counsel is expressly authorized
by federal or State statutes or city laws, bring action against a private
person as defined in §
1-4.1 without first obtaining the consent and approval of the council that
shall be manifested by an adopted council resolution.
(Sec. 2-3.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 3, § 2-3.2) (Am.
Ord. 96-58)
§ 2-3.3 Penalties.
   Penalty for violation of this article shall be a fine not to exceed $1,000
or one year’s imprisonment or both. Prosecution in such cases shall be as
provided by law for the prosecution of misdemeanors.
(Sec. 2-3.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 3, § 2-3.3)
§ 2-3.4 Procedure governing council approval for the settlement of claims
against the city.
(a)   Except as otherwise provided in §
2-3.1(4), no claim shall be adjusted, settled, or compromised without the prior
approval of the council.
(b)   The council shall determine and specify from time to time, by resolution,
claims for which all written offers of settlement are to be transmitted to the
council by legal counsel. Upon adoption of such a resolution, legal counsel
assigned to the claim specified in the council resolution shall transmit any
written offer of settlement to the council promptly, but no later than three
working days from the receipt of the offer, or before the expiration date of
the offer, if any, whichever occurs first.
Together with the offer, legal counsel shall transmit to the council: (i) the
recommendation of the agency, officer or employee against whom the claim is
made; and (ii) the recommendation of the legal counsel, as to whether to
accept, reject, or make a counter-offer to the offer. If, due to the shortness
of time within which to respond to an offer of settlement, legal counsel is
unable to obtain a recommendation from the agency, officer, or employee against
whom the claim is made, legal counsel need include only legal counsel’s
recommendation in the transmittal. However, legal counsel shall obtain the
recommendation of the affected agency, officer, or employee as soon as
practicable, and submit the recommendation in writing to the council.
(c)   The council may, after deliberation in executive session, accept or
reject the offer, or propose a counter-offer. If the council decides to accept
the offer of settlement, the council shall do so by adopting a committee report
or a resolution specifying the terms of settlement and expressing its approval
of the terms.
The decision of the council to accept a settlement offer shall be binding on
the city and on legal counsel. In the event the council rejects the offer or
proposes a counter-offer, it shall so inform legal counsel in executive
session. Legal counsel shall transmit the council’s acceptance of the offer of
settlement or the council’s proposed counter-offer to the claimant promptly and
without delay.
(d)   Nothing in this section shall preclude the corporation counsel from
establishing procedures consistent with the Code of Professional Responsibility
governing all attorneys licensed to practice law in the State of Hawaii, and
the Charter, for the transmittal of settlement offers to the council involving
claims not specified by the council pursuant to subsection (b). Further,
nothing in this section shall preclude legal counsel from recommending to the
council on legal counsel’s own initiative, or at the request of the affected
agency, officer or employee against whom a claim is made, offers to adjust,
settle, or compromise any claim, or to recommend to the council that the city
make an offer of settlement or judgment in any case in which the city is a
party.
(e)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Charter. The Revised Charter of the City and County of Honolulu, as amended.
City. The City and County of Honolulu, its agencies, officers, and employees.
Claim. Includes any claim, demand, debt, dispute, or other matter in favor of
or against the city, its agencies, officers or employees, initiated, brought,
or made by any person as defined in §
1-4.1, or any federal or State agency. The term includes claims for injunctive,
declaratory, and extraordinary relief.
Legal Counsel. Includes the corporation counsel, deputies corporation counsel,
special deputies, and special counsel representing the city in any claim.
Special Counsel. The private attorney or law firm retained by the city pursuant
to Charter § 5-204.3, to represent the city.
Special Deputies. The private attorney or law firm appointed by the corporation
counsel with the approval of the council pursuant to Charter § 5-204.1, to
represent the city.
(f)   Exception. This section shall not apply to claims arising between the
executive branch of city government and the council involving court litigation
for which corporation counsel, or if corporation counsel has been disqualified,
special counsel, has been retained to represent the agencies, officers, or
employees of the executive branch and either the attorneys in the office of
council services or special counsel has been retained by the council to
represent the council.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 3, § 2-3.4) (Added by Ord. 93-78)
ARTICLE 4: DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND FISCAL SERVICES*
Sections
   
2-4.1   Refund of license fees authorized
   
2-4.2   Additional powers, duties, and functions of the director of budget and
fiscal services
Editor’s note:
   *In general, see Charter Art. IV, Chap. 2.
§ 2-4.1 Refund of license fees authorized.
(a)   Legislative findings and declaration of intent. The council finds that:
Whenever a business license fee has been paid improperly or paid under
circumstances when it need not have been paid or otherwise paid in excess of
the amount required by law and such payments have been either voluntary,
involuntary, the result of a mistake of law or of fact, or any combination
thereof, and the payor has derived no benefit from the payment of such fee,
there exists a moral obligation on the part of the city to refund the payment
or such amount as represents the illegal excess collected over that required by
law.
(b)   Director of budget and fiscal services authorized to refund—when. Upon
the written request of the payor received within six months from the date of
the erroneous payment, the director may refund license fees or so much thereof
as represents the illegal excess collected over the amount required to be
collected by law or regulation when paid under the following conditions: when
such fees need not have been paid but were in fact paid voluntarily or
involuntarily, under a mistake as to the applicable law or mistake of fact;
provided that the payor has not derived any benefit from the payment of the
license fee. If such a benefit has been derived therefrom as in the case of a
payment made pursuant to a law or regulation subsequently declared by a court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, only the amount of the fee, which when
prorated over the term of the license represents the balance of the term for
which the license fee was paid after the decision invalidating the law or
regulation under which payment was made, shall be refunded; provided further,
that notwithstanding the receipt of any benefits by the payor, payments made
involuntarily as defined in subsection (d) shall be refunded in their entirety.
(c)   Limitations. The authority granted the director in subsection (b) shall
not extend to the payment of any other claims based on an asserted moral
obligation.
(d)   Involuntary payment. For the purposes of this article, involuntary
payments shall be those payments made under protest to prevent interference
with or the closing of the payor’s business or the arrest of such person.
Similarly, payment made under the threat of force or procured by fraud shall be
deemed involuntary.
(Sec. 2-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 4, § 2-4.1) (Am.
Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-4.2 Additional powers, duties, and functions of the director of budget and
fiscal services.
(a)   Collection. The director shall be the chief accounting officer of the
city and shall:
(1)   Collect and receive moneys due to or receivable by the city and issue
receipts therefor or authorize other executive agencies to do so under
conditions prescribed by the director; and
(2)   Have the responsibility of writing off uncollectible debts or accounts of
$1,000 or less for moneys due the city, upon recommendation of or with the
concurrence of the corporation counsel.
(b)   Payment—Check or electronic means.
(1)   In all instances where money due the city is paid by check or electronic
means, and the payment subsequently is dishonored by a bank or other financial
institution when presented for collection, a service fee shall be assessed
against the payor. The service fee shall be established and may be amended by
the director. The service fee shall be incorporated into the rules of the
department of budget and fiscal services and shall not exceed the reasonable
costs of the city relating to the processing and collection of dishonored
checks, or electronic payments.
(2)   Personal checks shall not be accepted by the city in payment of moneys
due the city of less than $1.
(3)   The director may accept payments of city taxes and other amounts owed to
the city made by electronic means, which in the director’s discretion are
determined acceptable to the city.
If any payment by electronic means tendered for payment of any taxes or other
amounts owed to the city is not paid by the bank, credit card company, or other
financial institution, the person for whom such payment was tendered shall
remain liable for the payment of the taxes or other amounts owed to the city,
including the service fee established pursuant to subdivision (1), the same as
if such payment had not been tendered.
(4)   The director may establish, where allowable, convenience and service fees
for payments made by electronic means to be added to the amounts owed to the
city. The convenience and service fees shall be adopted by rules of the
department of budget and fiscal services and shall not exceed the reasonable
costs of the city relating to the processing of the payments.
(5)   For purposes of this subsection, payments made by “electronic means”
include payments made by automated clearing house (ACH) transactions, fedwires,
credit cards, charge cards, debit cards, stored value cards, and other
electronic payment technology not yet developed.
(c)   Change orders. The director shall report in writing to the council
whenever:
(1)   The city approves change orders for a city-financed construction project
where the change orders result in an increase in project costs, which in
aggregate exceed one of the following amounts:
(A)   Seven percent of the original construction contract award, for
construction projects involving renovations to existing buildings, structures,
or facilities; or
(B)   Five percent of the original construction contract award, for
construction projects involving new buildings, structures, or facilities.
The director’s report to the council on the change orders shall include the
amount of the original contract award, the amount appropriated for construction
of the project, the amount of the appropriation for construction allocated for
contingencies, the total number and total dollar amount of the change orders
and the reason or reasons for the change orders. The director shall report to
the council within 30 days of the approval of the change order or orders that
result in the dollar amount of the change orders exceeding the limits set forth
in paragraph (A) or (B), as the case may be. For the purposes of this
subsection, a “contract award” means any separate award to a contractor for
construction work to be done for a city-financed construction project, and a
“city-financed construction project” means a project for which $500,000 or more
in city funds have been appropriated; provided that funds originally from the
State or federal government shall not be counted towards the $500,000
threshold.
(2)   The actual completion date of a city-financed construction project, as
defined in subdivision (1), occurs 90 days or more after its scheduled
completion date, as set forth in the contract for the construction of the
project. The director’s report on the aforementioned projects shall include for
each project the scheduled completion date, the actual completion date, the
number of days that the project was overdue and the reason or reasons for the
delay in completing the project. The director shall report to the council
within 30 days of the completion of a project that was overdue by 90 days or
more.
(d)   Annual review of fees and charges.
(1)   The director shall annually review all city fees and charges and
recommend to the council whether to increase, decrease, or maintain the current
amount of each fee and charge. Each recommendation shall be accompanied by a
statement of the reason or reasons why the particular fee or charge may be
increased, decreased, or maintained at the current level and the projected
amount by which city revenues would increase or decrease as a result of the
recommended increase or decrease in each fee or charge.
(2)   The director’s written recommendations, along with the appropriate
proposed ordinance, if any, shall be submitted to the council each year at the
same time that the city administration submits the annual executive operating
and capital budgets.
(3)   All changes in the city’s fees and charges recommended by the director
shall be reflected in the executive operating budget’s projection of revenues
for the upcoming fiscal year.
(Sec. 2-4.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 4, § 2-4.2) (Am.
Ords. 91-27, 95-09, 96-17, 97-02, 97-14, 16-29)
ARTICLE 5: RISK MANAGEMENT
Sections
   
2-5.1   General
   
2-5.2   Definitions
   
2-5.3   Purchase of insurance
§ 2-5.1 General.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall establish a risk management
program to identify and control the city’s exposure to liability. The program
shall be administered by the department of budget and fiscal services.
(Sec. 2-16.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 5, §
2-5.1) (Am. Ords. 91-27, 97-02, 16-29)
§ 2-5.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Risk. The potential for financial loss through occurrences, including but not
limited to accidents, personal injury, tort claims, legal obligations, and
natural disasters.
Risk Management. A management system to conserve the earning power and assets
of the city by minimizing the financial effect of accidental losses.
(Sec. 2-16.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 5, §
2-5.2)
§ 2-5.3 Purchase of insurance.
   The policies of insurance purchased pursuant to and in accordance with the
director of budget and fiscal services’ risk management program shall be
procured from companies authorized to do business in the State of Hawaii and
according to the applicable laws and ordinances on competitive bidding.
(Sec. 2-16.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 5, §
2-5.3) (Am. Ords. 91-27, 97-02, 16-29)
ARTICLE 6: DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES*
Sections
   
2-6.1   Director of human resources—Additional powers, duties and functions
   
2-6.2   Functions of the safety program administrator
Editor’s note:
   *In general, see Charter Art. VI, Chap. 11. ROH Art. 6 title was amended by
Ords. 96-58, 16-29.
§ 2-6.1 Director of human resources—Additional powers, duties and functions.
   The director shall:
(1)   Prepare and recommend to the civil service commission reasonable
regulations to carry out applicable provisions of the charter;
(2)   Examine all applicants for employment and all officers and employees of
the city pursuant to any applicable ordinance, civil service laws, and rules
then in effect; and
(3)   Work with other city departments and agencies to compile the report
required under §
2-18.7, by prescribing a form containing the information required under §
2-18.7 for each city department or agency to complete, and compiling the
information received into a comprehensive report that presents the information
in an organized, functional, and useful manner.
(Sec. 2-6.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 6, § 2-6.1) (Am.
Ords. 96-58, 16-29, 23-31)
§ 2-6.2 Functions of the safety program administrator.
   The functions of the safety program administrator are assigned to the
department of human resources.
(Sec. 2-6.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 6, § 2-6.2) (Am.
Ords. 96-58, 16-29)
ARTICLE 7: DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY*
Section
   
2-7.1   Qualifications
Editor’s note:
   *In general, see Charter Art. VI, Chap. 12. ROH Art. 7 title was amended by
Ord. 16-29.
§ 2-7.1 Qualifications.
   The director of information technology shall have had:
(1)   A minimum of five years of experience in an electronic data processing
position, including experience with third generation concepts and hardware to
include teleprocessing;
(2)   At least three years’ experience out of the five years’ experience in an
administrative and managerial capacity; and
(3)   At least one year of experience out of the three years of experience in a
comprehensive management capacity for the development, implementation, and
operation of business applications on a large scale computer system.
(Sec. 2-7.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 7, § 2-7.1) (Am.
Ord. 16-29)
ARTICLE 8: DEPARTMENT OF FACILITY MAINTENANCE*
Sections
   
2-8.1   Divisions
   
2-8.2   Adopt-a-block graffiti and litter removal program
   
2-8.3   Street lighting to be energy efficient
Editor’s note:
   *In general, see Charter Art. IV, Chap. 9. ROH Art. 8 title was amended by
Ord. 16-29.
§ 2-8.1 Divisions.
   The department of facility maintenance shall be divided under the chief
engineer into the following divisions:
(a)   Division of automotive equipment service. The division of automotive
equipment service, under the direction of a division chief, shall:
(1)   Have charge of the municipal garage and be responsible for the
acquisition, custody, repair, maintenance, and disposal of all automotive
vehicles and equipment assigned to and used by all city departments, except the
police department, fire department, board of water supply, and the Honolulu
Authority for Rapid Transportation, and except such stationary machinery as may
more practicably be maintained by the division or department having control
thereof;
(2)   Furnish when needed all parts, accessories, gasoline, distillate, fuel
oil, lubricants, and tires necessary for the repair of all such automobiles,
equipment, trucks, cranes, graders, sweepers, eductors, mixers, tankers,
trailers, large riding tractor mowers, and rollers;
(3)   Furnish or assign when needed for use by other city departments, on a
rental basis, such vehicular equipment as may be available to it from time to
time;
(4)   Have charge of the municipal corporation yard or yards occupied by the
division and any other place for the storing or housing of all such vehicular
equipment belonging to the city;
(5)   By proper methods, monitor the use of all vehicular equipment belonging
to or under the jurisdiction of the city and from time to time, report all
instances of accidents or apparent abuse of such equipment to the department or
division head concerned and to the chief engineer and the mayor. For the
purpose of this subdivision, vehicular equipment belonging to or under the
jurisdiction of the department of parks and recreation shall be deemed as
belonging to or under the jurisdiction of the city;
(6)   Municipal automobiles to be kept in garage. All automobiles belonging to
the city and under the jurisdiction of the division of automotive equipment
service shall be kept at the municipal corporation yard when not in the actual
service of the city, except such automobiles as the director and chief engineer
may specifically authorize to be kept elsewhere;
(7)   Repairs. All repairs upon any such automobile, equipment, truck, crane,
grader, sweeper, eductor, mixer, tanker, trailer, large riding tractor mower,
roller, or machinery belonging to the city shall be made at the municipal
garage to the fullest extent that the facilities of the garage permit, except
repairs made in an emergency. The municipal garage shall also make repairs upon
and furnish gasoline, oils, parts, and accessories for equipment coming under
the jurisdiction and control of other departments, excepting only the board of
water supply, police department, fire department, and the Honolulu Authority
for Rapid Transportation, and it may, upon request, furnish such repairs,
gasoline, oils, parts, and accessories for such excepted departments;
(8)   Accounting records. It shall be the duty of the division chief to keep a
system of accounting records as shall be approved by the director of budget and
fiscal services and the council so as to properly charge against the proper
division, department, or fund the cost of the service rendered and facilities
and equipment furnished by the division of automotive equipment service and the
cost shall be so charged;
(9)   Reports by division chief. The division chief shall make a full report to
the chief engineer and the council not later than the 15th day of the month
following the close of each quarter of all of the affairs of the division
chief’s division, including therein, among other things, work done and
equipment and stock on hand, and equipment purchased and disposed of during
such quarter. The report shall be made in such form and manner as shall be
approved by the director of budget and fiscal services and the council;
(10)   Fees or rates applicable to automotive equipment charges. The fees or
rates applicable to automotive equipment shall reflect the actual cost of
services performed or contracted for, goods provided, and overhead; and
(11)   Limitation. This subsection shall not be construed as authorizing the
division of automotive equipment service to control the routing and direction
of equipment while in use by another division or department.
The powers, duties, and functions provided to the division of automotive
equipment service by this subsection shall not apply to motor vehicles used for
the city bus system or special transit service. For the purpose of this
limitation, “city bus system” and “special transit service” have the same
meanings as defined in §
15B-1.1.
(b)   Division of road maintenance. The division of road maintenance, under the
supervision of a director, shall be responsible for the construction and
maintenance of roads, streets, highways, footpaths, storm drain facilities, and
bridges.
(c)   Division of public building and electrical maintenance. The division
shall:
(1)   Repair, maintain, and renovate all:
(A)   City buildings and appurtenant structures;
(B)   Street, park, mall, outdoor, and other city lighting and electrical
facilities; and
(C)   Communication facilities under the jurisdiction of the department;
(2)   Provide daily custodial and utility services for city buildings;
(3)   Manage city employees’ parking and motor pool services; and
(4)   Manage security services for Honolulu Hale, Kapolei Hale, the Frank F.
Fasi Municipal Building and other city facilities.
(Sec. 2-8.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 8, § 2-8.1) (Am.
Ords. 91-27, 93-31, 97-02, 16-29)
§ 2-8.2 Adopt-a-block graffiti and litter removal program.
(a)   Establishment. The chief engineer shall establish an “Adopt-A-Block
Graffiti and Litter Removal Program” that shall be administered by the
department of facility maintenance. The chief engineer may adopt rules or
policies and shall adopt forms necessary to implement this section.
(b)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Adopter. A person adopting a block or portion thereof under the program
established pursuant to this section.
Block. One side of any street, the length of such side extending between two
consecutive intersections; or, in the case of a dead-end street, one side of
such dead-end street, the length of such side extending between the dead-end
and the nearest intersection.
Bus Stop Shelter or Bench. A shelter or bench owned by the city and located at
an official or unofficial bus stop for the use of persons waiting for a city
bus.
Chief Engineer. The chief engineer of the department of facility maintenance.
Curb. Has the same meaning as defined in § 14-14.2.
Department. The department of facility maintenance.
Graffiti. Any unauthorized drawing, inscription, figure, or mark of any type
intentionally created by paint, ink, chalk, dye, or similar substances.
Graffiti also means any unauthorized sticker, decal, or tape.
Person. Individuals, corporations, firms, associations, societies, communities,
and assemblies.
Program. The Adopt-A-Block Graffiti and Litter Removal Program established
pursuant to this section.
Public Facility. Any city-owned light post, traffic control box or device, or
sign.
Sidewalk. Has the same meaning as defined in § 14-14.2.
(c)   Elements of program. The program shall at a minimum include the following
elements:
(1)   Interested persons may volunteer to remove or cover graffiti on walls,
public facilities, and bus stop shelters and benches along a city block or
blocks and remove litter from these facilities and public sidewalks and curbs
along a city block or blocks specified by the persons, which block or blocks
shall be “adopted” by the persons for the purposes of this section. A portion
of a block may be adopted, provided that the portion is a minimum of 200 feet
in length;
      The adopter shall enter into an agreement with the department:
(A)   To adopt the block or portion thereof for a minimum of two years; and
(B)   To perform the applicable of the following on the same day at least four
times a year:
(i)   To remove litter from the public sidewalks and curbs along the adopted
block or portion;
(ii)   To remove or cover graffiti on walls and public facilities along the
adopted block or portion; and
(iii)   If there is a bus stop shelter or bench on the adopted block, to also
remove or cover any graffiti on the shelter or bench;
(2)   The department shall provide the adopter with the supplies and materials
necessary to remove or cover the graffiti and collect the litter, including but
not limited to cleaning agents, paint, brushes, trash bags, and gloves, at no
charge to the adopter. The paint provided by the department need not match the
existing color of the wall. The department also shall provide instruction on
proper removal, painting, and safety procedures. The adopter shall return any
unused or reusable supplies and materials to the department after each graffiti
and litter removal operation. The department shall be responsible for the
prompt removal of all filled trash bags after each graffiti and litter removal
operation. This subdivision shall not preclude the adopter from providing its
own supplies and materials, provided that they are approved by the department,
or from removing filled trash bags;
(3)   Walls not owned by the city shall not be subject to the program unless
the adopter obtains the written consent thereto from the owner of the wall. The
owner’s consent shall be obtained on a form prescribed by the chief engineer
and shall include a provision holding the city harmless with respect to claims
for injury or damage by the owner or the owner’s lessees, agents, employees,
customers, or invitees arising from the removal or covering of the graffiti.
The department shall assist the adopter in identifying the owner of any wall
not owned by the city along the adopted block or portion thereof;
(4)   All of the adopter’s participants shall be at least 12 years of age. The
adopter shall provide adequate and necessary supervision of all participants
under the age of 18. There shall be at least one adult supervisor for every
five or fewer participants between the ages of 12 and 17. A signed parental
release form shall be provided for every participant between the ages of 12 and
17; and
(5)   The agreement between the adopter and the department may be terminated by
either party on written notice to the other.
(d)   Additional authority of chief engineer. The chief engineer may:
(1)   Declare a block or portion thereof as ineligible for the program if its
location or physical attributes would pose safety hazards to the adopter or the
public;
(2)   Impose additional requirements for adoption not in conflict with this
section and in the interests of public safety or necessary for practical
administration of the program;
(3)   Require the adopter or the owner of any wall along the adopted block or
portion thereof who consents to inclusion of the wall in the program to execute
such releases, indemnity agreements, and similar agreements as the chief
engineer may deem advisable in consultation with the corporation counsel; and
(4)   Attach to a bus stop shelter or bench or bus stop sign pole a plaque
citing the adopter’s adoption of the block. To be eligible for a plaque, the
block adopted shall consist of a city block that includes a city-owned bus stop
shelter or bench on it. The chief engineer shall have the authority to
determine whether and where to attach a plaque, but that authority shall be
exercised in accordance with this subdivision and other applicable law or
ordinance and after consultation with the director of transportation services.
A plaque shall state: “______________ (Adopter’s name) Adopt-A-Block Cleanup
Program.” It shall not include any other word or logo, trademark, symbol, or
other image. The chief engineer shall determine the dimension, design, and
coloring of a plaque; provided that, if the plaque is to be attached to a bus
stop sign pole, it shall be smaller than the bus stop sign, attached beneath
the sign, and designed and oriented so as not to constitute a traffic or
pedestrian hazard. A plaque shall be deemed a “public sign,” not “plaque,” for
the purpose of the land use ordinance. When the chief engineer attaches or
directs the attachment of a plaque in accordance with this section, the action
shall be deemed a performance of a public duty for the purpose of HRS Chapter
445, Part IV.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 8, § 2-8.3) (Added by Ord. 98-07; Am. Ords. 99-21, 16-
29)
§ 2-8.3 Street lighting to be energy efficient.
   All new and replacement municipal street lighting fixtures installed by the
department shall equal or exceed the energy efficiency of low pressure sodium
lighting fixtures, unless waived by the chief engineer in accordance with rules
adopted pursuant to HRS Chapter 91.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 8, § 2-8.4) (Added by Ord. 16-29)
ARTICLE 9: DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN SAFETY
Sections
   
2-9.1   Extended lifeguard services program
   
2-9.2   Additional powers, duties, and functions of the chief of ocean safety
§ 2-9.1 Extended lifeguard services program.
(a)   Legislative findings and declaration of intent. Public safety and welfare
would be served by providing public safety programs that protect and educate
beachgoers about ocean safety. With increasing use of Oahu’s beaches and ocean
waters from early mornings to late afternoons by both residents who want to
swim before and after work, and by visitors who are enticed by the visitor
industry and social media postings to maximize their beach activities during
their stays, the city needs to provide lifeguard services that encompasses the
times when beaches and ocean waters are being utilized by residents and
visitors.
(b)   Chief of ocean safety to develop extended lifeguard services program. The
chief of ocean safety shall undertake and develop an extended lifeguard
services program that provides for lifeguard personnel during all daytime
hours, as provided in § 2-9.2.
(Added by Ord. 19-26) (Am. Ord. 25-36)
§ 2-9.2 Additional powers, duties, and functions of the chief of ocean safety.
(a)   The chief of ocean safety shall establish a program that provides for
extended lifeguard services that encompasses all daytime hours, from dawn to
dusk.
(b)   The extended lifeguard services will apply to emergencies arising on the
beach and in the near shore waters of the city.
(Added by Ord. 19-26) (Am. Ord. 25-36)
ARTICLE 10:  OFFICE OF CLIMATE CHANGE, SUSTAINABILITY AND RESILIENCY
Section
   
2-10.1   Definitions
   
2-10.2   Energy program
   
2-10.3   Energy use reporting
   
2-10.4   Building energy benchmarking
   
2-10.5   Coastal and water program
   
2-10.6   Water use reporting
   
2-10.7   Climate resilience and equity program
   
2-10.8   Food security and sustainability program
   
2-10.9   Zero waste program
   
2-10.10   Pre-disaster multi-hazard mitigation program
   
2-10.11   Long-term disaster recovery
   
2-10.12   Climate action
   
2-10.13   Climate change adaptation
   
2-10.14   Report on visitor industry sustainability progress
   
2-10.15   Annual sustainability report
   
2-10.16   Climate change commission
§ 2-10.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Climate Change Adaptation. The process of anticipating and adjusting to
actual or expected climate change impacts and effects by taking appropriate
actions to prevent or minimize the damage they cause and advantageously improve
environmental and community conditions.
   Covered City Facility. A facility that exceeds 10,000 gross square feet in
total floor area and is owned, leased, or managed by the city and the city
regularly pays all or part of the energy and/or water utility bill, except for
single family, duplex, triplex and fourplex residential homes and related
accessory structures, or any other residential building with less than five
units; and other building types not meeting the purpose of this article, as
determined by the executive.
   Directors. The head officials of all city departments or agencies, including
all semi-autonomous city departments or agencies, including but not limited to,
the directors of the departments of planning and permitting, design and
construction, transportation services, environmental services, and parks and
recreation, the director and chief engineer of facility maintenance, the
manager and chief engineer of the board of water supply, and the executive of
climate change, sustainability and resiliency.
   Executive. The executive for climate change, sustainability and resiliency.
   Memorandum of Understanding. An inter-agency/departmental agreement to work
collaboratively on an issue, such as climate change and sea level rise
adaptation-related policies, strategies, projects, and programs, that provides
details on the collaborative framework, including but not limited to the
duties, responsibilities, procedures, and commitments of each participating
city department/agency.
   Net-Negative Carbon Emissions. At least as much carbon is captured from the
atmosphere annually as activities within the city release by reducing emissions
as much as possible and then balancing remaining emissions with carbon removal
or carbon offset programs.
   Office. The office of climate change, sustainability and resiliency.
   One Water. An integrated resource planning and implementation approach to
managing finite freshwater, wastewater, and stormwater resources for long-term
resilience and reliability, meeting both community and ecosystem needs.
   One Water Climate Resilience Checklist. A list of strategic and tactical
actions, including but not limited to: research and monitoring; policy and
regulation; financing, planning, and engineering; public outreach; design and
construction; and performance metrics that are essential components of climate
change adaptation.
   One Water Panel. A formal group of representatives from city departments and
agencies including, but not limited to, representatives from the department of
planning and permitting, department of design and construction, department of
transportation services, department of facility maintenance, department of
environmental services, department of parks and recreation, the board of water
supply, and the office of climate change, sustainability and resiliency.
(Added by Ord. 20-47)
§ 2-10.2 Energy program.
(a)   The office shall establish and manage an energy program to coordinate
actions and policies of city departments and agencies related to:
(1)   Greenhouse gas emissions reduction;
(2)   On-site renewable energy generation and storage;
(3)   Energy efficiency and conservation; and
(4)   Renewable-fueled transportation,
in accordance with implementation of the objectives in the city's climate
action plan specified in §
2-10.12.
(b)   As set forth in subsection (a), the office shall develop or coordinate
actions with city departments and agencies to implement the following:
(1)   The maintenance and monitoring of all information related to city energy
use and energy-related billing;
(2)   City energy efficiency, conservation, and savings projects, to ensure
consistency and alignment with city policies, including the monitoring of
energy savings performance contracts and energy benchmarking programs;
(3)   The conversion of the city fleet, which must transition to 100 percent
electric or renewable technology by 2035, excepting first responder vehicles,
until available electric or renewable technology is able to support the needs
deemed necessary for supporting emergency response, including securing
additional federal funds for these purposes;
(4)   Electric or renewable fuel vehicle infrastructure, including revenue
collection associated with electric vehicle charging at city facilities;
(5)   The development and annual update of a greenhouse gas emissions
inventory, that captures greenhouse gas emissions related to activities within
the city;
(6)   The development and implementation of the objectives in the city's
climate action plan specified in §
2-10.12, which will facilitate the integration of the climate action plan's
components into all city operations, projects, plans, procedures, and other
decision-making processes, and the monitoring of the city's progress in
achieving emissions reductions targets set forth in the climate action plan;
(7)   The provision of technical assistance to city departments and agencies
and other partners in the development of programs, projects, external
partnerships, and federal, state, and private funding proposals to attract
resources to the city related to energy; and
(8)   The use of collected city energy use data to educate city departmental
and agency staff on opportunities and pathways for reducing energy consumption
in city facilities.
(Added by Ord. 20-47)
§ 2-10.3 Energy use reporting.
   Beginning with the quarter ending June 30, 2021, and each quarter
thereafter, the office shall collect from all city departments and agencies
data that details each department's or agency's energy use, including but not
limited to electricity, gasoline, diesel, and biofuel consumption, and costs
during the previous quarter, and shall annually report the city's energy usage
data in the annual sustainability report specified in §
2-10.15.
(Added by Ord. 20-47)
§ 2-10.4 Building energy benchmarking.
(a)   There is hereby established a municipal building energy benchmarking
policy for the city to measure facilities' energy and water use over time for
transparency in energy usage. Under this policy, the city hereby expresses its
commitment to increasing the energy efficiency of its building stock to reduce
the city's energy usage and its associated costs and carbon pollution.
(b)   The office shall develop or coordinate actions with city departments and
agencies with responsibilities for the maintenance of public buildings and
facilities, as appropriate, to facilitate the energy benchmarking of every
existing covered city facility for the purposes of measuring energy use and
performance over time.
The office shall:
(1)   Report the city's energy use data collected in §
2-10.3, water use data collected in §
2-10.6, and any other basic property and usage characteristics necessary to
benchmark covered city facilities against other similar properties in an
industry-recognized benchmarking tool such as ENERGY STAR Portfolio Manager or
comparable tool as determined by the executive; and
(2)   Provide training on ENERGY STAR Portfolio Manager or comparable tool as
needed by the city departments and agencies.
(c)   The office shall annually report a summary of city facilities'
benchmarked data in the annual sustainability report specified in §
2-10.15.
(d)   The office shall assist all necessary and relevant city departments and
agencies, as appropriate, in using the benchmark to monitor efforts to improve
the efficiency of the city's building stock and in securing federal funds to
advance additional energy efficiency gains.
(Added by Ord. 20-47)
§ 2-10.5 Coastal and water program.
(a)   The office shall establish and manage a coastal and water program to
coordinate actions and policies of city departments and agencies related to:
(1)   Adapting to climate change impacts;
(2)   Protecting coastal areas and beaches;
(3)   Promoting the resiliency of communities and coastal areas;
(4)   Developing resilient physical and natural infrastructure in preparation
for and response to the effects of climate changes; and
(5)   Coordinating and supporting integrated water and urban forest resources
management, in accordance with the city's general plan, development plans,
zoning ordinances, and subdivision ordinance, and to increase sustainability
and resiliency.
(b)   As set forth in subsection (a), the office shall develop or coordinate
actions with city departments and agencies to implement the following:
(1)   The development and management of a coastal monitoring data program to
assess shoreline change and assist in the incorporation of the information into
city shoreline regulations, policies, plans, and programs;
(2)   The development, management, and maximization of the city's participation
in the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) National Flood Insurance
Program Community Rating System, including securing federal funding and
partnerships to advance the program; and
(3)   The provision of technical assistance to city departments and agencies,
and other partners in the development of programs, projects, external
partnerships, and federal, state, and private funding proposals to attract
resources to the city related to coastal and water issues.
(Added by Ord. 20-47)
§ 2-10.6 Water use reporting.
   Beginning with the quarter ending June 30, 2021, and each quarter
thereafter, the office shall collect from all city departments and agencies
data that details each department's or agency's water usage during the previous
quarter, and shall annually report the city's water usage data in the annual
sustainability report specified in §
2-10.15.
(Added by Ord. 20-47)
§ 2-10.7 Climate resilience and equity program.
(a)   The office shall establish and manage a climate resilience and equity
program to coordinate actions and policies of city departments and agencies to
advance procedural, distributional, structural, intergenerational, and cultural
equity related to:
(1)   Disparate outcomes of climate change impacts;
(2)   Programmatic and policy responses to climate change impacts; and
(3)   Underlying projects, policies, and programs that have created and
contributed to unequal resilience and vulnerability to climate change impacts.
(b)   As set forth in subsection (a), the office shall develop or coordinate
actions with city departments and agencies to implement the following:
(1)   Inclusive, community-centered engagement practices and decision-making
processes related to increasing community access, participation, and
representation in resilience programs and policies;
(2)   The prioritization of frontline communities and environmental justice by
being an accessible resource for two-way communication for climate change
information and decision-making;
(3)   The standardization and utilization of tools to advance equity in
research, policy formulation and implementation, trainings, and operational
processes;
(4)   The provision of technical assistance to city departments and agencies,
and other partners in the development of programs, projects, external
partnerships, and federal, state, and private funding proposals to attract
resources to the city related to achieving climate resilience and equity; and
(5)   Advancement of short- and long-term reduction and ultimate elimination of
disparity, harm, and disparate impact in programs, projects, and policy and
planning processes while increasing social and government process inclusion.
(Added by Ord. 20-47)
§ 2-10.8 Food security and sustainability program.
(a)   The office shall establish and manage a food security and sustainability
program to coordinate actions and policies of departments and agencies within
the city related to food security, sustainability, and climate resilience.
(b)   As set forth in subsection (a), the office shall develop or coordinate
actions with city departments and agencies to implement the following:
(1)   The development, implementation, and reporting of objectives in a city-
wide food system development plan that advances food security, self-sufficiency
and sustainability for the food system within the city;
(2)   The development of federal, state, and nonprofit partnerships and funding
sources to encourage community alignment to increase food security, including
local food supply, production, transportation and distribution, especially to
frontline communities that have historically lacked access to healthy and
affordable local food supplies;
(3)   The provision of technical assistance to city departments and agencies
and other partners in the development of programs, projects, external
partnerships, and federal, state, and private funding proposals to attract
resources to the city related to achieving food security and sustainability;
and
(4)   Coordinating with public, private, and nonprofit groups working to
address issues of the food and agricultural systems within the city, including
the sustainability and vulnerability of these systems in the face of natural
disasters, climate change impacts, and other disruptions.
(Added by Ord. 20-47)
§ 2-10.9 Zero waste program.
   The office shall establish and manage a zero waste program to develop or
coordinate actions and policies of departments and agencies within the city
related to moving toward a circular economy by promoting waste reduction
initiatives and encouraging the continual use of resources to eliminate waste.
(Added by Ord. 20-47)
§ 2-10.10 Pre-disaster multi-hazard mitigation program.
(a)   The office shall assist the department of emergency management in
establishing and managing a pre-disaster hazard mitigation program to
coordinate actions and policies of city departments and agencies related to
reducing loss of life and property by lessening the impact of natural disasters
that are projected to increase in intensity and frequency due to climate
change.
(b)   As set forth in subsection (a), the office shall develop or coordinate
actions with city departments and agencies to implement the following:
(1)   The preparation and implementation of the city's official pre-disaster
multi-hazard mitigation plan updated in accordance with requirements set forth
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA);
(2)   The inclusion of climate adaptation strategies and ensuring climate
resilience and equity in hazard mitigation plans and planning processes;
(3)   The continued eligibility for federal funding and maximum utilization of
federal funding and other resources to support hazard mitigation;
(4)   The provision of technical assistance to all city departments and
agencies and other partners in the development of programs, projects, and
applications for federal, state, and private funding for hazard mitigation
actions;
(5)   The provision of support to all city departments and agencies to ensure
the pre-disaster hazard mitigation plan is used as a resource for considering
hazard mitigation and disaster resilience in all city plans and planning
processes; and
(6)   The tracking and evaluation of city-wide investment in disaster
resilience as reported by all city agencies, which may be made publicly
available in the annual sustainability report specified in §
2-10.15.
(Added by Ord. 20-47)
§ 2-10.11 Long-term disaster recovery.
   The office, in coordination with the mayor and the department of emergency
management, and other necessary and interested city departments and agencies,
as appropriate, shall prepare and coordinate implementation of a long-term
disaster recovery plan for the city. Within 60 days following the end of the
fiscal year ending June 30, 2022, the office shall submit to the mayor and the
council a long-term disaster recovery plan for the city. The long-term disaster
recovery plan must:
(1)   Be defined as the plan for sustained disaster recovery operations over an
extended period of time of months or years, as necessary, transitioning from
the short-term recovery operations under the emergency operations plan;
(2)   Provide a long-term disaster recovery framework including organization,
policies, and processes that are consistent with the vision, goals, and
function of the city;
(3)   Be inclusive in both planning and implementation to meaningfully consider
input from all levels of government, individual members of the public,
representatives of the private sector, and any interested non-governmental or
non-profit groups or organizations which may include at least one open public
meeting in each council district; and
(4)   Be reviewed by the office annually, in coordination with all necessary
and interested city departments and agencies, as appropriate, and updated every
five years with support to the maximum extent from federal funding and in
conjunction with the pre-disaster multi-hazard mitigation plan specified in §
2-10.10.
(Added by Ord. 20-47)
§ 2-10.12 Climate action.
(a)   There is hereby established a climate action policy for the city to
transition to 100 percent renewable energy within the city and achieve net-
negative carbon emissions for emissions related to activities within the city
no later than 2045, consistent with state law.
(b)   The office, in coordination with all necessary and interested city
departments and agencies, as appropriate, shall prepare and assist in the
implementation of a climate action plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
related to activities within the city and achieve the goal of net-negative
carbon emissions related to activities within the city no later than 2045. The
climate action plan shall be based on the best available science and
internationally accepted best practices and must:
(1)   Include a greenhouse gas emissions inventory for emissions related to
activities within the city and use the inventory to set emissions baselines and
forecasts and identify targets for emissions reduction goals;
(2)   Identify specific and measurable benchmarks, policies, and action
strategies to achieve reductions in greenhouse gas emissions related to
activities within the city; provided that this subdivision shall not apply to
activities not primarily regulated by the city, including activities of the
utilities' business segments, subsidiaries, and affiliates that are subject to
regulation by the public utilities commission;
(3)   Incorporate or align with the goals and objectives of any and all other
emissions reduction plans adopted by other city departments and agencies;
(4)   Identify, to the extent possible, affordable solutions to advance
implementation of the objectives in the climate action plan;
(5)   Identify, to the extent possible, potential federal funds that can be
secured to help advance implementation of the objectives in the climate action
plan; and
(6)   Be inclusive in both planning and implementation to meaningfully consider
input from all levels of government, individual members of the public,
representatives of the private sector, and any interested non-governmental or
non-profit groups or organizations which may include at least one open public
meeting in each council district.
(c)   The office, in coordination with all necessary and interested city
departments and agencies, as appropriate, shall:
(1)   Annually track the city's progress in meeting emissions reductions
targets and implementing the strategies identified in the plan and summarize
such progress in a brief report or in the annual sustainability report
specified in §
2-10.15, and share the annual report with council;
(2)   Update the climate action plan every five years, starting no later than
2025; and
(3)   Submit, within 120 days following the end of each year it is updated, the
climate action plan for approval through a resolution, by one reading, by the
council. The council shall approve or disapprove the action plan within 90
days. Should the council fail to approve or disapprove the climate action plan,
the climate action plan submitted by the office will be deemed approved.
(Added by Ord. 20-47)
§ 2-10.13 Climate change adaptation.
(a)   The office shall develop policies and coordinate climate change
adaptation actions of departments and agencies within the city to take a
proactive approach in adapting to impacts resulting from climate change and sea
level rise, and to align programs to help protect and prepare the city and its
residents for the physical and economic impacts of climate change to the
maximum extent practicable. Under such policies, the city hereby expresses its
commitment to lead, plan, and implement the development of comprehensive and
balanced planning, regulations, design, and construction of climate change and
sea level rise adaptation of city infrastructure systems.
(b)   As set forth in this section, there is hereby established a one water
policy, principles, and procedures for city departments and agencies. This
policy will provide a climate change adaptation solution and one water
collaboration framework to be incorporated in the planning of all city
infrastructure systems.
(1)   One water principles will consist of the following:
(A)   Value all water in the natural and built environment, utilize and manage
freshwater, wastewater and stormwater resources for their best use, and
preserve water's quality and quantity;
(B)   Increase climate resilience and adaptation for freshwater, stormwater,
wastewater, water reuse, water desalination, and transportation systems;
(C)   Find opportunities to partner on projects taking advantage of co-
benefits, overlapping goals, and limited funding. Identify projects to leverage
the multiple benefits of one water practices;
(D)   Consistent messaging with the public and developers around stormwater,
wastewater, freshwater, water reuse, and sea water;
(E)   Encourage consistent use of national industry best practice guidelines
and emerging technology to ensure the efficient and best use of water
resources;
(F)   Recognize one water as a long-term investment that can save money over
time; and
(G)   Build partnerships with stakeholders and organizations, including
identifying to the extent possible, potential federal funds that can be secured
to help advance the one water goals of the city.
(2)   One water procedures will guide city departments and agencies to:
(A)   Establish a one water panel of affected city departments and agencies to
consult on city projects and programs, private development infrastructure
master plans, and updating building codes and design standards;
(B)   Develop an inter-agency memorandum of understanding detailing
collaboration procedures for research and monitoring, policies and procedures,
plans and programs, regulations and design standards, capital improvements, and
shared and supplemental funding opportunities;
(C)   Incorporate one water climate resilience in the city's development and
sustainable communities plans, watershed management plans, infrastructure
plans, and developer coordination for climate change adaptation;
(D)   Develop a checklist of strategic and tactical actions for one water
climate resilience and collaboration including but not limited to research and
monitoring, policies and regulations, coordinating resources, planning and
engineering, public outreach, and design and construction for climate change
and sea level rise adaptation, with both a 2050 and 2100 time outlook;
(E)   Prioritize and sequence one water climate resilience initiatives to
address critical infrastructure serving economic and transportation centers,
and other critical facilities;
(F)   Identify one water projects to promote innovative and scalable concepts;
and
(G)   Develop an alternative coordinating mechanism for private developments
interested in participating in such a mechanism to more simply navigate the
permitting systems among the various city agencies and align investments with
city plans, regulations, and infrastructure capacity for climate resilience.
(3)   The city's policy is to employ a one water collaboration framework for
climate change and sea level rise adaptation in the planning, design,
construction, maintenance, and operation of the city's infrastructure under the
jurisdiction of the directors. The one water panel shall be coordinated and
organized on a regular basis by the office.
(4)   The city's policy is to jointly adopt a one water climate resilience
checklist and associated procedures to be used by the directors and their staff
as guidance when initiating, policies, regulations, rules, planning, designs,
and construction of any infrastructure project. The checklist must be jointly
updated from time to time by the directors, as necessary and appropriate, to
facilitate the implementation of this article.
(5)   The city's policy is to evaluate and initiate updates of existing
policies, rules, regulations, and design guidelines to ensure consistency with
the one water climate resilience policy, principles, procedures, and national
industry best practices. The updates may occur from time to time, as necessary,
by the directors to reflect current best practices.
(6)   One water climate resilience features are not required if the head
official of an affected city department, agency, or semi-autonomous city agency
determines, in writing with appropriate documentation, prior to or during the
project planning and design process, that:
(A)   The resilience feature is prohibited by law;
(B)   The cost of the resilience feature would be excessively disproportionate
to the need, savings, or probable future use over the long term;
(C)   There is an absence of current or future need for the resilience feature;
or
(D)   The safety of the public may be placed at unacceptable risk by
implementation of the resilience feature.
(7)   The office shall submit to the council, within 120 days following the end
of each calendar year, beginning with the year ending December 31, 2021, and
each year thereafter, a report detailing compliance with the one water climate
resilience policy, and the principles and procedures included therein, during
the prior calendar year. The report must detail the climate resilience actions
initiated during that year and must include a list of exceptions made, with the
accompanying appropriate documentation, pursuant to subdivision (b)(6) for that
year.
(8)   The annual report required in this section may be part of the annual
sustainability report required by §
2-10.15 for purposes of compliance with this section.
(Added by Ord. 20-47)
§ 2-10.14 Report on visitor industry sustainability progress.
(a)   The office shall issue an annual report on the Oahu visitor industry's
sustainability efforts and progress toward reducing solid waste, energy
consumption, fossil fuel usage, and water waste, and encouraging multi-modal
transportation options. The executive may consult with other government and
private entities in order to produce the report.
(b)   The content and metrics of the report in subsection (a) will be
determined by the executive in consultation with a visitor industry stakeholder
advisory group based on internationally accepted best practices and be updated
periodically as best practices evolve. The stakeholder advisory group shall
include but not be limited to one member from each of the following
organizations: The Hawaii Tourism Authority, the Hawaii Lodging and Tourism
Association, the Sustainable Tourism Association of Hawaii, and the Oahu
Visitor's Bureau. The report may include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1)   Identifying industry stakeholders and forms of engagement;
(2)   Setting parameters for information gathered;
(3)   Identifying key topics to report;
(4)   Documenting organization management approaches to relevant topics,
including organization policies and practices, commitments, goals, and (short,
medium, and long-term targets);
(5)   Identifying risks and opportunities for various organizations;
(6)   Defining performance-based reporting for material topics, which may
include subjects such as energy and water consumption;
(7)   Developing content management procedures and structure to support the
accuracy and ease of overall sustainability reporting; and
(8)   Setting goals and targets, and transparently reporting on progress toward
meeting them.
(c)   Tourism-related entities shall respond to annual requests from the
executive for information on solid waste generation, energy consumption, fossil
fuel use, and water use. For the purposes of this annual report, the executive
shall determine relevant tourism-related entities from the lodging,
transportation, activity, and other tourism-related sectors.
(Added by Ord. 20-47)
§ 2-10.15 Annual sustainability report.
   The office shall submit an annual sustainability report to the mayor and the
council and make the report publicly available within 120 days following the
end of each calendar year, beginning with the year ending December 31, 2020,
and each year thereafter. The content and metrics of the report will be
determined by the executive and must measure the city's overall performance in
meeting its established sustainability, energy, and resilience targets and
objectives.
(Added by Ord. 20-47)
§ 2-10.16 Climate change commission.
   Consistent with Charter § 6-107(h), there shall be a climate change
commission consisting of five members with expertise in climate change in
Hawaii. The climate change commission will be governed by Charter § 13-103, and
shall:
(1)   Gather the latest science and information on climate change effects in
the city and provide advice as is deemed appropriate to the executive, the
mayor, the council, and city departments and agencies; and
(2)   At a minimum, meet quarterly, unless meeting is deemed unnecessary by a
majority of the commission members.
(Added by Ord. 20-47)
ARTICLE 11: FIRE DEPARTMENT*
Section
   
2-11.1   Powers, duties, and functions
   
2-11.2   Additional powers, duties, and functions of the fire chief
 
Editor’s note:
   *In general, see Chap. 10, Art. VI. Retirement system, see HRS §§ 88-21, 88-
45, and 88-63.
§ 2-11.1 Powers, duties, and functions.**
   The fire chief shall be charged with the prevention of fires and the
protection of life and property against fire and shall:
(1)   Report losses. Report all fire losses periodically to the mayor;
(2)   Maintain equipment. Be responsible for the maintenance and care of all
property and equipment used by the fire chief’s department; and
(3)   Fire extinguishers. Grant, withhold, suspend, or revoke certificates of
fitness authorizing persons to repair, fill, or refill portable fire
extinguishers.
(Sec. 2-11.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 11, § 2-11.1)
Editor’s note:
   ** Additional duties are prescribed in HRS Chapter 132.
§ 2-11.2 Additional powers, duties, and functions of the fire chief.
   The fire chief shall:
(1)   Identify and assess the training, qualifications and certifications
necessary for personnel assigned to rescue companies, establish additional
recommended standards as necessary, and upon completion of the assessment,
update the city position descriptions to be aligned with the rescue companies'
best practices;
(2)   Formalize a long-term training plan to effectively implement any
necessary additional standards and ensure consistency in standards among all
personnel assigned to rescue companies, and provide this plan to the council
and fire commission within 60 days of November 23, 2020;
(3)   Ensure that all personnel assigned to existing rescue companies have, or
are in the process of obtaining, the requisite training, qualifications, and
certifications to be rescue company personnel; and
(4)   Staff additional rescue companies only with personnel that have the
requisite training, qualifications, and certifications to be rescue company
personnel.
(Added by Ord. 20-39)
ARTICLE 12: DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION SERVICES*
Section
   
2-12.1   Powers, duties, and functions
   
2-12.2   City payment card
Editor’s note:
   * In general, see Charter Art. VI, Chap. 17.
§ 2-12.1 Powers, duties, and functions.
   The director of transportation services shall:
(1)   Be authorized to issue permits for the movement of vehicles, equipment,
or other objects of excessive weight, width, or height as prescribed by law;
(2)   Be responsible for the collection of revenue from on-street and off-
street parking meters and for the construction and maintenance of multideck
parking lots;
(3)   Plan, develop, promote, and coordinate:
(A)   Ridesharing programs, which include but are not limited to carpool,
vanpool, taxipool, and buspool programs. The director shall assist
organizations interested in promoting ridesharing programs, arrange for
contracts with private organizations to manage and operate the programs, and
assist in the formulation of ridesharing arrangements. Ridesharing programs
include informal arrangements in which two or more persons ride together in a
motor vehicle to and from work or school; and
(B)   Other transportation systems management programs, which include but are
not limited to alternate work hours programs and bicycling programs;
(4)   Prepare a bikeway system and master plan for urban Honolulu to be
submitted to the council for approval, and thereafter prepare and submit for
council approval revisions to the plan at least every five years after the
adoption of the plan by the council. The bikeway system in the plan shall, at a
minimum, connect the following principal bicycle destinations:
(A)   Waikiki;
(B)   Diamond Head;
(C)   The University of Hawaii and Manoa Valley;
(D)   Punchbowl;
(E)   The Hawaii Capital Special District;
(F)   Chinatown;
(G)   Aloha Tower;
(H)   The State Waterfront Park and redevelopment area;
(I)   Ala Moana Beach Park;
(J)   The airport area; and
(K)   Military bases;
(5)   Be responsible for the:
(A)   Planning, administration, and coordination of programs and projects that
are:
(i)   Proposed to be funded, wholly or partially, under the federal Urban Mass
Transportation Act of 1964, as amended, the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1973, as
amended, or any other federal law or regulation; and
(ii)   Required to be transmitted by the city to the Oahu metropolitan planning
organization;
In the planning, administration, and coordination of the programs and projects,
the director shall consult with the department of planning and permitting. When
deemed appropriate, the director may assign the responsibility for planning and
administering a particular program or project to the department of planning and
permitting;
(B)   Receipt of federal funds for the programs and projects and:
(i)   Expenditure of those federal funds appropriated to the department of
transportation services; and
(ii)   With respect to those federal funds appropriated to the department of
planning and permitting, apportionment of the funds to that department for
expenditure;
(C)   Preparation of the short-range transit plan and any update. The “short-
range transit plan” has the same meaning as defined in §
4-2.1; and
(6)   Manage and maintain all commercial parking facilities except facilities
that are attached or adjacent to a building or project managed by another city
agency.
(Sec. 2-12.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 12, § 2-12.1) (Am.
Ords. 89-149, 91-27, 94-39, 97-02, 16-29)
§ 2-12.2 City payment card.
(a)   The department may issue city payment cards that are permanent,
reloadable cards, or other devices furnished by the department, that store
value that can be used to pay fares, fees, and charges for the multimodal
municipal transportation system and for other goods and services.
For the purposes of this section, "department" means the department of
transportation services and "multimodal municipal transportation system" means
all public transportation systems of the city, including but not limited to,
the city bus system, special transit services, the city rail system, and
associated parking and other services.
(b)   The department may charge a fee not to exceed $5 for a new or replacement
city payment card.
(c)   If a city payment card is lost or stolen, the stored value on the card
may be recovered; provided that:
(1)   The lost or stolen city payment card was registered;
(2)   The owner of the card files a report with the department that the card
has been lost or stolen; and
(3)   The owner requests the stored value to be transferred to a new card.
The city shall not bear any responsibility, liability, or obligation if any
value on a lost or stolen city payment card cannot be recovered.
(Added by Ord. 21-7)
ARTICLE 13: DEPARTMENT OF ENTERPRISE SERVICES*
Sections
   
2-13.1   Powers, duties, and functions
   
2-13.2   Status of city parks and recreational facilities
Editor’s note:
   *In general, see Charter Art. VI, Chap. 15.
§ 2-13.1 Powers, duties, and functions.
   The director of enterprise services shall:
(1)   Have the authority to negotiate contracts for:
(A)   Concessions in or on; or
(B)   The renting, leasing, or licensing of;
property under the control of the department, including the auditorium,
cultural, entertainment, and recreational facilities assigned to the
department, pursuant to Chapter 38; provided that all such contracts shall be
executed by the director of budget and fiscal services; and **
(2)   Have the authority to manage, control, and operate the facilities of the
municipal auditorium complex and the Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell complex of the
city, including the right of custody, repair, and maintenance of all property
and equipment assigned to and used by the department.
(Sec. 2-13.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 13, § 2-13.1) (Am.
Ord. 16-29)
Editor’s note:
   ** See ROH Chapter 38.
§ 2-13.2 Status of city parks and recreational facilities.
(a)   Except as provided in subsection (b), parks and recreational facilities,
or any portion thereof, under the ownership, management, or control of the city
shall not be cultural or entertainment facilities subject to the jurisdiction
of, or assignment to, the department of enterprise services.
(b)   Subsection (a) does not apply to the following:
(1)   The Honolulu Zoo;
(2)   The Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell complex; and
(3)   Municipal golf courses.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 13, § 2-13.2) (Added by Ord. 17-21)
ARTICLE 14: RESERVED
ARTICLE 15: ROYAL HAWAIIAN BAND*
Sections
   
2-15.1   Powers, duties, and functions
   
2-15.2   Fees for services
Editor’s note:
   *In general, see Charter § 6-105.
   Pensions, see HRS Chapter 88.
   Travel, see HRS § 46-10.
§ 2-15.1 Powers, duties, and functions.
   The bandmaster shall:
(1)   Be charged with the supervision, direction, and control of the Royal
Hawaiian Band; and
(2)   Keep a permanent and accurate inventory of the musical instruments and
other related equipment and fixtures assigned to or used by the band.
(Sec. 2-15.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 15, § 2-15.1)
§ 2-15.2 Fees for services.
(a)   The following are the fees to be assessed for any performance by the
Royal Hawaiian Band of the city:
 
Performance Type               Fee
                               $2,500 for the first hour, and
Private function               thereafter, $250 for each 15 minutes or
                               fraction thereof
Television, radio, movies, or  $250 per 15 minutes or fraction thereof,
recordings                     plus royalties and residuals
Vessel arrival or departure    $500 for each performance
Public or semi-public function No fee
 
(b)   The term “public” includes occasions sponsored by or related to a
governmental purpose. The term “semipublic” includes occasions that are
sponsored by or related to community, civic, athletic, or ethnic organizations
or associations and that are either eleemosynary corporations chartered under
the laws of the State of Hawaii, or listed by the Internal Revenue Service as a
nonprofit organization or association or duly recognized by the residents of
the city as a community or civic organization, with sufficient public purpose
to warrant performance by the band with incidental benefits to the private
organizations or associations.
(c)   All fees collected under this article shall be paid into the general fund
of the city.
(Sec. 2-15.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 15, §
2-15.2) (Am. Ords. 99-10, 02-66, 22-27 )
ARTICLE 16: DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
2-16.1   Powers, duties, and functions
§ 2-16.1 Powers, duties, and functions.
   The director of parks and recreation shall:
(1)   Operate and maintain the Waikiki war memorial and natatorium, including
its structures, facilities, and grounds;
(2)   Schedule the use of parks areas and facilities, provided that the
director may give preference to events which promote Hawaii-based artists,
whenever practicable; and
(3)   Perform such other duties as may be required by law.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 16, § 2-16.1) (Added by Ord. 90-1; Am. Ord. 94-77)
ARTICLE 17: EXECUTION OF EXECUTIVE OPERATING BUDGET AND
EXECUTIVE CAPITAL BUDGET ORDINANCES
Sections
   
2-17.1   Definitions
   
2-17.2   Budget execution
   
2-17.3   Moneys earned on investment of funds
   
2-17.4   Notice of bid results
§ 2-17.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Activity. The lowest level in the appropriations ordinance at which resources
are budgeted.
Permanent Position Count. The number of permanent full-time equivalent
positions authorized for each activity by law.
Program. A combination of activities designed to achieve a specific goal of the
city.
Temporary Position Count. The number of temporary, full-time equivalent
positions that are authorized for each activity by law. Temporary positions
shall include those positions defined in Charter § 6-1103(f) and (g).
(Sec. 2-18.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 17, §
2-17.1) (Am. Ords. 90-49, 96-58, 16-29)
 § 2-17.2 Budget execution.
   Upon the enactment of the executive operating budget ordinance and the
executive capital budget ordinance, each executive agency may make expenditures
pursuant to the charter, subject, however, to the following.
(a)   Authorized positions. Only those positions authorized within the
specified permanent position count and temporary position count for each
activity under the executive operating budget ordinance may be established,
filled, and have funds allotted to them; provided if because of an unforeseen
or emergency circumstance a temporary position is required for an activity for
which a temporary position count has not been authorized, the mayor, after
notifying the council, may establish, fill and allot funds for that temporary
position.
The notification shall identify:
      (1)   The type of temporary position required;
      (2)   The anticipated duration of the employment of the temporary
position;
      (3)   The cost of the temporary position;
      (4)   The source of budgetary savings that will accrue to finance the
temporary position; and
      (5)   The unforeseen or emergency circumstance justifying the need for
the temporary position.
(b)   (1)   Temporary transfers of positions. Temporary transfers of positions
by the mayor shall be permitted pursuant to Charter § 5-103 within the fiscal
year. A quarterly status report of all transfers shall be filed with the office
of the city clerk. Such report shall include but need not be limited to the
following information for each position transferred:
(A)   The position title and position number of the position transferred;
(B)   The originating activity from which the position is transferred;
(C)   The activity to which the position is transferred;
(D)   The title and function of the position in its temporary assignment;
(E)   The purpose for the transfer; and
(F)   The effective date and the anticipated duration of the temporary
transfer.
(2)   Temporary transfer of position actions shall not be used as a means to
circumvent the annual budget policies and process.
(c)   Transfer of funds.
(1)   No transfer of funds from an activity shall be executed without council
approval by resolution when the cumulative amount of transfers from that
activity shall total in excess of $100,000 or 10 percent of the amount
appropriated for that activity in the executive operating budget ordinance, as
may be amended, whichever is less. No transfer of funds to an activity shall be
executed without council approval by resolution when the cumulative amount of
transfers to that activity shall total in excess of $100,000 or 10 percent of
the amount appropriated for that activity in the executive operating budget
ordinance, as may be amended, whichever is less. A report of all individual
transfers of funds between activities occurring within each month shall be
filed with the office of the city clerk within 15 days after the end of the
month. Such report shall include but need not be limited to the following
information:
(A)   The amount of funds transferred;
(B)   The source of funding of the transferred funds;
(C)   The originating activity and character of expenditure thereof from which
the funds are transferred;
(D)   The activity and character of expenditure thereof to which the funds are
transferred;
(E)   The purpose for the transfer; and
(F)   The impact of the loss of funds on the originating activity.
(2)   Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (4), no transfer of funds
between characters of expenditure within the same activity shall be executed
without council approval by resolution when the cumulative amount of such
transfers exceeds the lesser of:
(A)   $100,000; or
(B)   The greater of:
(i)   Ten percent of the appropriation for either the originating or receiving
character of expenditure; or
(ii)   $10,000.
A report of all individual transfers of funds between characters of expenditure
shall be filed with the office of the city clerk within 15 days after the end
of the month. Such report shall include but need not be limited to the
following information:
(i)   The amount of funds transferred;
(ii)   The source of funding of the transferred funds;
(iii)   The originating character of expenditure from which the funds are
transferred;
(iv)   The character of expenditure to which the funds are transferred;
(v)   The purpose of the transfer; and
(vi)   The impact of the loss of funds on the originating character of
expenditure.
(3)   For the purposes of this subsection, “character of expenditure” has the
same meaning as defined in §
2-18.1.
(4)   Council approval shall not be required for transfers of funds between
characters of expenditure within the same activity when the funds transferred
are from and will remain a part of the appropriations to the transit management
services contractor as defined in
Chapter 15B. A report of all individual transfers of funds as provided herein
shall include the same information prescribed in subdivision (2). The report
shall be filed with the office of the city clerk within 15 days after the end
of the month and a copy of the report shall be transmitted to the council.
(d)   Force and effect of the executive program. The temporary position count
for each activity as may be provided for in the executive program, as attached
to the executive operating budget ordinance, shall have the same force and
effect as provided by this article, to limit funding only to duly authorized
temporary positions.
(Sec. 2-18.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 17, §
2-17.2) (Am. Ords. 88-14, 90-49, 91-27, 96-23, 97-02, 98-02, 00-48)
§ 2-17.3 Moneys earned on investment of funds.
   Unless otherwise provided by law, or by ordinance or resolution providing
for the issuance of and security for bonds of the city, all moneys earned on
the investment of funds shall be deposited to the general fund of the city.
(Sec. 2-18.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 17, §
2-17.3) (Am. Ord. 98-20)
§ 2-17.4 Notice of bid results.
(a)   Whenever the city receives bids for a capital improvement project, one or
more of which bids exceed the city’s estimate of the project’s cost, and the
user agency decides not to proceed with the project, the user agency shall
notify the council of the following as soon as the user agency determines not
to award the contract because of insufficient funds:
(1)   The name of the project;
(2)   The city’s estimate of the project’s cost;
(3)   The dollar amount of each bid received for the project; and
(4)   The amount and percentage by which the lowest bid exceeds the city’s
estimate of the project’s cost.
(b)   For the purpose of this section, “user agency” means the city agency for
which the project is being built.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 17, § 2-17.4) (Added by Ord. 94-74)
ARTICLE 18: FORM OF EXECUTIVE OPERATING BUDGET AND
EXECUTIVE CAPITAL BUDGET BILLS
Sections
   
2-18.1   Definitions
   
2-18.2   Executive operating budget bill—Form
   
2-18.3   Executive capital budget bill—Form
   
2-18.4   Transfer and allocation of funds
   
2-18.5   Executive program and budget
   
2-18.6   Line-item budget details
   
2-18.7   Report on position vacancies
   
2-18.8   Park land acquisition—Report
§ 2-18.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Activity. The lowest level in the appropriations ordinances at which resources
are budgeted.
Character of Expenditure. The major categories of expenditures. For the
operating budget, it includes but is not limited to salaries, other current
expenses, and equipment. For the capital budget, it includes the work phases.
Function. A combination of programs designed to achieve a major purpose of the
city.
Position Count. The number of permanent full-time equivalent positions
requested for authorization.
Program. A combination of activities designed to achieve a specific goal of the
city.
Source of Funding. The source from which funds are requested for appropriation
for the activities and projects specified in the executive operating budget and
executive capital budget bills. Each source of funding shall be identified with
a unique letter symbol.
Work Phase. A stage or element of a capital project including but not limited
to planning and engineering, land acquisition, construction, inspection,
equipment and artwork purchased for display on city property.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 18, § 2-18.1) (Added by Ord. 88-107)
§ 2-18.2 Executive operating budget bill—Form.
   The proposed executive operating budget bill shall be substantially in the
form found in Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified in this article,
and made a part hereof, and it shall include but not be limited to the
following:
(1)   A summary of the estimated revenues, by source, with which the
expenditures requested for appropriations shall be financed. If the source of
funding is a broad category of funds composed of specific component funds, such
as other operating funds, other federal funds or other State funds, a listing
of all anticipated grants or programs, along with the estimated revenue for
each, which comprise this source of funding shall also be included;
(2)   Definitions of key words, phrases and symbols including but not limited
to letter symbols designating the source of funding for the appropriations;
(3)   For each activity, the number of full-time equivalent positions, the
amount of the requested appropriation by source of funding, the amount of the
requested appropriation by character of expenditure, and the moneys that
comprise the requested appropriation for the activity;
(4)   For each function, the total full-time equivalent positions, the amount
of the requested appropriation by source of funding, the amount of the
requested appropriation by character of expenditure, and the total of all
moneys that comprise the requested appropriation for the function;
(5)   The total of all moneys requested for appropriation by function; and
(6)   The executive operating budget bill may include provisos or conditions
applicable to one or more activity and that relate to the receipt or
expenditure of funds or positions requested within the bill.
   Volume I of the executive program and budget shall show, as appropriate,
amounts reflecting prior fiscal year expenditures, current appropriations, and
funding proposals for the ensuing fiscal year at a level below the activity
level. Where necessary for review purposes, the council may request that
additional subactivities be added. These new subactivities shall be shown in
future budgets submitted to the city council. In addition, each budgeted item
within the miscellaneous function shall be deemed a separate activity and
Volume I shall include a statement of purpose for each activity and show prior
fiscal year expenditures inclusive of any transfer to and from the activity and
current appropriations and funding proposals for the ensuing fiscal year.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 18, § 2-18.2) (Added by Ord. 88-107; Am. Ords. 91-24,
96-23)
EXHIBIT A
                                             ORDINANCE ___________
                                             BILL __________________
   A BILL FOR AN ORDINANCE
RELATING TO THE EXECUTIVE OPERATING BUDGET AND PROGRAM FOR THE FISCAL YEAR JULY
1, 20_____ TO JUNE 30, 20_____.
BE IT ORDAINED by the People of the City and County of Honolulu:
   SECTION 1. The revenues from the following sources estimated for the fiscal
year July 1, 20_____ to June 30, 20_____ are hereby provided and appropriated
for the purposes set forth in Sections 2 through _____:
 
   OPERATING FUNDS
Fund Code SOURCE OF FUNDS AMOUNT        LESS INTERFUND NET AMOUNT TOTAL
                                        TRANSFER
XX        XXXX            $             $              $          $
          TOTAL           $             $                         $
                              _______    ________               ________
 
   SECTION 2. The moneys described in Section 1 for the fiscal year July 1,
20_____ to June 30, 20_____ are appropriated as indicated to the following
activities in the __________________ function.
FUNCTIONS,      NUMBER OF           CURRENT            TOTAL ALL SOURCE OF
PROGRAMS &      POSITIONS  SALARIES EXPENSES EQUIPMENT FUNDS     FUNDS
ACTIVITIES      (F.T.E.)
FUNCTION
PROGRAM
Department
   Activity  XX         $        $        $         $         $         XX
TOTAL FUNCTION  XX         $        $        $         $         $
                =======    =======  =======  =======   =======   =======
FUNCTION
SOURCE OF FUNDS
XX XXXX       $
TOTAL FUNCTION   $
 
   SECTION 11. The sums appropriated above are totalled as follows:
 
     GROSS
FUND APPROPRIATIONS EXECUTIVE        DEBT SERVICE    MISCELLANEOUS    TOTAL
CODE BY SOURCE OF   AGENCIES
     FUNDS
XX   XXXX           $                $               $                $
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   
                       __________   __________    __________    ______
     TOTAL          $                $               $                $
 
 
FUNCTION TOTAL         LESS INTERFUND TRANSFER NET TOTAL
         $             $                       $
                                              
                                              
                                              
XXXX                                          
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                            
         $             $                       $
TOTAL    $             $                       $
            ========   ==========           ==========
 
(Added by Ord. 01-52)
§ 2-18.3 Executive capital budget bill—Form.
   The proposed executive capital budget bill shall be substantially in the
form found in Exhibit B, attached to the ordinance codified in this article,
and made a part hereof, and it shall include but not be limited to the
following:
(1)   A summary of the estimated revenues, by source, with which the capital
improvement projects are to be financed. If the source of funding is a broad
category of funds composed of specific component funds, such as other federal
funds or other State funds, a listing of all anticipated grants or programs,
along with the estimated revenue for each, which comprise these sources of
funding shall also be included;
(2)   Definitions of key words, phrases, and symbols including but not limited
to letter symbols designating the source of funding for the appropriations;
(3)   For each capital improvement project requested, the title of the project,
the amount of the requested appropriation by source of funding, the amount of
the requested appropriation by work phase, and the total of all moneys that
comprise the requested appropriation for the project. The display of the
appropriation for each project by work phase is for information purposes only
and shall not be construed as restricting the allocation of moneys among the
work phase appropriations;
(4)   For each function, the total amount of requested appropriations by source
of funding, the total amount of the requested appropriations by work phase, and
the total of all moneys that comprise the requested appropriation for the
function. The display of the appropriation for each function by work phase is
for information purposes only and shall not be construed as restricting the
allocation of moneys among the work phase appropriations;
(5)   The total of all moneys requested for appropriation by function; and
(6)   The executive capital budget bill may include provisos or conditions
applicable to one or more than one project and that relate to the receipt or
expenditure of funds appropriated in the ordinance.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 18, § 2-18.3) (Added by Ord. 88-107; Am. Ords. 91-02,
01-52)
EXHIBIT B
                                             ORDINANCE ___________
                                             BILL __________________
   A BILL FOR AN ORDINANCE
RELATING TO THE EXECUTIVE CAPITAL BUDGET AND PROGRAM FOR THE FISCAL YEAR JULY
1, 20_____ TO JUNE 30, 20______.
BE IT ORDAINED by the People of the City and County of Honolulu:
   SECTION 1. The revenues from the following sources estimated for the fiscal
year July 1, 20_____ to June 30, 20_____ are hereby provided and appropriated
for the purposes set forth in Sections 2 through _____:
 
FUND CODE SOURCE OF FUNDS AMOUNT TOTAL
XX        XXXX            $      $
          TOTAL ALL FUNDS        $
                              ==========
 
   SECTION 2. The moneys described in Section 1 for the fiscal year July 1,
20_____ to June 30, 20_____ are appropriated as indicated to the following
projects and public improvements in the _________________ function.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as restricting the allocation of
moneys among the work phase appropriations (e.g., planning, design, and
construction).
 
PROJECT NUMBER FUNCTIONS, PROGRAMS & WORK PHASE SOURCE OF FUNDS TOTAL ALL FUNDS
               PROJECTS
               FUNCTION
               Program
               DEPARTMENT
XX             Project               $ XX       $ XX            $
               TOTAL FUNCTION                                   $
 
                      FUNCTION
                      SOURCE OF FUNDS
XX XXXX                               $
TOTAL SOURCE OF FUNDS                 $_____________
                      WORK PHASE
XX XXXX                               $
TOTAL WORK PHASES                     $______________
 
   SECTION 9. The sums appropriated above are totaled as follows:
 
FUNCTION
XXXX     $
         _________
TOTAL    $_________
 
(Added by Ord. 01-52)
§ 2-18.4 Transfer and allocation of funds.
   The execution of the budget appropriations and the transfer of funds therein
shall be governed by
Article 17 of this chapter, as amended. Nothing herein shall be construed as to
restrict the allocation of an appropriation among the work phase
appropriations.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 18, § 2-18.4) (Added by Ord. 88-107; Am. Ord. 96-23)
§ 2-18.5 Executive program and budget.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed to mandate that the format of
volumes I and II of the documents entitled executive program and budget
previously submitted to the council pursuant to Charter § 9-102, as amended, be
altered or that any information provided therein be deleted. The executive
program and budget shall, at the outset, define and identify those sections of
the document that constitute the executive program and that constitute the
executive budget.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 18, § 2-18.5) (Added by Ord. 88-107)
§ 2-18.6 Line-item budget details.
(a)   At the same time the mayor submits the budget documents specified in
Charter § 9-102.1 to the council, the mayor also shall submit related line-item
budget details for each budgeted activity in the executive operating budget
bill, according to salary, current expense, and equipment expenditure
categories.
(1)   The line-item budget for salary cost items shall include but not be
limited to the class description of budgeted positions.
(2)   The line-item budget for current expenses shall include but not be
limited to the object description of each item. For line items exceeding
$50,000, additional information shall be provided, including descriptions of
the budgeted items or services, or both.
(3)   The line-item budget for equipment shall include but not be limited to a
listing of the type of equipment. For line items exceeding $50,000, additional
information shall be provided, including description and purpose of the
budgeted equipment.
(4)   The amounts displayed in the details shall total to the activity
appropriations of the budget.
(b)   At the same time the mayor submits the budget documents specified in
Charter § 9-102.1 to the council, the mayor also shall submit related line-item
budget details for each miscellaneous project in the executive capital budget
bill exceeding $50,000, such as ADA improvements, public building facilities
improvements, rehabilitation of streets, landscape improvements, playfield
lighting improvements, reconstruction of wastewater systems for various parks,
renovation of recreational facilities, etc. As used in this subsection,
“miscellaneous project” means a single capital project that provides a lump-sum
appropriation for a number of similar projects.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 18, § 2-18.6) (Added by Ord. 95-58; Am. Ords. 08-7, 13-
15)
§ 2-18.7 Report on position vacancies.
(a)   Within five days after the mayor submits to the council the budget
documents specified in Charter § 9-102.1, the mayor shall also submit to the
council a report on position vacancies in the city’s executive branch. The
report must be data-driven and must include but need not be limited to:
(1)   An updated listing (as of January 31 of the year of submittal or later)
of all vacant positions, by activity, within each city executive branch
department and agency, and by position number and position title;
(2)   An updated listing (as of January 31 of the year of submittal or later)
of all vacant positions in each city executive branch department and agency
that were abolished in the preceding fiscal year;
(3)   For any vacant position that has been abolished in the preceding fiscal
year, the positions, if any, to which the responsibilities of the abolished
vacant position have been transferred;
(4)   A qualitative and quantitative discussion of the impact of the vacant
positions in each city executive branch department and agency on the operations
and delivery of services for that department or agency; and
(5)   The steps taken to fill the vacant positions in each city executive
branch department and agency, and any challenges encountered.
(b)   For each vacant position, the report must indicate:
(1)   The amount budgeted for the position in the upcoming fiscal year,
including the source of funds;
(2)   Whether the position has ever been filled;
(3)   If the position has at some time been filled, the most recent date on
which the position became vacant;
(4)   Whether the position is temporary or permanent;
(5)   Whether the duration of the vacancy is:
(A)   Three years up to five years;
(B)   More than five years up to seven years; or
(C)   More than seven years; and
(6)   Whether and when the position is proposed to be filled or abolished.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 18, § 2-18.7) (Added by Ord. 96-32) (Am. Ord. 23-31)
§ 2-18.8 Park land acquisition—Report.
(a)   No funds for the acquisition of 5 acres or more of land for a park or
expansion of a park shall be included, by either the council or the mayor, in
the executive capital budget or any amendment thereto, unless the director of
parks and recreation, after consultation with the department of design and
construction, department of enterprise services, or other applicable
departments, has transmitted to the council a report which sets forth the
anticipated cost of operating and maintaining the proposed park and states the
major assumptions underlying the report, including assumptions relating to
anticipated uses of the park, particularly the anticipated uses of the land to
be acquired. In lieu of the report, the information on the anticipated cost of
operating and maintaining the proposed park, including the assumptions relating
to anticipated park uses, may be provided by the department of planning and
permitting when a proposal to amend a public infrastructure map to add a park
symbol is submitted to the council. For the purposes of this section, a “park”
includes the areas and facilities listed in the definition of a “public park”
in §
10-1.1, including a city golf course, regardless of the city department or
agency that will control, maintain, and manage the areas and facilities.
(b)   Notwithstanding the requirement established in subsection (a), in the
event there is an urgent need to acquire park land or there is a time-sensitive
opportunity to acquire park land at a cost significantly below the market value
of the land, at any time the council, by resolution, may waive the requirement
for the report if the council makes a finding that the waiver of the
requirement is necessary.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 18, § 2-18.8) (Added by Ords. 01-44, 16-29)
ARTICLE 19: EXECUTIVE BRANCH OPEN DATA, STRATEGIC DATA USAGE, AND REPORTING
REQUIREMENTS
Sections
   
2-19.1   Definitions
   
2-19.2   Electronic data set availability and updates—Duties of city agencies
   
2-19.3   City liability for data sets
   
2-19.4   Data set licensing
   
2-19.5   City data plan
   
2-19.6   Agency compliance plans
   
2-19.7   City data plan implementation
   
2-19.8   Open data set policies and procedures
   
2-19.9   Minimum key performance indicators
§ 2-19.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Agency. Has the same meaning as “executive agency” as defined in Charter § 13-
101.
Data. Final versions of statistical or factual information that is:
(1)   In alphanumeric form reflected in a list, table, graph, chart, or other
non-narrative form, which can be digitally transmitted or processed; and
(2)   Regularly created or maintained by or on behalf of, and owned by, an
agency that records a measurement, transaction, or determination related to the
mission of that agency.
Data-Rich Format. A collection of records or information, or both, provided in
a format that is in compliance with non-proprietary, open, and documented
standards, is in common usage by business and research communities, uses
standard character encodings, is uncompressed and unencrypted, and contains
metadata.
Data Set. A named collection of related records on an electronic storage
device, with the collection containing individual data units organized or
formatted in a specific and prescribed way, often in tabular form, and accessed
by a specific access method that is based on the data set organization;
provided that a data set shall not include any data that are protected from
disclosure under applicable federal or State law, or contract, or data that are
proprietary or privileged.
Director. The director of information technology.
Key Performance Indicator. A quantifiable measure used to evaluate the
performance of agency programs and initiatives.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 19, § 2-19.1) (Added by Ord. 13-39; Am. Ord. 22-31 )
§ 2-19.2 Electronic data set availability and updates—Duties of city agencies.
(a)   Each agency shall, in consultation with the director and the city’s chief
data officer established in §
2-19.7, and in coordination with the city data plan created pursuant to §
2-19.5, use reasonable efforts to make appropriate and existing electronic data
sets maintained by the agency electronically available at no cost to the public
through the city’s open data portal at data.honolulu.gov or its successor
website designated by the director; provided that:
(1)   Data licensed to the city by another person or entity shall not be made
public under this article, unless the person or entity licensing the data
agrees to the public disclosure; and
(2)   Proprietary, privileged, and other information protected from disclosure
by law, ethical standard, court order, or contract shall not be disclosed.
Such disclosure shall be consistent with the procedures and standards developed
by the chief data officer and consistent with applicable law, including HRS
Chapter 92F and other State and federal laws and ethical standards related to
security, privacy, and confidentiality, and no personally identifiable
information shall be posted online unless the identified individual has
consented to the posting or the posting is necessary to fulfill the lawful
purposes or duties of the agency.
(b)   Each agency shall, in consultation with the director and the city’s chief
data officer established in §
2-19.7, and in coordination with the city data plan in §
2-19.5, use reasonable efforts to make appropriate and existing electronic data
sets maintained by the agency electronically available to the city’s enterprise
operational platform.
(c)   Nothing in this chapter prevents the director or managing director from
adopting rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 to implement this article, and
nothing in this article supersedes HRS Chapter 27G.
(d)   Each agency shall update its electronic data sets in the manner
prescribed by the chief data officer and as often as is necessary to preserve
the integrity and usefulness of the data sets to the extent that the department
or agency regularly maintains or updates the data sets.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 19, § 2-19.2) (Added by Ord. 13-39; Am. Ord. 22-31 )
§ 2-19.3 City liability for data sets.
   Data sets shall be available for informational purposes only. The city does
not warrant, either expressly or impliedly, the completeness, accuracy,
content, or fitness of any data set for a particular purpose and shall not be
liable for any deficiencies in the completeness or accuracy of any data set, or
third-party application utilizing any data set.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 19, § 2-19.3) (Added by Ord. 13-39; Am. Ord. 22-31 )
§ 2-19.4 Data set licensing.
   The director may make the agencies’ electronic data sets on
data.honolulu.gov or its successor website available to third parties pursuant
to a license, which may require the licensee to allow any user to copy,
distribute, display, or create derivative works at no cost and with an
appropriate level of conditions placed on the use.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 19, § 2-19.4) (Added by Ord. 13-39; Am. Ord. 22-31 )
§ 2-19.5 City data plan.
(a)   Within one year of the hiring of a chief data officer and every two years
thereafter, the managing director, in consultation with the director, other
city agencies, agency data coordinators, and the council, shall create a city
data plan for submission to the mayor, the council, and all agency directors.
The city data plan, at minimum, shall:
(1)   Establish governance structures for the implementation of the city data
plan;
(2)   Address the strategic use of data throughout city operations by, at a
minimum:
(A)   Establishing data management and analysis standards across all agencies;
(B)   Developing specific, short-term goals achievable for each agency within
the two years following the submission of the initial city data plan (which
plan is to be submitted within one year of the hiring of a chief data officer)
and within two years of each plan submitted thereafter, as well as longer-term
goals; and
(C)   Making recommendations to enhance standardization and integration of data
systems and data management practices across all agencies;
(3)   Address open data policies and procedures by, at minimum:
(A)   Determining specific minimum key performance indicators for each agency,
to be posted pursuant to §
2-19.2 and §
2-19.9;
(B)   Developing specific short- and long-term goals for each agency for the
posting of data sets, pursuant to §
2-19.2; and
(C)   Establishing guidelines for the selection and prioritization of data sets
for posting for each agency;
(4)   Establish processes for compliance with the city data plan by each agency
in accordance with § 2-19.6; and
(5)   Incorporate any technical policies, procedures, or standards developed by
the director.
(b)   All city data plans submitted after the submission of the initial city
data plan (which shall be submitted within one year of the hiring of a chief
data officer) shall report project funding and expenditures, cost savings, cost
avoidance, efficiency gains, process improvements, and major accomplishments. A
description of cost savings and cost avoidance shall include immediate monetary
impacts as well as ongoing projections.
(Added by Ord. 22-31 )
§ 2-19.6 Agency compliance plans.
(a)   Each agency shall, in consultation with the director and the city’s chief
data officer and in coordination with the city data plan created pursuant to §
2-19.5, submit an annual agency compliance plan to the mayor and the council on
or before July 15 of each year. The plan shall include:
(1)   A summary description of public data sets under the control of the
individual agency;
(2)   A summary description of the prioritization of public data sets for
inclusion on the open data portal in §
2-19.2;
(3)   A timeline for the publication or update of public data sets on the open
data portal; and
(4)   An update on compliance with the city data plan outlined in §
2-19.5.
(b)   All agency compliance plans shall be made available to the public on the
open data portal in §
2-19.2.
(Added by Ord. 22-31 )
§ 2-19.7 City data plan implementation.
   The mayor may designate a chief data officer who, in consultation with the
director, shall:
(1)   Oversee the strategic direction, creation, and implementation of the city
data plan specified in §
2-19.5;
(2)   Advise agencies on the use and management of data to enhance the
efficiency and effectiveness of city programs and policies;
(3)   Establish systems and provide continual support for agencies to
consistently evaluate, determine, and report on minimum key performance
indicators;
(4)   Facilitate the sharing and use of agency data:
(A)   Between or among other agencies;
(B)   With the legislative branch; and
(C)   With the public;
(5)   Coordinate data analytics and transparency master planning for agencies;
(6)   In consultation with the director, ensure that agencies transmit data in
a data-rich format;
(7)   Collaborate with the director to develop any and all data-related
administrative rules; and
(8)   Facilitate the disaggregation of racial data and reporting beyond federal
minimum standards.
(Added by Ord. 22-31 )
§ 2-19.8 Open data set policies and procedures.
(a)   The director, in consultation with the chief data officer, the State
office of information practices, and the State office of enterprise technology
services, shall adopt rules, pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, to establish policies
to implement §
2-19.2, including standards to determine which data sets are appropriate for
online disclosure as provided in §
2-19.2; provided that the standards shall not require the agencies to post
information that is otherwise required to be disclosed under HRS Chapter 92F,
but is personally identifiable information, information that may pose a
personal or public security risk, or is otherwise inappropriate for online
disclosure as part of a data set. The rules shall include the following:
(1)   Technical requirements with the goal of making data sets available to the
greatest number of users and for the greatest number of applications,
including, whenever practicable, the use of machine readable, non-proprietary
technical standards for web publishing; and
(2)   Guidelines for agencies to follow in making data sets available, such as
requirements for the intergovernmental transfer of data sets in data-rich
format.
(b)   The chief data officer, in consultation with the director, shall work
with agencies to develop an enterprise data inventory that describes data sets
with significant strategic use that are created or collected by an agency. The
chief data officer shall also establish a process and a reporting format for
agencies to provide the collected data to the chief data officer. The inventory
shall include, but is not limited to:
(1)   The title and description of the information contained within the data
set;
(2)   A description of how the data sets are maintained, including standards or
terminologies used to structure the data sets;
(3)   Any existing or planned application programming interface used to publish
the data sets;
(4)   A description of the data sets provided in any such existing interface;
and
(5)   A description of the data sets expected to be provided in any currently
planned interface.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 19, § 2-19.5) (Added by Ord. 13-39; Am. Ord. 22-31 )
§ 2-19.9 Minimum key performance indicators.
   Under the oversight of the chief data officer, key performance indicators by
agency shall be reported and posted publicly, and should be built into
operations systems that will provide continual measurements for agencies, in
accordance with the city data plan and agency compliance plans provided for in
§
2-19.5 and §
2-19.6, respectively.
(Added by Ord. 22-31 )
ARTICLE 20: RESERVED
ARTICLE 21: DEPARTMENT OF CUSTOMER SERVICES
Sections
   
2-21.1   Municipal Reference and Records Center
§ 2-21.1 Municipal reference and records center.
(a)   There shall be a municipal reference and records center in the department
of customer services.
(b)   It shall be the duty of the director of customer services to guide the
development and maintenance of a collection of publicly released documents,
which may be made available to any officer or employee of the city government,
and to maintain an electronic depository for the purpose of facilitating public
access.
(c)   The municipal reference and records center is designated as a depository
for publications issued by or for city agencies. Each city agency shall,
immediately upon release of a publication, deposit with the municipal reference
and records center a copy or copies of the final version of any consultant
study, document, compilation, journal, report, and rules in a manner, quantity,
and format as determined by the municipal reference and records center, but
excluding publications determined by the issuing agency to be of a confidential
nature.
(Added by Ord. 18-30)
ARTICLE 22: AGE-FRIENDLY CITY PROGRAM
Sections
   
2-22.1   Definitions
   
2-22.2   Age-friendly city program
   
2-22.3   Administration—implementation
   
2-22.4   Annual report
§ 2-22.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Action Plan. “Making Honolulu an Age-Friendly City: An Action Plan,” a June
2015 report prepared by the University of Hawaii Center on Aging, including any
revisions or updates thereto from time to time.
Age-Friendly Checklist. A tool to collect data and information about the status
of city programs, services, facilities, or projects with the goal of ensuring
that city directors and their departments consider the goals and objectives of
the age-friendly city program and action plan in the conduct of their normal
business, and to provide a mechanism for informing the public of the status of
age-friendly city program implementation.
Age-Friendly City. An inclusive and accessible urban or suburban environment
that encourages active and healthy aging, as elaborated in the action plan.
Area Plan on Aging. A four-year plan prepared in compliance with the federal
Older Americans Act by the Department of Community Services, Elderly Affairs
Division, the recognized Area Agency on Aging, that outlines major goals and
objectives to be achieved in the delivery of elderly services.
Consolidated Plan. Has the same meaning as defined in §
1-8.1.
Directors. The administrative heads of all city departments of the executive
branch, however denominated.
General Plan. Has the same meaning as defined in §
2-24.2.
(Added by Ord. 18-36)
§ 2-22.2 Age-friendly city program.
(a)   There is hereby established within the department of community services
an age-friendly city program.
(b)   The purpose of this program is to make Honolulu an “age-friendly city” as
envisioned in the World Health Organization’s Global Network of Age-Friendly
Cities and Communities program. The initial steps towards this goal were
outlined in the action plan and overseen by a joint city and community
implementation committee. Age-friendly programs, services, facilities, and
projects as outlined in the World Health Organization’s ‘Global age-friendly
cities: A guide,’ in its original published form or as amended, will be
incorporated, as appropriate, within the city’s planning documents, including,
but not limited to, the general plan, Consolidated Plan, and Area Plan on
Aging. The program will sustain the age-friendly city initiative into the
future by guiding the comprehensive and balanced planning, budgeting, design,
construction, implementation, operation, and evaluation of city programs,
services, facilities, and projects in accordance with the age-friendly city
concept.
(Added by Ord. 18-36)
§ 2-22.3 Administration–Implementation.
(a)   The managing director shall designate a city employee as program
coordinator. The program coordinator shall work with all city departments to
encourage and incorporate age-friendly city features in the planning,
budgeting, design, construction, implementation, operation, and evaluation of
city programs, services, facilities, and projects.
(b)   The directors shall:
(1)   Establish age-friendly checklists and administrative procedures
appropriate to their departments, and apply the checklists to programs and
projects within their departments. The age-friendly checklists shall be updated
from time to time by the directors as necessary to reflect age-friendly city
best practices;
(2)   Establish appropriate metrics, as described in the action plan, to
measure, assess, and report on progress in meeting the goals and objectives of
the age-friendly city program; and
(3)   Provide training for their staffs in developing age-friendly city
policies, principles, and implementation procedures that may be applicable to
the performance of their duties.
(c)   Rules, policies, plans, and design guidelines shall be consistent with
the age-friendly city concept and with the age-friendly city goals and
strategies as elaborated in the action plan. Design standards, guidelines, and
manuals shall incorporate national best practice guidelines and shall be
updated from time to time by the directors as necessary to reflect current best
practices.
(d)   Within six months of October 11, 2018*, the directors shall establish and
begin to apply to the activities of their departments age-friendly checklists,
administrative procedures, and metrics as set forth in subsection (b) of this
section. Where age-friendly checklists, administrative procedures, and metrics
are already in use, they shall be updated within this period.
(e)   Within one year of October 11, 2018*, the directors shall review existing
ordinances, codes, subdivision standards, rules, policies, plans, and design
guidelines, assess their consistency with the age-friendly city concept and
with the age-friendly city goals and strategies as elaborated in the action
plan, and initiate any updates needed to achieve compliance with subsection (c)
of this section.
(Added by Ord. 18-36)
Editor’s note:
   * “October 11, 2018” is substituted for “the effective date of this
ordinance.”
§ 2-22.4 Annual report.
(a)   For each fiscal year commencing subsequent to October 11, 2018*, the
directors shall submit to the council a report detailing their compliance with
the age-friendly city program during the prior fiscal year, including:
(1)   A listing of the department’s age-friendly city-related budgetary
appropriations and expenditures for the prior fiscal year;
(2)   A listing of the department’s age-friendly city programs, services,
facilities, or projects initiated during the prior fiscal year and the age-
friendly city features incorporated therein; and
(3)   A listing of metrics used by the department in the prior fiscal year to
monitor progress towards the attainment of age-friendly city goals and
objectives.
The annual report required by this section may be part of each agency’s annual
report required by charter.
(b)   The managing director, with input from the directors, shall make public
the city’s efforts at advancing the age- friendly city program.
(Added by Ord. 18-36)
Editor’s note:
   * “October 11, 2018” is substituted for “the effective date of this
ordinance.”
ARTICLE 23: DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES
Sections
   
2-23.1   Powers, duties, and functions
   
2-23.2   Used oil recycling program
§ 2-23.1 Powers, duties, and functions.
   The director of the department of environmental services shall:
(1)   Advise the director of design and construction concerning the planning
and design of wastewater facilities;
(2)   Oversee the operation and maintenance of sewer lines, treatment plants,
and pumping stations;
(3)   Monitor the collection, treatment, and disposal of wastewater;
(4)   Provide chemical treatment and pumping of defective cesspools;
(5)   Develop and administer solid waste collection, processing, and disposal
systems, including a comprehensive curbside recycling system;
(6)   Adopt rules as necessary to administer and enforce requirements
established by law; and
(7)   Perform such other duties as may be required by law.
(Added by Ord. 93-31) (1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 23, § 2-23.1) (Am. Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-23.2 Used oil recycling program.
(a)   The department of environmental services shall establish a used oil
recycling program. Under the program, the department, by January 1, 1990,
shall:
(1)   Establish and operate at least one used oil collection center; and
(2)   Conduct used oil recycling education and promotion activities.
In addition, the department may establish and provide a curbside used oil
collection service, but only after establishment of at least one used oil
collection center and commencement of the used oil recycling education and
promotion activities.
(b)   For the purposes of this section, “used oil” means a petroleum-based oil
that through use, storage, or handling has become unsuitable for its original
purpose due to the presence of impurities or loss of original properties.
(c)   The department shall establish at least one used oil collection center,
at which used oil, generated from other than commercial or industrial
activities, shall be accepted from individuals. Each center shall be
established on the grounds of a solid waste disposal facility, wastewater
treatment plant, wastewater pump station, corporation yard, or other facility
under the jurisdiction of the department, or at privately operated service
stations designated by the department. Establishment shall be contingent upon a
finding by the department that the used oil collection activity shall not
unduly interfere with or endanger the employees or operations of the other
facility. In the operation of the used oil collection center, the department
shall not:
(1)   Accept used oil from any business or any individual who has generated the
used oil from commercial or industrial activities;
(2)   Impose any charge on an individual for accepting used oil from the
individual; or
(3)   Pay any amount to an individual for accepting the used oil from the
individual, except from funds appropriated by the council for the payment of
incentives to encourage individuals to turn in used oil.
(d)   The department shall conduct used oil recycling education and promotion
activities, which shall include but not be limited to the following:
(1)   Promotion of public awareness of the hazards and detrimental effects that
may result from disposal of used oil in the solid waste disposal system and
wastewater treatment and disposal system;
(2)   Promotion of public awareness of the hazards and detrimental effects that
may result from release of used oil into the environment, especially the
groundwater;
(3)   Promotion of public awareness of the businesses and facilities to which
used oil may be transported for lawful disposal; and
(4)   Provision of information to businesses generating used oil of federal,
State, and city laws and rules concerning disposal of the used oil.
(e)   The department may establish a curbside used oil collection service,
under which used oil shall be collected by the department from private
dwellings and multi-unit residential buildings. If established, the department
periodically on scheduled days, shall collect containers of used oil which are
placed within the sidewalk area. The department shall establish the procedures
for the collection of used oil, which shall be separate from the procedures for
collection of refuse. Under no circumstances shall the department collect used
oil from businesses, nor shall the department impose a charge for collection of
the used oil.
(f)   Used oil accepted or collected by the department shall be disposed of
under arrangement with a holder of a permit under HRS Chapter 342J, to
transport, market, or recycle used oil. The city may pay a fee or charge to the
used oil transporter, marketer, or recycler under an arrangement to transport,
market, or recycle the used oil. To keep that fee or charge to a minimum, the
department may transport any collected or accepted used oil to the facility of
the used oil transporter, marketer, or recycler.
(g)   In the implementation of the used oil recycling program, the department
shall comply with all applicable federal and State laws and rules. If a permit
from the federal or State government is required to undertake any activity
under the program, the department shall obtain the necessary permit.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 23, § 2-23.2) (Added by Ord. 16-29)
ARTICLE 24: DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND PERMITTING
Sections
Part A. Council Proposals to Revise or Amend the General Plan, a Development
Plan, the Zoning Ordinances, and the Subdivision Ordinance
   
2-24.1   Applicability
   
2-24.2   Definitions
   
2-24.3   Initiation by the council
   
2-24.4   Processing by the department
   
2-24.5   Processing by planning commission
   
2-24.6   Action by council
   
2-24.7   Determination of submission date
   
2-24.8   Severability
Part B. Central Coordinating Agency for Oahu
   
2-24.9   Authority and purpose
   
2-24.10   Designation
   
2-24.11   Powers, duties, and functions
   
2-24.12   Rules
   
2-24.13   Applicability
   
2-24.14   Appeals
   
2-24.15   Validity
Part C. Additional Powers, Duties, and Functions
   
2-24.16   Additional powers, duties, and functions
   
2-24.17   House numbering
PART A. COUNCIL PROPOSALS TO REVISE OR AMEND THE GENERAL PLAN,
A DEVELOPMENT PLAN, THE ZONING ORDINANCES, AND THE SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
§ 2-24.1 Applicability.
   This part shall apply to council proposals to revise or amend:
(1)   The general plan;
(2)   A development plan;
(3)   The zoning ordinances; and
(4)   The subdivision ordinance.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.1) (Added by Ord. 08-8; Am. Ords. 09-4, 16-
29)
§ 2-24.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Charter. The Revised Charter of the City and County of Honolulu.
Council Proposal. Any proposal set forth in §
2-24.1.
Development Plan. A development plan for a particular area within the city, as
described in Charter § 6-1509, and sometimes referred to as a sustainable
communities plan, codified in
Chapter 24.
Director. The director of planning and permitting.
Director’s Alternative. Any ordinance or resolution proposed by the director as
an alternative to a council proposal as provided in §
2-24.4.
General Plan. The general plan for the city, as described in Charter § 6-1508.
Subdivision Ordinance. The city’s ordinance governing the subdivision and
consolidation of land, as described in Charter § 6-1515.1, codified as
Chapter 22.
Zoning Ordinance. Any of the following:
(1)   The land use ordinance, codified as
Chapter 21; or
(2)   An ordinance designating and redesignating land to one or more of the
zoning districts specified in the land use ordinance.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.2) (Added by Ord. 08-8; Am. Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-24.3 Initiation by the council.
(a)   A council proposal shall be initiated by adoption of a resolution by the
council directing the director to process the proposal. The resolution shall
state the reason for the proposal and shall attach a draft ordinance or
resolution, as appropriate, setting forth the revision or amendment. Upon
introduction of a resolution for a council proposal, the city clerk shall
transmit a copy of the resolution to the director.
(b)   Before the adoption of the resolution pursuant to subsection (a), the
director shall assist the council in the preparation of the council proposal
by:
(1)   Advising the council, within 30 days of the submission to the director of
the introduced resolution, on the accompanying documentation, if any, needed to
satisfy the director’s usual requirements for the commencement of processing of
the type of proposal being considered (general plan amendment, development plan
amendment, land use ordinance amendment, or rezoning of land) in the same
manner as if proposed by the director. Any specification of required
documentation shall be in sufficient detail to enable production of the
documentation by third parties contracted by the council pursuant to
subdivision (2);
(2)   Providing documents and information in the possession and control of the
department of planning and permitting, as requested by any councilmember,
including but not limited to maps; provided that this subdivision shall not
require the director to prepare arguments, justifications, or analyses in favor
of the council proposal. Requested documents shall be submitted to the council
within 30 days of the submission to the director of a written request from any
councilmember. The council may contract with third parties for the preparation
of any documentation, and shall submit copies of such documentation to the
director for the director’s review; and
(3)   Advising the council on the sufficiency of any documentation prepared by
the council or its contractor to accompany the proposal within 30 days of
submission of the documentation to the director.
The director’s assistance in the preparation of the council proposal pursuant
to this subsection shall not be construed as the director’s support for or
approval of the council proposal. The director’s failure to advise the council
on the necessary documentation or the sufficiency thereof within the deadlines
specified above shall constitute a waiver by the director of any objection for
insufficient accompanying documentation. Any supporting documentation shall be
attached to and be deemed an integral part of the resolution adopted.
(c)   Upon adoption of a resolution initiating a council proposal, the city
clerk shall transmit copies of the resolution to the director and, in the case
of council proposals set forth in §
2-24.1(1), (2), and (3), the planning commission, along with a writing setting
forth the date by which the director’s report and accompanying proposed
ordinance or resolution are required to be submitted to the planning commission
or the council, as applicable, under the deadlines set forth in §
2-24.4(a) and (b).
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.3) (Added by Ord. 08-8; Am. Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-24.4 Processing by the department.
(a)   Council proposals to revise or amend the general plan, any development
plan, or a zoning ordinance. Within 270 days of the adoption of the resolution
initiating a council proposal to revise or amend the general plan, any
development plan, or a zoning ordinance, the director shall submit a report,
accompanied by the proposed ordinance or resolution, to the planning
commission. If the director proposes an alternative ordinance or resolution for
consideration by the planning commission, both versions shall be attached to
the director’s report in a form sufficient for introduction in the council.
(b)   Council proposal to revise or amend the subdivision ordinance. Within 270
days of the adoption of the resolution initiating a council proposal to revise
or amend the subdivision ordinance, the director shall submit a report,
accompanied by the proposed ordinance, to the council. If the director proposes
an alternative ordinance, both versions shall be attached to the director’s
report in a form sufficient for introduction in the council.
(c)   Extension of deadline. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the director
finds that the council proposal involves complex issues that require additional
time for review, the director may request a 60-day extension of the deadline as
follows.
(1)   Within the existing deadline, the director shall submit to the council a
request for an extension of the deadline and an interim report describing the
status of the director’s processing of the council proposal and the reasons
that additional time is needed for processing.
(2)   The council may approve or deny the proposed extension by adoption of a
committee report or resolution. If the council fails to take final action on
the proposed extension within 60 days after receipt of the director’s request,
the extension shall be deemed denied. The city clerk shall advise the director
and, for council proposals set forth in §
2-24.1(1), (2), and (3), the planning commission, in writing of the council’s
action on the director’s extension request. If the council approves the
extension, the clerk shall also advise the director and, for council proposals
set forth in §
2-24.1(1), (2), and (3), the planning commission, in writing of the new date by
which the director’s report and accompanying proposed ordinance or resolution
are required to be submitted to the planning commission.
(3)   If an extension of the deadline is approved by the council, the director
may thereafter request subsequent extensions of the deadline in accordance with
the procedures described in subdivisions (1) and (2).
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.4) (Added by Ord. 08-8; Am. Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-24.5 Processing by planning commission.
(a)   The planning commission shall commence processing of a council proposal
to revise or amend the general plan, any development plan, or a zoning
ordinance, upon the first to occur of:
(1)   Submission of the director’s report and proposed ordinance or resolution;
or
(2)   The director’s failure to transmit the report and proposed ordinance or
resolution by the deadline required by this part, including any extensions
approved by the council pursuant to §
2-24.4(c).
(b)   The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the council
proposal and any director’s alternative within 45 days of the commencement of
processing. Within 30 days of the close of the public hearing, the planning
commission shall transmit through the mayor to the council the director’s
report, if any, council proposal, and any director’s alternative, with its
recommendations. If the director has proposed an alternative ordinance or
resolution, the planning commission shall make recommendations on both the
council proposal and the director’s alternative. The mayor shall submit the
director’s report, if any, council proposal, any director’s alternative, and
planning commission recommendations to the council within 30 days of receipt of
the same from the planning commission.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.5) (Added by Ord. 08-8; Am. Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-24.6 Action by council.
(a)   If the planning commission disapproves a council proposal to revise or
amend the general plan, any development plan, or a zoning ordinance, or
recommends a modification thereof not accepted by the council, or fails to make
its report within a period of either 30 days after the close of its public
hearing or 90 days after the commencement of processing by the commission
pursuant to §
2-24.5(a), whichever occurs first, the council may nevertheless consider and
adopt such council proposal, but only by the affirmative vote of at least two-
thirds of its entire membership.
(b)   If the director disapproves a council proposal to revise or amend the
subdivision ordinance, or recommends a modification thereof not accepted by the
council, or fails to submit the report and proposed ordinance to the council
within the required deadline specified in §
2-24.4(b), including any extensions approved by the council pursuant to §
2-24.4(c), the council may nevertheless consider and adopt such council
proposal, but only by the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of its entire
membership.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.6) (Added by Ord. 08-8; Am. Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-24.7 Determination of submission date.
(a)   For the purposes of this part, a document shall be deemed submitted to
the recipient when the document is received by the recipient.
(b)   The director shall cause the date and time of receipt by the department
of planning and permitting of any of the following documents to be promptly
stamped on the first page of the document, and notify the council in writing of
the date of receipt:
(1)   Any correspondence from the city clerk transmitting a copy of any
introduced resolution for a council proposal pursuant to §
2-24.3(a);
(2)   Any correspondence from the council or any councilmember regarding the
nature, preparation, or sufficiency of supporting documentation for the council
proposal pursuant to §
2-24.3(b); and
(3)   Any correspondence from the city clerk transmitting a copy of any adopted
resolution initiating a council proposal pursuant to §
2-24.3(c).
(c)   The planning commission shall cause the date and time of receipt by the
commission of any director’s report on a council proposal, and accompanying
proposed ordinance or resolution, to be promptly stamped on the first page of
the report, and notify the council in writing of the date of receipt.
(d)   The city clerk shall promptly stamp the date and time of receipt by the
council of any report or recommendation from the director or the planning
commission, and accompanying proposed ordinance or resolution, on the first
page of the report or recommendation.
(e)   If the date and time of receipt of a document is not stamped on a
document, the document shall be received by the recipient one day after the
date set forth on the transmittal letter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.7) (Added by Ord. 08-8; Am. Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-24.8 Severability.
   If any provision of this part, or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions
or applications of this part which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this part are
severable.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.8) (Added by Ord. 08-8; Am. Ord. 16-29)
PART B. CENTRAL COORDINATING AGENCY FOR OAHU
§ 2-24.9 Authority and purpose.
   This part is adopted pursuant to authority conferred by HRS Chapter 46. The
purpose of this part is to improve the coordination and efficiency of the land
use and planning control systems.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.9) (Added by Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-24.10 Designation.
   Pursuant to HRS Chapter 46, as amended, the department of planning and
permitting is designated the central coordinating agency for the City and
County of Honolulu.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.10) (Added by Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-24.11 Powers, duties, and functions.
   The department of planning and permitting as the central coordinating agency
shall:
(1)   Maintain and continuously update a repository of all laws, rules,
procedures, permit requirements and review criteria of all federal, State, and
city and county agencies having control or regulatory powers over land
development projects within the city and shall make the repository and
knowledgeable personnel available to inform any person requesting information
as to the applicability of the same to a particular project within the city;
(2)   Study the feasibility and advisability of using a master application form
to concurrently file applications for an amendment to a general plan and
development plan, change in zoning, special management area permit, and other
permits and procedures required for land development projects in the city to
the extent practicable with one master application;
(3)   Maintain and continuously update a master file for the city of all
applications for building permits, subdivision maps, and land use designations
of the State and city;
(4)   When requested by the applicant, the central coordinating agency shall
endeavor to schedule and coordinate, to the extent practicable, any referrals,
public informational meetings, or any public hearings with those held by any
one or more of the following: other federal, State, or city commissions or
agencies pursuant to existing laws pertaining to the city; and
(5)   Assist the council in proposing amendments to
Chapter 21 (LUO) as permitted by Charter § 6-1513, by gathering and preparing
the necessary supporting documentation sufficient to satisfy the usual
requirements to commence processing the amendments.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.11) (Added by Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-24.12 Rules.
   The central coordinating agency shall compile the repository and adopt
necessary rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 46, as amended. Drafts of rules to be
adopted by the agency to implement the functions specified in §
2-24.11 shall be presented to the council for its review before its
finalization.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.12) (Added by Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-24.13 Applicability.
   All State and city departments, divisions, agencies, and commissions, with
control or regulatory powers over land development projects within the city
shall cooperate with the central coordinating agency in making available and
updating information regarding laws, rules, procedures, permit requirements,
and review criteria they enforce upon land development projects. The term
“agency” has the same meaning as defined in HRS Chapter 91.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.13) (Added by Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-24.14 Appeals.
   Appeals from actions by the director of planning and permitting in the
administration of the rules adopted pursuant to this part shall be heard and
decided by the council. An appeal shall be sustained only if the council finds
that the director’s action was based on an erroneous finding of material fact,
or that the director had acted in an arbitrary or capricious manner, or had
manifestly abused the director’s discretion.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.14) (Added by Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-24.15 Validity.
   The validity of any word, section, clause, paragraph, sentence, part, or
provision of §§
2-24.9 to 2-24.14 shall not affect the validity of any other part of the
sections which can be given effect without the invalid part or parts.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.15) (Added by Ord. 16-29)
PART C. ADDITIONAL POWERS, DUTIES, AND FUNCTIONS
§ 2-24.16 Additional powers, duties, and functions.
(a)   The director shall be charged with the supervision, direction, and
control of:
(1)   The administration and enforcement of the building code, and all statutes
and ordinances relating to the work of the department of planning and
permitting;
(2)   Inspecting, supervising, regulating, and approving the construction,
alteration, repair, and moving of buildings, structures, and certain
accessories related thereto, such as electrical, plumbing, and gas systems, as
are prescribed by the building code and other statutes and ordinances related
to the work of the department of planning and permitting; and
(3)   Reviewing private subdivision plans and inspecting the construction of
the subdivisions.
(b)   Reports and records. The director shall:
(1)   Submit reports to the mayor, upon request, in addition to the submission
of an annual report, covering the work of the department of planning and
permitting during the preceding period. The director shall incorporate in the
report a summary of recommendations as to desirable amendments to the building
code and other related ordinances that the director administers and enforces;
and
(2)   Keep a permanent, accurate account of all fees and other moneys collected
and received, the names of the persons upon whose account the same were paid,
and the date and amount thereof as authorized by the director of budget and
fiscal services.
(c)   Valuation. The determination of value or valuation under the building
code shall be made by the director.
(d)   Right of entry. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the director or
the director’s duly authorized representatives may enter at reasonable times
any building, structure, or premises in the city to perform any duty imposed
upon such persons by the building code.
(e)   Stop order. Whenever any building work is being done contrary to the
building code or any other statutes or ordinances related to the work of the
department of planning and permitting, the director may order the work stopped
by notice, in writing, served on any person engaged in the doing or causing
such work to be done, and such person shall stop such work until authorized by
the director to proceed with the work.
(f)   For the purposes of this part, except as otherwise indicated, “director”
means the director of planning and permitting.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.16) (Added by Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-24.17 House numbering.
(a)   Authorization. The director or the director’s designated assistant shall
plan and regulate the numbering of all buildings in the city.
(b)   Method in rural areas. The director or such person’s designated assistant
in numbering buildings in areas outside of the districts of Honolulu, Pearl
City, Lanikai, Kailua, Wahiawa, the city of Kapolei, and any urban areas
specifically designated by the director as exempt from this subsection shall
adhere in all respects to the following system of numeration. The first digit
of the building number shall correspond with the zone number of the appropriate
tax map of the City and County of Honolulu; the second digit of the building
number shall correspond to the section number of the tax map. The remaining
digits of the building number shall be assigned in a manner to be determined by
the director or such person’s designated assistant.
(c)   Numbering of entrances. All main entrances to buildings shall be
numbered, and the director or the director’s designated assistant shall assign
to each building its proper number or numbers and furnish free of charge to the
owner a certificate designating each number and location.
(d)   Duty of the property owner.
(1)   It shall be the duty of every person owning any building within the city
to number the same or cause the same to be numbered correctly within 60 days
after receipt of the certificate designating the assigned number, and to remove
or efface any wrong number upon such building.
(2)   All numbers shall be placed in such manner as to be readily seen from the
street, roadway, or lane, shall be of different color from the background on
which they are placed, and shall be at least 2 inches in height. The number
shall be placed in a permanent manner, chalk, or other effaceable material not
being permitted.
(3)   All buildings shall be numbered at the expense of the owner.
(4)   An owner of a building may supplement the building numbers required by
this section with numbers on the curb fronting the building. Curb numbers shall
be painted on the curb fronting the respective building in an area as close to
the middle of such curb frontage as possible, measured from property line to
property line, or, where a driveway exists, in the area immediately adjacent to
the driveway, or in any other such manner as to make clear to which building
the numbers refer. The numbers shall only be allowed in addition to the numbers
required by this section and shall be painted in a manner to be determined by
the director.
(e)   Penalty for tearing, defacing, or changing number. Any person tearing
down, defacing, or changing any number put up in accordance with this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine
of not more than $10 and not less than $1.
(f)   Penalty for failure to conform to requirements of numbering. Any owner of
a building in the city who neglects to number such buildings as provided in
this section or who shall place, maintain, or allow to remain thereon any
number other than that assigned by the director or the director’s designated
assistant after being notified in writing by the director or assistant, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a
fine of not less than $5 nor more than $20, and a further penalty of like sum
for every two weeks thereafter that such property owner shall neglect or refuse
to properly number such house or building or efface an improper number.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.17) (Added by Ord. 16-29) (Am. Ord. 25-37)
Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to § 2-24.17 in Ord. 25-37 take effect on January 1, 2026,
and are not yet incorporated herein.
ARTICLE 25: DEPARTMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Section
   
2-25.1   Director of emergency management
Editor’s note:
   * Section 5 of Ord. 87-97 provided that the article would take effect upon a
determination by the council by resolution that “the current dispute concerning
the city’s civil defense administrator position has been concluded.” In Res.
93-246, the council determined that the dispute had been concluded and that the
section of Ord. 87-97 enacting the article would take effect upon the filing of
a stipulation to dismiss with prejudice plaintiff’s claims against all
defendants in all capacities in Civil No. 88-1285-04. Such a stipulation was
filed on August 13, 1993.
§ 2-25.1 Director of emergency management.
(a)   The director of emergency management shall serve in that capacity on a
full-time basis.
(b)   The director of emergency management shall be subject to the civil
service laws.
(c)   Except as provided herein, the director of emergency management shall not
be made subordinate to or answerable to any person or department with respect
to State or city civil defense matters other than the mayor or the managing
director.
(d)   The director of emergency management shall install, maintain, and repair
the civil defense siren warning system and the fire alarm and police
communication systems, other than radio.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 25, § 2-25.1) (Added by Ord. 87-97; Am. Ord. 16-29)
ARTICLE 25A: CONTROL OF AND EVACUATION FROM DISASTER AREAS
DURING POTENTIAL DISASTERS
Sections
   
2-25A.1   Legislative findings
   
2-25A.2   Definitions
   
2-25A.3   Prohibitions
   
2-25A.4   Declaration by mayor
   
2-25A.5   Violation—Penalty
§ 2-25A.1 Legislative findings.
   The council finds that:
(1)   Because of the possibility of disaster of great destructiveness resulting
from flood, tidal waves, storm waves, fire, or other natural causes or from
enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile enemy action; and
(2)   To ensure the orderly evacuation of persons and property; and
(3)   To protect the public peace, health, safety, and welfare; and
(4)   To preserve the lives and property of the people of the City and County
of Honolulu;
   it is in the public interest to make unlawful certain activities as provided
herein.
(Sec. 13-30.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 11, § 41-11.1)
§ 2-25A.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Authorized Personnel. Any of the following:
(1)   City or State employee assigned to disaster duty during an impending
disaster or disasters;
(2)   National Guard members;
(3)   United States Armed Forces personnel; or
(4)   Department of emergency management personnel or volunteers.
Disaster. Any situation, usually catastrophic in nature, where numbers of
persons are plunged into helplessness and suffering and, as a result, may be in
need of food, clothing, shelter, medical care, or other necessities of life,
and the governor of the State or mayor of the City and County of Honolulu has
declared a State of disaster or emergency.
Disaster Area. The area in which a disaster occurs.
Highway. Any primary or secondary road, street, alley, pedestrian walkway, and
trail.
Impending Disaster. Any situation where a catastrophe threatens an inhabited
area and the department of emergency management has issued a warning that the
inhabitants thereof should evacuate the threatened area.
Impending Disaster Area. The area which is threatened by a catastrophe such as
a flood, tidal waves, storm waves, fire, or other natural causes, or from enemy
attack, sabotage, or other hostile enemy action.
(Sec. 13-30.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 11, § 41-11.2)
§ 2-25A.3 Prohibitions.
(a)   No person shall commit the following acts during an impending disaster or
disasters:
(1)   Loiter, loaf, or idle upon any public or private highway, place,
sidewalk, or beach, on foot or on any vehicle, in or close to an impending
disaster or disaster area;
(2)   Disobey any direction or command of any authorized person directing
traffic;
(3)   Refuse or fail to evacuate any area, public or private, upon order of any
authorized person, which action impedes or tends to impede the effectiveness
and orderly handling of the evacuation of persons from an impending disaster
area; and
(4)   Refuse or fail to leave any area, public or private, upon order of any
authorized person, which action impedes or tends to impede the effective and
orderly handling of the disaster; provided nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent any authorized person from lawfully preserving, protecting, or
salvaging any property, real or personal, or to prevent any other authorized
person from performing any other lawful duty within a disaster area after the
danger to life and property from natural causes or enemy action has passed.
(b)   For the purposes of this section, the director of emergency management
shall determine when the danger to life and property has subsided.
(Sec. 13-30.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 11, § 41-11.3)
§ 2-25A.4 Declaration by mayor.
   The power to declare a state of disaster or emergency is conferred on the
mayor of the City and County of Honolulu.
(Sec. 13-30.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 11, § 41-11.4)
§ 2-25A.5 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$500 or imprisonment in the city and county jail for a term not to exceed 30
days, or both.
(Sec. 13-30.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 11, § 41-11.5)
ARTICLE 26: EMPLOYMENT OF PRIVATE ATTORNEYS AS SPECIAL COUNSEL TO
REPRESENT THE CITY, ITS AGENCIES, OFFICERS, AND EMPLOYEES
Sections
   
2-26.1   Applicability
   
2-26.2   Definitions
   
2-26.3   Written contract required
   
2-26.4   Payment procedure
   
2-26.5   Quarterly reports required
   
2-26.6   Selection of legal representation
   
2-26.7   Control of fees—Reduction in hourly rates
§ 2-26.1 Applicability.
(a)   This article shall apply to the employment of private attorneys retained
as special counsel to represent the city, its agencies, and its officers and
employees sued for acts done in their official capacities, pursuant to Charter
§ 5-204.3, when the corporation counsel has been disqualified from representing
the city, its agencies, officers, and employees.
(b)   This article shall not apply to private attorneys retained:
(1)   To represent the mayor or any councilmember in impeachment proceedings as
provided by Charter § 5-204.3;
(2)   Pursuant to the city’s consultant contract procedures;
(3)   As special deputies appointed by the corporation counsel with the
approval of the council to represent the city pursuant to Charter § 5-204.1;
(4)   As special counsel employed by the council to represent the council
pursuant to Charter § 3-107.5;
(5)   To defend police officers and firefighters as provided in State law;
(6)   By the Honolulu liquor commission to act as an adviser to or represent
the commission or any of its employees or investigators in litigation; or
(7)   By the department of water to act as an adviser to or represent the
department in litigation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 26, § 2-26.1) (Added by Ord. 94-27; Am. Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-26.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Agency. Any office, department, board, commission, or other governmental unit
of the city, including the council and agencies of the legislative branch of
the city, and unless otherwise specified in this article, semi-autonomous
agencies.
City. The municipal corporation known as the City and County of Honolulu.
Employee. Has the same meaning as defined in Charter § 13-101.
Lawsuit. Any civil action filed in a court of law that names the city, an
officer, employee, or agency of the city as a defendant.
Officer. Has the same meaning as defined in Charter § 13-101.
Private Attorney. An attorney in private practice who is licensed to practice
or permitted by law to practice law in the State of Hawaii, and includes the
law firm for which the private attorney works and all the attorneys associated
with the law firm.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 26, § 2-26.2) (Added by Ord. 94-27)
§ 2-26.3 Written contract required.
(a)   No private attorney retained as special counsel pursuant to Charter § 5-
204.3, to represent the city, an officer, employee, or agency of the city,
shall be paid for legal services rendered except pursuant to a formal written
contract. The contract shall be dated and signed by the private attorney
retained, by the director of budget and fiscal services, and by the corporation
counsel, who shall approve as to form and legality. The contract shall also
contain the signature of the officer, employee, or head of the agency being
represented by the private attorney, or in the case of special counsel
representing the city or the council, the signature of the chair of the
council, as confirmation that the attorney has been selected by the officer,
employee, agency, or city.
(b)   The contract required by this section shall include but need not be
limited to the following provisions:
(1)   The name of the case and civil number for which the private attorney is
being retained and the name of the represented party;
(2)   The commencement date of legal services, the approximate date when the
case is expected to be concluded, and an estimate of the total cost of the
case, exclusive of any appeal;
(3)   The categories and names of the private attorneys, if known, assigned to
the case who will provide legal services and the hourly rate charged by each
attorney;
(4)   The nature of the work and the rates to be charged to the city for work
performed by nonattorneys, including persons on contract with the private
attorney who perform specialized services, such as investigators, expert
witnesses, etc.;
(5)   Special rates, if any, which differ from the hourly rate specified in
subdivision (3) for legal work performed by attorneys;
(6)   A description of court costs and out-of-pocket expenses that will be
charged to the city; and
(7)   Express agreements that:
(A)   Should the case continue beyond the estimated date for conclusion, or the
total cost exceed the estimated cost, the council shall be promptly informed in
writing;
(B)   No appeal shall be taken or settlement entered into in the case without
the prior approval of the council;
(C)   All settlement proposals received from the opposing party shall be
transmitted to the council in a timely manner and within the time frame
specified by the proposal, if any, for its acceptance or rejection;
(D)   When requested, the attorney will attend meetings with the council or a
council committee to discuss matters relating to the case; and
(E)   The attorney shall comply with all the applicable provisions of this
article.
(c)   A copy of the executed contract shall be transmitted to the city clerk
after it has been signed by all parties.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 26, § 2-26.3) (Added by Ord. 94-27; Am. Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-26.4 Payment procedure.
(a)   Private attorneys shall bill the city on a monthly basis for services
rendered. The billing shall identify the attorneys rendering services, the
number of hours or fraction of an hour each attorney has worked, a description
of the legal work performed, and an itemization of the costs being billed and
the date each cost was incurred.
(b)   All billings for payment of legal fees to a private attorney shall be
submitted to the department of corporation counsel for review and approval.
Before making payment, the corporation counsel shall notify the council in
writing that a billing for payment has been received and the amount of billing.
The notification shall specify that unless objected to in writing by a majority
of the council, the billing shall be approved for payment within 30 days from
the council’s receipt of the corporation counsel’s notice. Upon request of a
councilmember, the corporation counsel shall transmit copies of the billing to
the councilmember.
(c)   In the event a majority of the council objects to the payment of all or a
portion of the billing, the corporation counsel shall bring the objection to
the attention of the private attorney and attempt to resolve the matter to the
satisfaction of the council. No payment to the private attorney shall be made
for any billing for which an objection has been made by a majority of the
council and not resolved.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 26, § 2-26.4) (Added by Ord. 94-27)
§ 2-26.5 Quarterly reports required.
   Beginning March 31 following the date of the enactment of this ordinance and
every three months thereafter, the corporation counsel shall compile and
transmit to the council, a report listing the names of all the cases, civil
numbers, and contract numbers for which a private attorney has been retained
pursuant to Charter § 5-204.3, the date of commencement of each contract, the
officer, employee, or agency being represented, the total amount of legal fees
billed, the total amount of legal fees paid, and the amount of legal fees
remaining unpaid.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 26, § 2-26.5) (Added by Ord. 94-27)
§ 2-26.6 Selection of legal representation.
(a)   A single defendant named in a lawsuit.
(1)   An officer or employee named. If an officer or employee of the city is
sued for acts done solely in the performance of the officer’s or employee’s
official duties, the officer or employee named shall be entitled to and shall
select no more than one private attorney as special counsel to represent the
officer or employee.
(2)   An officer or employee named in official and personal capacities. If an
officer or employee is sued for acts done in the performance of the officer’s
or employee’s official duties and the complaint alleges that some acts were
done outside the scope of the officer’s or employee’s official duties, if the
council determines by resolution that:
(A)   The acts for which the officer or employee is being sued were done solely
in the officer’s or employee’s official capacity; and
(B)   The city will indemnify the officer or employee for any and all liability
arising out of the lawsuit, the officer or employee shall be entitled to and
shall select a single attorney as special counsel to represent the officer or
employee.
(3)   Agency named. If an agency is named in the lawsuit, the agency shall be
entitled to and shall select no more than one private attorney as special
counsel to represent the agency.
(4)   City named. If the city is named in the lawsuit, the council shall select
no more than one private attorney as special counsel to represent the city.
(b)   Multiple defendants named. If a lawsuit names multiple city defendants,
each named defendant shall be entitled to and shall select no more than one
private attorney to represent the defendant as special counsel, providing that
the following shall apply to the following specified circumstances.
(1)   If more than one officer or employee is named in a lawsuit for acts done
in the performance of the officers’ or employees’ official duties, unless a
conflict of interest arises between two or more of the officers and employees,
the officers and employees shall select a single private attorney as special
counsel to represent all the officers and employees jointly. If the officers
and employees cannot agree on a single private attorney, the council by
resolution, shall select a private attorney to represent the officers and
employees.
(2)   If more than one officer or employee is sued for acts done in the
performance of the officers’ or employees’ official duties and the complaint
alleges that some acts were done outside the scope of the officers’ or
employees’ official duties, if the council determines by resolution that:
(A)   The acts for which the officers and employees are being sued were done
solely in the performance of the officers’ and employees’ official duties; and
(B)   The city will indemnify the officers and employees for any and all
liability arising out of the lawsuit, unless a conflict of interest arises
between two or more of the officers and employees, the officers, and employees
shall be entitled to and shall select a single private attorney to represent
all the officers and employees jointly. If the officers and employees cannot
agree on a single private attorney, the council by resolution shall select a
private attorney to represent the officers and employees.
(3)   If any agency is named in a lawsuit and one or more officers or employees
of the agency are also named for acts done in the performance of their official
duties, unless a conflict of interest arises between the agency and one or more
of the officers and employees, the agency and the named officers and employees
shall select a single private attorney to represent the agency and all the
officers and employees jointly. If the agency, officers, and employees cannot
agree on a single private attorney, the council by resolution shall select a
private attorney to represent the agency, officers, and employees.
(4)   If the city is named in a lawsuit and one or more officers or employees
are also named for acts done in the performance of their official duties,
unless a conflict of interest arises between the city and one or more of the
officers and employees, the council shall select a single private attorney to
represent the city and all the officers and employees jointly.
(5)   If the city is named in the lawsuit and an agency is named in the same
lawsuit, unless a conflict of interest arises between the agency and the city,
the council shall select a single attorney as special counsel to represent the
city and the named agency jointly.
(c)   No private attorney shall be paid by the city to represent an officer or
employee of the city sued for acts done outside the scope of the officer’s or
employee’s official duties, except as provided by subsections (a)(2) and (b)
(2). If the corporation counsel is disqualified because of a conflict of
interest from participation in the lawsuit, the council shall make the
determination as to whether the matters raised in a lawsuit relate to an
officer’s or employee’s official powers, duties, and responsibilities.
(d)   Nothing herein shall preclude an officer or employee from employing, at
the officer’s or employee’s own expense, additional private counsel to
represent the officer or employee.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 26, § 2-26.6) (Added by Ord. 94-27)
§ 2-26.7 Control of fees—Reduction in hourly rates.
   Reasonable fees billed to the city by private attorneys shall be paid at the
rates specified in the written contract; except, where the fees billed,
exclusive of court costs and out-of-pocket expenses, exceed the following
amounts, the hourly rates payable to each attorney or category of attorneys
specified in the written contract referred to in §
2-26.3 and any special hourly rates specified in the contract shall be reduced
by the following percentages and applied to fees billed in excess of the
threshold amounts:
(1)   Where fees billed exceed $100,000, the hourly rates shall be reduced by 5
percent;
(2)   Where fees billed exceed $300,000, the hourly rates shall be reduced by
10 percent;
(3)   Where fees billed exceed $500,000, the hourly rates shall be reduced by
20 percent;
(4)   Where fees billed exceed $750,000, the hourly rates shall be reduced by
25 percent; and
(5)   Where fees billed exceed $1,000,000, the hourly rates shall be reduced by
30 percent.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 26, § 2-26.7) (Added by Ord. 94-27)
ARTICLE 27: VOLUNTEER SERVICES PROGRAM
Sections
   
2-27.1   Policy
   
2-27.2   Definitions
   
2-27.3   Volunteer services program—Established—Nondiscrimination—Coordinator
   
2-27.4   Agency rights and responsibilities
   
2-27.5   Volunteer benefits
   
2-27.6   Volunteer policing program
   
2-27.7   Rules
§ 2-27.1 Policy.
   It is the policy of the City and County of Honolulu to:
(1)   Recognize the volunteer spirit in our citizenry as a fundamental
ingredient to our democratic form of government;
(2)   Adhere to the principle that every citizen regardless of race, color,
ancestry, politics, religion, sex, age, economic condition, physical or mental
disability, or marital status has the right to participate voluntarily in city
government;
(3)   Foster the use of volunteer services in city government to supplement,
strengthen, and support the ability of city agencies to accomplish their
missions;
(4)   Demonstrate the vital role that volunteers can offer in assisting and
augmenting city services;
(5)   Become a model employer by developing a program on the use of volunteer
services and effectively using volunteers; and
(6)   Take a positive and active role in promoting the use of volunteers by
city agencies in a manner that would benefit the volunteers as well as the
agencies.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 27, § 2-27.1) (Added by Ord. 95-14)
§ 2-27.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Agency. Any city agency within the executive branch, excepting the prosecuting
attorney and the board of water supply.
Chief of Police. The chief of the Honolulu police department or the chief’s
authorized designee.
Laws. Includes Hawaii State statutes, city ordinances, and Hawaii State and
city rules adopted pursuant to HRS Chapter 91.
Volunteer. A person or organization who is willing to provide any of the
following services with no monetary or material gain:
(1)   Occasional service consisting of one-time, on-call, or single-task
service to any agency without receipt of any compensation, except as provided
in this article; or
(2)   Regular service consisting of activities on an ongoing or continuous
basis to an agency without receipt of any compensation, except as provided in
this article; or
(3)   Stipend service consisting of the receipt of a support allowance that
then enables a person to provide voluntary service to an agency. The allowance
may be for food, mileage, and other related expenses, but does not reflect
compensation for work performed.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 27, § 2-27.2) (Added by Ord. 95-14; Am. Ords. 97-02,
03-40)
§ 2-27.3 Volunteer services program—Established—Nondiscrimination— Coordinator.
(a)   A volunteer services program shall be established within a city
department designated by the mayor. The director of the designated department
may adopt rules to carry out the purposes of this article.
(b)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall, on the
basis of sex, age, race, color, ancestry, religion, national origin, marital
status, economic condition, physical or mental disability, or politics, be
excluded from participation in the volunteer services program.
(c)   The volunteer services program shall be headed by a volunteer services
coordinator who shall be charged with the following duties:
(1)   In cooperation with each city agency, identify tasks that may be
appropriately performed by volunteers;
(2)   In cooperation with the department of human resources, develop written
guidelines for the recruitment, screening, supervision, and use of volunteers
by city agencies;
(3)   Serve as a central clearinghouse for volunteer recruitment for the city;
(4)   Assist each agency in training existing staff on how to supervise,
assist, and support agency volunteers;
(5)   Maintain a list of available volunteers and a list of jobs for which
agencies are seeking volunteers;
(6)   In cooperation with the director of budget and fiscal services, establish
a risk management program aimed at minimizing the risk of liability to the city
due to the volunteer service program while protecting volunteers from liability
when performing services as city volunteers; and
(7)   Prepare and submit an annual report to the council with a breakdown of
the number of volunteers used by each agency, the number of volunteer service
hours donated to each agency, the types of tasks performed by volunteers in
each agency, and the cost of using volunteers by each agency.
(d)   Any volunteer used by the city shall be excluded from the civil service
system of Charter Article VI, Chapter 11, and any other public employee benefit
program except those provided in this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 27, § 2-27.3) (Added by Ord. 95-14; Am. Ord. 03-40)
§ 2-27.4 Agency rights and responsibilities.
(a)   An agency has the right to decline any offer of voluntary services, or if
accepted, to release subsequently the volunteer whose services are no longer
needed or whose performance is found unacceptable.
(b)   An agency using the services of volunteers has the responsibility to:
(1)   Use volunteers to extend city services without displacing regular, full-
time employees;
(2)   Provide volunteers with the orientation and training necessary to do work
for the agency;
(3)   Provide each volunteer with a designated supervisor to assist and direct
the work of the volunteer;
(4)   Allow volunteers to serve on a trial or probationary period for a
specified period;
(5)   Assign volunteers to tasks that are suited to their respective skills or
geared to develop new skills; and
(6)   Recognize volunteers for their services to the agency.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 27, § 2-27.4) (Added by Ord. 95-14)
§ 2-27.5 Volunteer benefits.
(a)   An agency may reimburse volunteers for out-of-pocket costs incurred in
carrying out their volunteer duties, consistent with subsection (b), as deemed
necessary to assist volunteers in performing their services.
(b)   Volunteer benefits may include, within the limits of an agency’s budget,
the following:
(1)   Meals without charge or the cost thereof reimbursed;
(2)   Transportation costs including parking fees, bus and taxi fares to cover
expenses incurred in carrying out a volunteer’s duties;
(3)   Out-service training and attendance at conferences pertaining to a
volunteer’s assigned duties; and
(4)   Other reasonable expenses incurred by volunteers in connection with their
assignments.
(c)   Volunteers shall not be deemed “employees of the city” when acting for an
agency in their capacity as volunteers.
(d)   Personal liability insurance coverage may be furnished for volunteers.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 27, § 2-27.5) (Added by Ord. 95-14)
§ 2-27.6 Volunteer policing program.
(a)   There is established within the Honolulu police department, and under the
supervision of the chief of police, a volunteer policing program to use
volunteers to assist the Honolulu police department in the enforcement of
certain city and State laws related to abandoned and derelict vehicles and
parking, including parking for persons with disabilities, and other laws
designated by the chief of police.
(b)   The chief of police is authorized to commission volunteers as special
enforcement officers to issue citations on public and private property to
persons violating certain city and State laws relating to abandoned and
derelict vehicles, parking, including parking for persons with disabilities,
and other laws designated by the chief of police.
(c)   The chief of police, in cooperation with the directors of other city
agencies as appropriate, shall:
(1)   Establish minimum qualifications for persons wishing to volunteer their
services to become special enforcement officers and application procedures for
volunteers;
(2)   Provide a required training program for police volunteers totaling not
less than 20 hours, which shall include but not be limited to training on:
(A)   Pertinent city and State laws;
(B)   Identifying violators and issuing citations;
(C)   Use of communication and other necessary equipment;
(D)   Procedures to follow in the event of confrontations with suspected
violators; and
(E)   Providing testimony in court to enforce citations;
(3)   Grant commissions to volunteers who have successfully completed the
training program, and who are qualified as determined by the chief of police to
become special enforcement officers; and
(4)   Provide for supervision and monitoring of the special enforcement
officers while such officers are on duty.
(d)   Each special enforcement officer shall agree to:
(1)   Work a minimum number of hours per week, as determined by the chief of
police; and
(2)   Serve at locations designated by the chief of police.
(e)   Each special enforcement officer who is assigned duties under this
program shall:
(1)   Complete a volunteer application;
(2)   Be a United States citizen, a resident of the city, and at least 21 years
of age;
(3)   Pass a background check conducted by the chief of police, which may
include a criminal background check;
(4)   Possess a valid State of Hawaii driver’s license;
(5)   Complete the training program established by the chief of police; and
(6)   Be provided with an identification card.
(f)   The chief of police shall coordinate recruitment of volunteers.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 27, § 2-27.6) (Added by Ord. 03-40; Am. Ord. 14-25)
§ 2-27.7 Rules.
   The chief of police, in cooperation with the directors of other city
agencies, may adopt rules to implement the volunteer policing program.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 27, § 2-27.7) (Added by Ord. 03-40)
ARTICLE 28: PROHIBITION ON TAKE-HOME USE OF CITY MOTOR VEHICLE BY
EXECUTIVE AGENCY HEAD OR DEPUTY HEAD
Sections
   
2-28.1   Definitions
   
2-28.2   Prohibition on take-home use of city motor vehicle by executive agency
head or deputy head— Exceptions
   
2-28.3   Applicability of article
§ 2-28.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
City Motor Vehicle. A motor vehicle owned or leased by the city.
Executive Agency. Any agency of the executive branch of city government,
excluding the board of water supply and the Honolulu Authority for Rapid
Transportation.
Executive Agency Head. The director or other officer serving as the
administrative head of an executive agency.
Executive Agency Deputy Head or Deputy Head. The officer serving as a deputy
head of an executive agency.
Use of a City Motor Vehicle on a Take-Home Basis. The use of a city motor
vehicle by a person for the following:
(1)   Travel between the person’s work and home; and
(2)   Other travel incidental to travel between the person’s work and home.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 28, § 2-28.1) (Added by Ord. 96-66; Am. Ord. 97-02, 16-
29)
§ 2-28.2 Prohibition on take-home use of city motor vehicle by executive agency
head or deputy head—Exceptions.
(a)   Except as otherwise provided under subsection (b), an executive agency
head or deputy head shall not be allowed to use a city motor vehicle on a take-
home basis.
(b)   The prohibition of subsection (a) shall not apply to the following:
(1)   The police chief or any deputy police chief;
(2)   The fire chief or deputy fire chief;
(3)   The medical examiner or first deputy medical examiner; and
(4)   The director of emergency management.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 28, § 2-28.2) (Added by Ord. 96-66; Am. Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-28.3 Applicability of article.
(a)   This article applies only to the use of a city motor vehicle on a take-
home basis by an executive agency head or deputy head.
(b)   This article does not apply to the following:
(1)   The use of a city motor vehicle by an executive agency head or deputy
head on other than a take-home basis; or
(2)   The use of a city motor vehicle by any other city officer or employee,
including the mayor.
Other applicable law, ordinance, rule, or policy shall govern the use of a city
motor vehicle in a manner described under this subsection.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 28, § 2-28.3) (Added by Ord. 96-66)
ARTICLE 29: DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY SERVICES
Sections
   
2-29.1   Definition
   
2-29.2   Prohibition on presale or prelease of dwelling unit in proposed
housing project on city real property before council approval
§ 2-29.1 Definition.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Department. The department of community services.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 29, § 2-29.1) (Added by Ord. 97-24; Am. Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-29.2 Prohibition on presale or prelease of dwelling unit in proposed
housing project on city real property before council approval.
(a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Development Agreement. The agreement or contract between the city and a
developer concerning the development of a housing project on city real property
to be leased or otherwise conveyed to the developer.
Prelease of a Dwelling Unit. The lease of a dwelling unit by its developer to a
lessee before the commencement of construction of the unit.
Presale of a Dwelling Unit. The sale of a dwelling unit by its developer to a
purchaser before the commencement of construction of the unit.
Proposed Housing Project on City Real Property. A housing project proposed to
be developed by a private person on city real property to be leased or
otherwise conveyed to that person.
(b)   The department shall not allow the presale or prelease of a dwelling unit
in a proposed housing project on city real property before council approval of
the pertinent development agreement.
(c)   A prospective developer of a proposed housing project on city real
property shall not engage in or authorize the presale or prelease of a dwelling
unit in the proposed project before council approval of the pertinent
development agreement.
(d)   Subsections (b) and (c) shall not prohibit the following:
(1)   The presale or prelease of a dwelling unit in a proposed housing project
after council approval of the pertinent development agreement; or
(2)   The presale or prelease of a nondwelling unit in a proposed housing
project at any time.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 29, § 2-29.2) (Added by Ord. 97-24)
ARTICLE 30: PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACTS
Sections
   
2-30.1   Definitions
   
2-30.2   Review and competitive procurement of personal services contracts
   
2-30.3   Public notice of employer-employee contracts
   
2-30.4   Reporting of employer-employee contracts
   
2-30.5   Public record-keeping requirements
§ 2-30.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Contractor. Any individual, corporation, trust, partnership, or other business
or governmental entity.
Department. The department of budget and fiscal services.
Director. The director of budget and fiscal services.
Employer-Employee Contract. A contract entered into by an executive agency of
the city pursuant to Charter § 6-1103(f), (g), (h), in which the contractor is
paid on a payment schedule applicable to regular employees. This term includes
any amendment to, extension, or renewal of the contract.
Executive Agency. Has the same meaning as defined in Charter § 13-101.
Independent Contractor. A person who provides independent services of a
technical, expert, or professional nature to the city, who may lawfully provide
such services concurrently with other private employment, if any, who is not
supervised or directed on a daily basis by a city officer or employee, and who
is not paid on a payment schedule applicable to regular employees.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 30, § 2-30.1) (Added by Ord. 97-54; Am. Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-30.2 Review and competitive procurement of personal services contracts.
(a)   The director shall review all employer-employee contracts requested by an
executive agency before contract execution and determine whether the contract
is appropriate or whether the personal services to be procured would be more
appropriately procured by a contract with an independent contractor. This
determination shall be made in accordance with written guidelines established
by the director for all executive agencies regarding the types of personal
services that shall be competitively procured.
(b)   If the director determines that a proposed employer-employee contract is
more appropriately procured by a contract with an independent contractor, the
director shall so notify the executive agency making the request and determine
the proper method of procurement.
(c)   No employer-employee contract requested by an executive agency shall be
entered into without the approval of the director.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 30, § 2-30.2) (Added by Ord. 97-54; Am. Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-30.3 Public notice of employer-employee contracts.
   The director shall post or cause to be posted a public notice of the request
to enter into an employee-employer contract not less than seven days before
final approval of the request. The notice shall be posted in an area accessible
to the public.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 30, § 2-30.3) (Added by Ord. 97-54; Am. Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-30.4 Reporting of employer-employee contracts.
(a)   Within 30 days following the end of each fiscal year, the director shall
submit to the council and file with the city clerk a report regarding all
employer-employee contracts of the executive agencies of the city during the
fiscal year just ended. An employer-employee contract shall be included in the
report for the fiscal year if:
(1)   The contract was executed, extended, amended, or renewed during the
fiscal year; or
(2)   The city made any payments pursuant to such contract during the fiscal
year.
(b)   The report required by subsection (a) shall be organized by the executive
agency requesting the employer- employee contract and, for each contract, shall
include the following information:
(1)   The executive agency that procured the services of the contractor;
(2)   A brief statement of the nature of the personal services provided to the
city under the contract and justification for procuring such services through
an employer-employee contract;
(3)   The name of the contractor;
(4)   A statement of the qualifications of the contractor to provide the
contracted services;
(5)   A statement of whether the information provided relates to the original
contract or to an amendment, extension, or renewal of the contract;
(6)   The total amount of compensation to be paid to the contractor;
(7)   A statement of whether the contractor is working on a full- or part-time
basis, and if the latter, the amount of hours per week that the contractor is
working;
(8)   The time period and duration of the contract;
(9)   A statement of which subsection of Charter § 6-1103 provided the basis
for the contract, amendment, renewal, or extension;
(10)   A statement as to whether, in the immediately preceding fiscal year, the
contractor was engaged in the same or any other employer-employee contract with
the city;
(11)   A statement as to whether, in the immediately preceding fiscal year, the
executive agency engaged the same or a different contractor to perform the same
or similar services for the agency; and
(12)   A statement as to whether funds are included in the city’s executive
budget ordinance for the current fiscal year for the same or similar contract,
and if so, whether the contract is with the same contractor.
(c)   If a contractor provided personal services pursuant to more than one
employer-employee contract with the city during the fiscal year, the report
required by subsection (a) shall specify the number of contracts entered into,
the type and service provided and the aggregate compensation received by the
contractor under the various employer-employee contracts.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 30, § 2-30.4) (Added by Ord. 97-54; Am. Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-30.5 Public record-keeping requirements.
(a)   The department shall keep a record of all employer-employee contracts, by
executive agency, for a period of at least five years. Each record shall
contain at least the following information:
(1)   The executive agency that procured the services of the contractor;
(2)   The type of services provided by the contractor;
(3)   The name of the contractor;
(4)   The total amount of compensation paid the contractor; and
(5)   The time period and duration of the contract.
(b)   Records of employer-employee contracts required to be kept under
subsection (a) shall be made available for public inspection; provided that no
information shall be disclosed to the public which is prohibited from
disclosure by HRS Chapter 92F or any other State, city, or federal privacy law.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 30, § 2-30.5) (Added by Ord. 97-54; Am. Ord. 16-29)
ARTICLE 31: SEALS AND LOGOTYPES OF EXECUTIVE AGENCIES
Sections
   
2-31.1   Adoption of official seals and logotypes
   
2-31.2   Unauthorized use of seals and logotypes—Penalty
§ 2-31.1 Adoption of official seals and logotypes.
(a)   Executive agencies of the City and County of Honolulu are authorized to
adopt official seals or logotypes. A copy of any official seal or logotype
adopted by a city agency shall be filed with the office of the city clerk
within 30 days of its adoption. For the purposes of this article, “logotype”
includes any trade name, trademark, service mark, nickname, motto, slogan,
abbreviation, word, logo, logogram, logographic, logotype, symbol, design,
graphic depiction, or other work or designation that may be associated with the
city or an executive city agency, facility, property, operation, or activity.
(b)   The seals and logotypes may be used only for:
(1)   Official governmental purposes;
(2)   City-sponsored articles or activities when the sponsorship of the article
or activity and the use of the seal or logotype on the article or for the
activity is approved by the director; or
(3)   Revenue-raising activities authorized pursuant to subsections (c) and
(d).
(c)   The department, to the extent deemed necessary and practicable, shall
register any official seal or logotype adopted by an executive city agency with
the State of Hawaii and take any additional measures required by law to ensure
the city’s exclusive ownership of the seal or logotype. As the exclusive owner
of an agency’s seal or logotype, the city, through the department, may enter
into contracts with private parties for the manufacture, fabrication,
production, reproduction, marketing, distribution, and sale of articles or
materials imprinted with the agency’s seal or logotype for the purpose of
raising revenues or securing goods, materials, supplies, or equipment at no or
reduced costs for the city, nonprofit city support or friends group, or city
employee organizations. Any goods, materials, supplies, or equipment received
under this article shall not be a gift or donation within the meaning of
Charter § 13-113.
(d)   The city may provide for an exclusive or nonexclusive license to use an
agency’s official seal or logotype; provided that in contracting for an
exclusive license for the use of an agency’s seal or logotype, the director, to
the extent feasible, shall follow procedures similar to the procurement
procedures provided for in HRS Chapter 103D and the rules adopted pursuant
thereto; and provided further, that such procedures need not be applied to any
exclusive license granted to a nonprofit city support or friends group or city
employee organization. In granting a license, the director shall establish an
appropriate duration for the license. Any license for exclusive use of an
agency’s official seal or logotype shall not preclude the use of the agency’s
official seal or logotype for official governmental purposes.
(e)   The department shall maintain a copy of all contracts relating to the use
of an official seal or logotype of an executive city agency and make them
available for public inspection.
(f)   The director shall provide a report to the council on or before January 1
of each year relating to official seals and logotypes registered pursuant to
subsection (c).
(g)   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Department. The department of budget and fiscal services.
Director. The director of budget and fiscal services.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 31, § 2-31.1) (Added by Ord. 98-43; Am. Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-31.2 Unauthorized use of seals and logotypes—Penalty.
   Whoever knowingly manufactures, fabricates, produces, reproduces, markets,
distributes, sells, or purchases for sale any article or material imprinted
with the official seal or logotype of a city executive agency or knowingly
displays the official seal or logotype of a city executive agency, or any
facsimile thereof, in any display, advertisement, poster, or circular for the
purpose of conveying or in a manner reasonably calculated to convey a false
impression of sponsorship or approval by the city or any executive agency
thereof, except for a city-sponsored article, material, or activity approved by
the director in accordance with this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 31, § 2-31.2) (Added by Ord. 98-43; Am. Ord. 16-29)
ARTICLE 32: CITY VIDEO MONITORING OF PUBLIC ACTIVITY
Sections
   
2-32.1   Definitions
   
2-32.2   Overt video monitoring of public activity
   
2-32.3   Authorization for certain overt video monitoring of public activity
from fixed locations
   
2-32.4   Authorization for other overt video monitoring of public activity
   
2-32.5   Use, storage, and disposition of video monitoring information and
tapes
   
2-32.6   Third party rights
§ 2-32.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Chief. The chief of police of the Honolulu police department or the chief’s
designee.
Chinatown Area. The area generally bounded by Nuuanu Stream, Vineyard
Boulevard, and Bishop Street, extended to meet Vineyard Boulevard and Honolulu
Harbor.
General Area. Includes a district, subdistrict, neighborhood, street, or
intersection.
Illumination. Making visible details not visible to the naked eye because of
poor lighting conditions.
Law Enforcement Official. An officer of the Honolulu police department; a
similar officer or a criminal investigator employed by any federal, State, or
local government agency; the attorney general, the prosecuting attorney, the
corporation counsel or any of their deputies; or a similar attorney employed by
any federal, State, or local government agency for purposes of criminal
prosecutions.
Legitimate Law Enforcement Objective. The detection, investigation, prevention,
or deterrence of crime, protection of a person or property from harm, or the
apprehension and prosecution of a suspected criminal or traffic violator. An
action is “reasonably likely to achieve a legitimate law enforcement objective”
if there is an articulable reason for concluding that one of these objectives
may be met by taking the action.
Legitimate Public Purpose. The detection, investigation, prevention, or
deterrence of violations of federal, State, or city regulatory requirements,
the evaluation of city programs and operations, the training of city personnel,
the investigation of claims involving the city, and other activities supporting
public functions. An action is “reasonably likely to achieve a legitimate
public purpose” if there is an articulable reason for concluding that one of
these objectives may be met by taking the action.
Officer. An officer of the Honolulu police department.
Overt Monitoring. Monitoring of which a reasonable person would be aware.
Private Activity, Condition, or Location. Any activity, condition, or location
when the place where it occurs or exists and other relevant considerations
afford it a constitutionally protected reasonable expectation of privacy with
respect to the person asserting the claim of an expectation of privacy. A place
is “private” if physical entry therein would be an intrusion upon the
constitutionally protected reasonable expectation of privacy of the person
asserting the claim of an expectation of privacy. The term private activity,
condition, or location shall not be deemed to include any streets, sidewalks,
or other places owned or controlled by the city or another governmental entity
or streets, sidewalks, or other places owned or controlled by private entities,
but open to the general public.
Public Activity. Any activity, condition, or location that is not a private
activity, condition, or location.
Public Buildings or Other Facilities. Any buildings or other facilities or
portion thereof owned or controlled by the city whether such buildings or other
facilities or portions thereof are managed by the city or a private entity,
including but not limited to the sidewalks, driveways, and grounds immediately
adjacent to public buildings or other facilities
Responsible City Official. The chief with respect to the overt video monitoring
of public activity from fixed locations to be implemented pursuant to §
2-32.3(a)(1), (2), and (5), the director and chief engineer of facility
maintenance with respect to the overt video monitoring of public activity from
fixed locations to be implemented pursuant to §
2-32.3(a)(3), and the director of transportation services with respect to overt
video monitoring of public activity from fixed locations to be implemented
pursuant to §
2-32.3(a)(4). For purposes of §
2-32.4, responsible city official means the chief or the head of any other city
department or agency.
Telescopic. Making visible details not visible to the naked eye because of
distance.
Video Monitoring. The use of a lawfully positioned camera as a means of viewing
or recording activities, conditions, or locations other than those occurring
within the sight or immediate vicinity of the person conducting the video
monitoring.
Video Monitoring Tapes. Includes any film, photographs, slides, videotapes,
diskettes, or other recorded representations resulting from overt video
monitoring of public activity.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 32, § 2-32.1) (Added by Ord. 98-59)
§ 2-32.2 Overt video monitoring of public activity.
   No overt video monitoring of public activity shall be conducted by the city
or under the sponsorship of the city except as authorized by this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 32, § 2-32.2) (Added by Ord. 98-59)
§ 2-32.3 Authorization for certain overt video monitoring of public activity
from fixed locations.
(a)   Overt video monitoring of public activity conducted by the city or under
the sponsorship of the city from fixed locations is specifically authorized in
the following areas and for the following purposes:
(1)   In the Waikiki special district as defined in §
21-9.80-2 for purposes of the general prevention and deterrence of criminal
activity;
(2)   In the Chinatown area for purposes of the general prevention and
deterrence of criminal activity;
(3)   In and around public buildings or other facilities for the purposes of
the general prevention and deterrence of criminal activity;
(4)   On streets or roads under the jurisdiction of the city for purposes of
facilitating the efficient flow of traffic;
(5)   On streets or roads under the jurisdiction of the city for the purposes
of detecting, investigating, preventing, or deterring traffic violations; and
(6)   In such other areas or for such other purposes as are designated by the
council, by resolution, following the holding of a public hearing at which
members of the public may express their views on the proposed monitoring and
the proposed general area where the monitoring shall take place, notice of
which public hearing shall have been given to the public at least 10 days in
advance of the public hearing in a publication meeting the State’s requirements
for the publication of public notice.
(b)   In implementing overt video monitoring of public activity authorized by
subsection (a), the responsible city official shall act in accordance with the
following standards and guidelines.
(1)   The overt video monitoring of public activity authorized by subsections
(a)(1) and (2) shall be conducted in partnership with the affected communities.
To the extent practicable, the overt video monitoring of public activity in
these areas shall be conducted by community volunteers.
(2)   Cameras may use telescopic, zoom, panoramic, illumination, pan, tilt, and
rotate capabilities.
(3)   Cameras shall be installed in such a manner that they are not likely to
view a private activity, condition, or location.
(4)   All individuals conducting or supervising video monitoring shall receive
training and written instructions in the proper operation of the video
monitoring equipment and the applicable requirements of this article.
(5)   Before initiating overt video monitoring of public activity in any area
or public building or other facility, the responsible city official shall
publish or cause to be published a notice of such monitoring in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city at least 10 days before implementation of such
monitoring. The notice shall include a general description of the area or
building to be monitored, the general location of the cameras, the general
capability of the cameras, and a statement that the public may submit written
comments to the council and the responsible city official relating to the
monitoring. Before materially changing the location of any camera, changing the
general capability of cameras, or with respect to the overt video monitoring of
public activity authorized by subsections (a)(1) and (2), terminating the video
monitoring on a permanent basis, the responsible city official shall publish or
cause to be published a notice of such change in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city at least 10 days before implementing such change, with
a statement that the public may submit written comments to the council and the
responsible city official relating to the monitoring.
(6)   The responsible city official shall post or cause to be posted a
reasonable number of signs in the affected area or in or around the public
building or other facility advising the public that the area or public building
or other facility is subject to video monitoring of public activity; provided
that such signs shall not be required for video monitoring conducted pursuant
to subsections (a)(4) and (5).
(7)   The responsible city official may, at any time, discontinue the overt
video monitoring of public activity, including but not limited to
discontinuation during certain hours of the day or days of the week and
discontinuation for purposes of maintenance and repair, or where there are not
an adequate number of community volunteers or city personnel to conduct such
monitoring.
(8)   The responsible city official shall provide an annual report to the
council on activities relating to the overt video monitoring of public activity
under this section no later than January 15 of each year.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 32, § 2-32.3) (Added by Ord. 98-59)
§ 2-32.4 Authorization for other overt video monitoring of public activity.
(a)   No overt video monitoring of public activity, other than overt video
monitoring of public activity from fixed locations specifically authorized by §
2-32.3, shall be conducted by the city or under the sponsorship of the city
except where the responsible city official finds that it:
(1)   Is reasonably likely to achieve a legitimate law enforcement objective or
other legitimate public purpose; and
(2)   Is not likely to view a private activity, condition, or location.
An officer of the Honolulu police department may make the determinations
required under the preceding sentence when there are exigent circumstances.
(b)   Overt video monitoring of public activity pursuant to this section shall
be subject to the standards and guidelines set forth in §
2-32.3(b)(4).
(c)   Overt video monitoring of public activity pursuant to this section shall
be conducted for the duration reasonably necessary as determined by the
responsible city official.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 32, § 2-32.4) (Added by Ord. 98-59)
§ 2-32.5 Use, storage, and disposition of video monitoring information and
tapes.
(a)   Except as otherwise required by HRS Chapter 92F, ordered by the office of
information practices pursuant to HRS Chapter 92F, or ordered by a court of
competent jurisdiction, information obtained from overt monitoring of public
activity and video monitoring tapes shall be used only for legitimate law
enforcement objectives and traffic management and other legitimate public
purposes and shall be disclosed only to city personnel or community volunteers
conducting or supervising the video monitoring, law enforcement officials, city
personnel involved in the evaluation of city programs or operations or training
of city personnel, and to individuals involved in or potentially involved in
criminal or civil proceedings to be brought by a governmental entity, including
but not limited to victims or perpetrators or suspected or potential victims or
perpetrators of criminal activity. Nothing contained in this paragraph shall be
construed as prohibiting the disclosure or use of information obtained from
overt monitoring of public activity under any of the subdivisions of §
2-32.3(a) or under §
2-32.4 for: (i) the detection, investigation, prosecution or adjudication of
criminal activity, traffic infractions, or regulatory violations, violations of
conditions of bail, parole or probation, or violations of court orders; or (ii)
the detection, investigation, discovery, and trial of alleged violations of the
civil legal rights of victims of criminal activity other than traffic
infractions, including but not limited to property damage claims resulting from
criminal activities. Nothing contained in this paragraph shall be construed as
prohibiting the disclosure or use of information obtained from overt monitoring
of public activity under §
2-32.3(a)(4) to the media for purposes of advising the public of prevailing
traffic conditions.
(b)   Video monitoring tapes shall be stored in secure locations so as to limit
access to such tapes to the purposes specified in subsection (a).
(c)   Except where the responsible city official finds that there is a need to
maintain a specific video monitoring tape for a longer period for a purpose
specified in subsection (a), video monitoring tapes shall be erased or
destroyed within 30 days after they are taken or made.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 32, § 2-32.5) (Added by Ord. 98-59)
§ 2-32.6 Third party rights.
   Nothing contained in this article is intended to or shall in any manner
create or afford any rights, privileges, or benefits not otherwise recognized
by law, including but not limited to any right to suppress evidence because of
an alleged violation of the requirements of this article or any claim against
the city for invasion of privacy or failure to continuously maintain overt
video monitoring of public activity. Rather, this article is intended as
internal policy guidance to the affected city departments to ensure that overt
monitoring of public activity decisions is based on all relevant considerations
and information.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 32, § 2-32.6) (Added by Ord. 98-59)
ARTICLE 33: RESERVED
ARTICLE 34: BIODIESEL OR RENEWABLE FUEL CONVERTED FROM COMMERCIAL
FOG WASTE OR COMMERCIAL COOKING OIL WASTE
Sections
   
2-34.1   Definitions
   
2-34.2   Policy on procurement of biodiesel or renewable fuel converted from
commercial FOG waste or commercial cooking oil waste
§ 2-34.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Biodiesel or Renewable Fuel. Fuel converted from commercial FOG waste or
commercial cooking oil waste.
City Executive Agency. An agency of the executive branch other than the board
of water supply. The term does not include the transit management services
contractor as defined under
Chapter 15B.
Commercial Cooking Oil Waste. Has the same meaning as defined in
Chapter 43, Article 5A.
Commercial FOG Waste. Has the same meaning as defined in
Chapter 43, Article 5A.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 34, § 2-34.1) (Added by Ord. 02-14)
§ 2-34.2 Policy on procurement of biodiesel or renewable fuel converted from
commercial fog waste or commercial cooking oil waste.
(a)   This section shall apply when a city executive agency engages in the
procurement of fuel to power a city vehicle fleet or city facility.
(b)   In such a procurement, the city executive agency shall not, without
justification based upon quality or price, discriminate against biodiesel or
renewable fuel. The city executive agency shall allow a person to submit a bid
or offer to supply such biodiesel or renewable fuel as the fuel for the
procurement if the agency determines that:
(1)   The biodiesel or renewable fuel is usable by the city vehicle fleet or
city facility, as applicable; and
(2)   The biodiesel or renewable fuel will perform at least as efficiently and
effectively as petroleum-based fuel that meets the specifications of the
procurement.
The city executive agency shall issue specifications for the procurement that
are consistent with this subsection.
The city executive agency shall not be required to award the contract to a
person who submits a bid or offer to supply biodiesel or renewable fuel.
Instead, the city executive agency shall select the winning bid or offer and
award the fuel supply contract in accordance with HRS Chapter 103D and after
consideration of relevant factors, including quality and price.
(c)   This section shall not be construed as preventing the application of a
preference in a procurement for biodiesel or renewable fuel.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 34, § 2-34.2) (Added by Ord. 02-14)
ARTICLE 35: ENERGY STAR PRODUCTS
Sections
   
2-35.1   Definitions
   
2-35.2   Required procurement of ENERGY STAR qualified products
§ 2-35.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
City. Includes both the executive and legislative branches of the City and
County of Honolulu.
ENERGY STAR. The joint program of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) and the United States Department of Energy designed to identify
and promote energy efficient products.
ENERGY STAR Qualified Product. A product that has met strict energy efficiency
guidelines set by the EPA and Department of Energy and is identified by the
ENERGY STAR label.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 35, § 2-35.1) (Added by Ord. 08-28)
§ 2-35.2 Required procurement of ENERGY STAR Qualified products.
(a)   Except as otherwise provided under subsection (b), when procuring
products that are listed under the ENERGY STAR program, the city shall procure
only ENERGY STAR qualified products.
(b)   The city may procure products not ENERGY STAR qualified under the
following circumstances:
(1)   No comparable product is ENERGY STAR qualified; or
(2)   The life-cycle costs of all comparable ENERGY STAR qualified products are
more than 105 percent of the life-cycle cost of a product that is not ENERGY
STAR qualified.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 35, § 2-35.2) (Added by Ord. 08-28)
ARTICLE 36: LIGHT POLLUTION
Sections
   
2-36.1   Definitions
   
2-36.2   Street lighting to minimize light pollution
§ 2-36.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Full-Cutoff. The street lighting fixture is constructed so that all of the
light emitted by the fixture is projected below the horizontal plane of the
lowest point of the fixture.
Semi-Cutoff. The street lighting fixture is constructed so that at least 90
percent of the light emitted by the fixture is projected below the horizontal
plane of the lowest point of the fixture.
Street Lighting Fixture. An outdoor artificial lighting device, fixture, lamp,
or other similar device that is intended to provide illumination for visibility
on city or city-approved streets and roadways.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 36, § 2-36.1) (Added by Ord. 13-4)
§ 2-36.2 Street lighting to minimize light pollution.
   All new and replacement municipal street lighting fixtures installed by the
department of design and construction or the department of facility maintenance
from July 1, 2013, shall be full-cutoff or semi-cutoff lighting fixtures. This
section shall not apply to any street lighting fixture that is existing and
legally installed, or planned and approved before July 1, 2013; provided that
any street lighting fixture exempt under this section that subsequently becomes
inoperable shall be replaced with a full-cutoff or semi-cutoff street lighting
fixture that provides illumination and uniformity equal to or better than the
recommendations of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America;
provided further, that if the appropriate fixture for the existing light pole
spacing is not available, a noncomplying fixture that meets the illumination
and uniform design criteria of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North
America shall be allowed.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 36, § 2-36.2) (Added by Ord. 13-4)
ARTICLE 37: ZOO SPONSORSHIP PROGRAM
Sections
   
2-37.1   Declaration of legislative intent and findings
   
2-37.2   Definitions
   
2-37.3   Exclusions
   
2-37.4   Sponsorship of Honolulu Zoo exhibits or facilities
   
2-37.5   Funds received from sponsorship agreements
   
2-37.6   Approval of sponsorship agreements
   
2-37.7   Sponsorship guidelines
   
2-37.8   Sponsorship rules
§ 2-37.1 Declaration of legislative intent and findings.
   In an effort to support and improve the Honolulu Zoo, it is in the best
interest of the city to create and enhance relationships with the private
sector, including individuals, corporations, and other organizations, through
sponsorship arrangements. Sponsorship arrangements are deemed not to constitute
a public forum for communication and debate. The rights established by the
sponsorships are established and retained at the city’s discretion.
Sponsorships will create alternative revenue streams that will increase the
city’s ability to improve and to maintain the Honolulu Zoo or to provide
enhanced levels of service and maintenance beyond the core levels funded from
the city’s special events fund or general fund, or both, for the benefit of
users and the community at large.
   In appreciation of such support, it is the policy of the city to provide
sponsors with suitable acknowledgement of their contribution. However, such
recognition may adhere to the aesthetic values and purposes of the Honolulu
Zoo. In addition, such recognition should not detract from the public’s
experience or expectation, nor should it impair the visual qualities of the
Honolulu Zoo or be perceived as creating a proprietary interest.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 37, § 2-37.1) (Added by Ord. 15-42)
§ 2-37.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Financial Contribution. Any one of the following: cash, goods, or services,
paid, given, or provided to the city at such time or times as set forth in the
sponsorship agreement.
Person. Has the same meaning as defined in §
1-4.1.
Request for Proposals. An open competitive process whereby persons may express
their interest in participating in sponsorship opportunities with the city.
Requests for proposals shall include a summary of the  sponsorship opportunity,
benefits for participation, and a description of the open and competitive
procedure for expressing interest in participating in sponsorship
opportunities.
Sponsor. A person that enters into a sponsorship agreement with the city.
Sponsorship. A mutually beneficial arrangement between the city and a person,
wherein the person provides a financial contribution to the city in return for
recognition of the sponsor, for a specified period of time, toward the
construction, renovation, or maintenance of an exhibit or facility at the zoo.
Sponsorship Agreement. A written agreement executed between the city and a
sponsor governing a sponsorship, on terms and conditions acceptable to the city
and the sponsor.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 37, § 2-37.2) (Added by Ord. 15-42)
§ 2-37.3 Exclusions.
   This article shall not apply to:
(1)   Gifts, grants, or unsolicited donations where no sponsorship agreement
exists or is required; and
(2)   Memorials and the name of a city park, site or facility subject to §§
22-9.3 to
22-9.5.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 37, § 2-37.3) (Added by Ord. 15-42)
§ 2-37.4 Sponsorship of honolulu zoo exhibits or facilities.
(a)   The department of enterprise services, in consultation with the director
of the Honolulu Zoo, may, through the department of budget and fiscal services,
establish a Honolulu Zoo sponsorship program to allow sponsorships of exhibits
or facilities within the boundaries of the Honolulu Zoo, provided that the
terms of sponsorship of the exhibit or facility must include but will not be
limited to:
(1)   Designation of the specific exhibit or facility at the Honolulu Zoo being
sponsored;
(2)   The financial contribution proposed to be made for the sponsorship of the
specified exhibit or facility; and
(3)   The duration of the sponsorship agreement.
(b)   The department of enterprise services may recognize the sponsor of an
exhibit or facility in any city publications or city informational notices
describing the exhibit or facility and may place a plaque or sign within the
boundaries of the Honolulu Zoo in recognition of sponsors stating that an
exhibit or facility is “sponsored by” or “made possible through the support of”
the sponsor; provided that a plaque or sign in view of the general public from
outside the boundaries of the Honolulu Zoo is prohibited.
(c)   Placement of sponsorship signs shall require specific authorization, and
no sponsorship sign shall be intended or considered as an open, limited, or
designated public forum.
(d)   Signs providing sponsorship recognition shall conform to all applicable
laws and rules.
(e)   The city reserves the right to refuse to enter into any proposed
sponsorship agreement.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 37, § 2-37.4) (Added by Ord. 15-42)
§ 2-37.5 Funds received from sponsorship agreements.
   All funds received from any sponsorship agreements made pursuant to this
article shall be deposited into the special events fund established in
Chapter 6, Article 53.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 37, § 2-37.5) (Added by Ord. 15-42)
§ 2-37.6 Approval of sponsorship agreements.
   No sponsorship agreement may be executed by the city without the approval of
the city executive department designated by the mayor.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 37, § 2-37.6) (Added by Ord. 15-42)
§ 2-37.7 Sponsorship guidelines.
(a)   The following guidelines shall apply to a sponsorship agreement.
(1)   Signage, publications, and informational notices shall conform to all
applicable laws and rules.
(2)   The sponsorship shall not confer a personal benefit, directly or
indirectly, to any particular city employee or official.
(3)   The sponsorship shall not constitute an endorsement of the sponsor or its
services and products, or create any proprietary interest of the sponsor in the
city or Honolulu Zoo.
(4)   No materials, communications, or advertisements including but not limited
to print, video, internet, broadcast, or display items developed to promote or
communicate the sponsorship, may use the city’s name, seal, or logo without
express prior written approval from the city.
(5)   The sponsorship shall not discriminate against any person on the basis of
race, color, creed, religion, sex, including gender identity and expression,
sexual orientation, age, marital status, ancestry, national origin, or
disability.
(6)   Signage, branding, publicity, and advertising in conjunction with the
sponsorship agreement shall not contain the following:
(A)   Obscenity;
(B)   Pornography;
(C)   Incitement to imminent lawless action;
(D)   Speech presenting a grave and imminent threat;
(E)   Fighting words;
(F)   Fraud;
(G)   True threats;
(H)   Defamation (libel/slander); or
(I)   Solicitations to commit, or speech integral to, criminal conduct.
(7)   Sponsorships shall be nonexclusive, and the city shall retain the right
to grant multiple sponsorships for the Honolulu Zoo.
(8)   Sponsorship recognition benefits may include the following during the
term of the agreement:
(A)   Recognition of the sponsor for the exhibit or facility;
(B)   Appropriate mention in media releases and promotional materials as
sponsor for the exhibit or facility;
(C)   Appropriate sponsor signage at the exhibit or facility;
(D)   Appropriate recognition on the program website as a sponsor for the
exhibit or facility; and
(E)   Other possible benefits as negotiated.
(9)   Sponsorships may be terminated in writing at any time during the term of
the sponsorship agreement when, in the sole determination of the city, the
sponsorship is no longer in the best interest of the city.
(10)   The city retains its rights and discretion to exercise full editorial
control over the placement, content, appearance, and wording of sponsorship
signs, affiliations, and messages.
(11)   Sponsorship materials that advocate, contain price information or an
indication of associated savings or value, request a response, or contain
comparative or qualitative descriptions of products, services, or
organizations, shall not be allowed.
(b)   The city shall not solicit or accept sponsorship from any potential
sponsor if not deemed in the best interest of the city. In addition,
sponsorships involving the following shall not be accepted:
(1)   Persons or companies whose business is substantially derived from the
sale or manufacture of tobacco, alcohol, or firearms;
(2)   Political campaign speech, or speech that supports or opposes or appears
to support or oppose a ballot measure or initiative, or refers to any person in
public office;
(3)   Religious speech that advocates or opposes a religion or religious
belief; and
(4)   Entities that practice or promote discrimination based on race, color,
creed, religion, sex, including gender identity and expression, sexual
orientation, age, marital status, ancestry, national origin, or disability.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 37, § 2-37.7) (Added by Ord. 15-42)
§ 2-37.8 Sponsorship rules.
   The city executive department designated by the mayor, in consultation with
the director of the Honolulu Zoo, may adopt rules, in accordance with HRS
Chapter 91, for the implementation, administration, and enforcement of this
article. Such rules may include but will not be limited to the:
(1)   Facilities and exhibits that may be sponsored;
(2)   Use of the request for proposal process for selection of the sponsor;
(3)   Types of access to the commercial or marketing potential association with
the city, or both, including giving sponsorship credit to the sponsor, size,
number, and placement of plaques or signs;
(4)   Use of city logos; and
(5)   Types of facilities and exhibits that are not eligible for sponsorship.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 37, § 2-37.8) (Added by Ord. 15-42)
ARTICLE 38: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEMS
Section
   
2-38.1   Required construction, installation, and operation of solar
photovoltaic systems at municipal buildings and municipal facilities
§ 2-38.1 Required construction, installation, and operation of solar
photovoltaic systems at municipal buildings and municipal facilities.
   The city shall install solar photovoltaic systems in municipal buildings and
facilities to the extent practicable to meet the city’s electrical demand. All
solar photovoltaic systems installed at a city building or facility must be
designed, erected, and installed in accordance with all applicable codes,
regulations, and standards. For the purposes of this article, “solar
photovoltaic system” means any system that converts solar radiation to
electricity.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 38, § 2-38.1) (Added by Ord. 15-49)
ARTICLE 39: DEPARTMENT OF DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION
Sections
   
2-39.1   General
   
2-39.2   Notice of proposed condemnation action
   
2-39.3   Green building standards for city facilities
§ 2-39.1 General.
   The department of design and construction shall be responsible for:
(1)   The planning, engineering, design, and construction of city buildings,
structures, and grounds, except as otherwise provided by the Charter or
ordinance;
(2)   Surveys, title searching, appraising, and negotiation for acquisition of
lands and easements for rights-of-way for street widening and extensions,
sewers, water, drainage, and other public uses; and
(3)   Planning, engineering, design, and construction services and expertise as
needed for public works and improvement district functions other than for
sewers.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 39, § 2-39.1) (Added by Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-39.2 Notice of proposed condemnation action.
   Whenever the city proposes to acquire real property by means of the right
and power of eminent domain, the city shall mail a notice to every owner and
lessee of record of the property whenever the council is being requested to
authorize condemnation of the property. The notice shall be mailed to the
owners’ and lessees’ last known addresses no later than the date a request is
transmitted to the council for authorization, pursuant to HRS § 101-13, to
institute condemnation proceedings against the owners and claimants of the
property sought to be condemned.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 39, § 2-39.2) (Added by Ord. 16-29)
§ 2-39.3 Green building standards for city facilities.
(a)   Qualifying city facilities shall comply with LEED™ Silver, in the version
most recently adopted by the U.S. Green Building Council, as a minimum design
standard.
(b)   As used in this section, “qualifying city facilities” means facilities
with a floor area greater than 5,000 square feet, the design of which is
appropriated in the executive capital budgets for the fiscal years 2008 and
thereafter. The term excludes wastewater treatment, solid waste, and other
facilities for which LEED™ certification is not available or facilities for
which the director of design and construction has determined that compliance
with LEED™ Silver would be infeasible or inappropriate.
(1990 Code, Ch. 2, Art. 39, § 2-39.3) (Added by Ord. 16-29)
ARTICLE 40: RESERVED
ARTICLE 41: ENFORCEMENT OF WATER SAFETY RULES BY LIFEGUARDS
Sections
   
2-41.1   Authority
   
2-41.2   Administration
   
2-41.3   Rules
§ 2-41.1 Authority.
   Lifeguards employed by the city are authorized to accept appointment by the
State department of transportation as enforcement officers, in accordance with
HRS § 266-24, and to carry out water safety enforcement duties and
responsibilities assigned by the State department of transportation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 24, § 41-24.1) (Added by Ord. 88-3)
§ 2-41.2 Administration.
   Appointment of and service by city lifeguards as enforcement officers under
this article is governed by applicable rules of the State department of
transportation, the department of ocean safety, and all other applicable laws,
including Chapter 1, Article 8.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 24, § 41-24.2) (Added by Ord. 88-3) (Am. Ord. 25-36)
§ 2-41.3 Rules.
   Subject to HRS Chapter 91, the chief of ocean safety shall adopt rules
having the force and effect of law for the implementation, administration, and
enforcement of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 24, § 41-24.3) (Added by Ord. 88-3) (Am. Ord. 25-36)
ARTICLE 42: COMMUNITY WORKFORCE AGREEMENTS
Sections
   
2-42.1   Definitions
   
2-42.2   Contract rewards
   
2-42.3   Required terms for citywide community workforce agreement
§ 2-42.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Agreement to be Bound. The agreement attached to the Community Workforce
Agreement that may be executed by a Contractor as a condition of working on a
Covered Project, under which a Contractor agrees to be bound by the CWA.
Community Workforce Agreement or CWA. The multi-craft collective bargaining
agreement between the city, the Hawaii Building and Construction Trades Council
and its affiliated labor unions, and the Hawaii Construction Alliance and its
affiliated labor unions, that governs the terms and conditions of employment on
Covered Projects.
Contractor. Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, or other business
entity (including but not limited to a general contractor, project manager,
construction manager, or primary employer, or combination thereof), including
joint ventures, and any successors and assigns of the foregoing, that has
entered into a contract to perform, assign, award, or subcontract any part of
the construction work on a Covered Project, and all contractors and
subcontractors of any tier.
Covered Work. All work covered by Master Agreements of the Unions.
Covered Project. Any large-scale public works project, including any police,
fire, emergency services, erosion, rock-fall mitigation, road, stormwater or
sewer infrastructure, and pump station projects, in which there is a contract
in excess of $2,000,000 for:
(1)   The building, erection, installation, or assembly of a new structure,
building, or facility, or of new infrastructure;
(2)   The major repair or rehabilitation of an existing structure, building, or
facility, or existing infrastructure, that increases the value or useful life,
or both, of the structure, building, facility, or infrastructure, or a
replacement that is of significantly improved quality and higher value compared
to the replaced item, and in either case, that is funded by an appropriation in
the executive capital budget; or
(3)   Any other public works project where the city has determined that delay
in completing the project may lead to interruption or delay of services or use
of facilities that are important to the essential operations or infrastructure
of the city;
   provided that the term does not include the routine operation or maintenance
of a structure, building, or facility, or of infrastructure, whether old or
new.
Local Area. The City and County of Honolulu.
Maintenance. The upkeep of a structure, building, or facility, or of
infrastructure, to preserve the original functional and operational state and
useful life of the structure, building, facility, or infrastructure, and
includes any work that has been traditionally and historically performed by
public workers in or upon structures, buildings, facilities, and
infrastructure.
Master Agreement. The master collective bargaining agreement of each Union
signatory to the Community Workforce Agreement.
Operation. Activities related to the normal performance of the functions for
which a structure, building, facility, or infrastructure is intended to be
used.
Union. Includes the Hawaii Building and Construction Trades Council (“HBCTC”)
and the Hawaii Construction Alliance (“HCA”), and their affiliated labor
organizations, acting on their own behalf and on behalf of their own respective
affiliates and member organizations, whose names are subscribed to the
Community Workforce Agreement. The parties to the Community Workforce Agreement
may mutually agree, in writing, to amend or modify the list of affiliated labor
organizations in the event there is a change in affiliation. Nothing in this
article is intended to imply that the city has the authority to approve which
local unions may affiliate with the HBCTC or HCA.
(Added by Ord. 19-24; Am. Ords. 20-14, 24-18)
§ 2-42.2 Contract awards.
   The award of a contract on a Covered Project may be conditioned upon the
execution of an Agreement to be Bound by the CWA, and all Contractors on all
Covered Projects so conditioned must execute an Agreement to be Bound by the
CWA as a precondition of performing, assigning, awarding, or subcontracting
work on a Covered Project.
(Added by Ord. 20-14)
§ 2-42.3 Required terms for citywide community workforce agreement.
   In the event a Community Workforce Agreement is required, the CWA must
include the following terms:
(1)   The CWA must be binding on all Contractors at all tiers, and all
Contractors shall condition the engagement of each subcontractor on the
subcontractor’s execution of an Agreement to be Bound;
(2)   The City may select any qualified bidder for its award of a contract for
a Covered Project without regard to whether it is otherwise a signatory to a
Master Agreement. The bidder need only be willing, ready and able to execute
and comply with the terms of the CWA in order to be awarded a contract on a
Covered Project;
(3)   The CWA must prohibit discrimination on any basis prohibited by federal,
State, or local law;
(4)   Alleged violations of the CWA must be resolved by a mandatory, final, and
binding arbitration procedure;
(5)   The Unions shall refrain from strikes, picketing, and other labor actions
on or arising from a Covered Project and the Contractors shall refrain from
lockouts or similar actions on or arising from a Covered Project;
(6)   All apprentices must be indentured in a State-approved apprenticeship
program;
(7)   Incorporation of the “Helmets to Hardhats” program, which creates
pathways for careers in construction to returning veterans; and
(8)   The CWA must be in effect for a five-year term, and unless otherwise
ordered by the city, will roll over for successive five-year terms thereafter.
The CWA must apply to each Covered Project until completion of the project.
(Added by Ord. 20-14)
ARTICLE 43: “KEEP HAWAII HAWAII - PROMISE TO OUR KEIKI PLEDGE”
Section
   
2-43.1   “Keep Hawaii Hawaii - Promise to Our Keiki Pledge”
§ 2-43.1 “Keep Hawaii Hawaii - Promise to Our Keiki Pledge.”
(a)   For the purposes of this article, the term “agency” means the mayor’s
office of economic development, or such other city department or agency as may
be designated by the mayor.
(b)   There is established within the agency a “Keep Hawaii Hawaii - Promise to
Our Keiki Pledge” aimed at promoting visitor awareness and on-island behaviors
that are as environmentally responsible and culturally sensitive as possible.
(c)   The agency will create and promote a “Keep Hawaii Hawaii - Promise to Our
Keiki Pledge” that joins in the spirit of the other established county pledges.
(d)   The agency will publish the pledge in multiple languages and formats to
improve accessibility, especially to visitors from abroad.
(e)   The agency may partner with other public and private persons and
entities, including those in the airline, cruise ship, visitor, and hospitality
industries, and those receiving funding from the Hawaii Tourism Authority, to
promote the pledge.
(f)   The pledge may be promoted on the city’s websites and may be promoted on
such other media and social media as the agency deems appropriate.
(g)   The agency may institute community service dates such as those that have
been used in other counties where select businesses and nonprofit organizations
host volunteer activities at various locations throughout the county in order
to heighten community awareness of the pledge.
(Added by Ord. 20-2)
ARTICLE 44: BULLYING OF YOUTH PROHIBITED
Section
   
2-44.1   Declaration of legislative intent—Purpose
   
2-44.2   Definitions
   
2-44.3   Prohibitions
   
2-44.4   City partners
   
2-44.5   Agency and department policies
   
2-44.6   Annual report
   
2-44.7   No new private right action
   
2-44.8   Severability
§ 2-44.1 Declaration of legislative intent—Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to prevent bullying and:
(1)   Create a protective environment for youths by prohibiting bullying in all
city programs and on all city property, and by prohibiting retaliation against
persons who witness, report, or participate in any investigation into a
suspected incident of bullying; and
(2)   Provide for intervention in suspected incidents of bullying by requiring
city agencies and departments that interact with youths to implement policies
and procedures for reporting and identifying incidents of bullying, protecting
the targeted youth, and imposing sanctions on the perpetrators.
(Added by Ord. 23-1)
§ 2-44.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Adverse Action. Any action that would dissuade a reasonable person from
reporting or participating in an investigation into a suspected incident of
bullying.
Bullying. Any unwanted severe, persistent, or pervasive conduct against a youth
by another person that:
(1)   May be based on the targeted youth’s physical appearance or attire, or
their perceived or actual sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender
expression, race, national origin, ethnicity, age, religion, physical or mental
disability, pregnancy status, socioeconomic status, or their association with
others with such characteristics;
(2)   Inflicts harm or can reasonably be expected to inflict harm on the
targeted youth, including by:
(A)   Placing the targeted youth in reasonable fear of physical injury or
causing physical injury to their person, or damage to or loss of their
property;
(B)   Causing the targeted youth psychological injury, social injury, or
educational injury; or
(C)   Substantially disrupting or materially interfering with the targeted
youth’s ability to participate in or benefit from the city’s programs, public
services, or public resources; or
(3)   Substantially disrupts or materially interferes with the orderly
operation of the city’s programs, property, public services, or public
resources.
   Bullying includes cyberbullying; physical bullying; relational bullying;
verbal bullying; other severe, persistent, or pervasive harmful conduct against
a youth that serves no legitimate purpose, such as stalking the youth or
repeatedly calling, texting, or emailing the youth despite the youth’s requests
to stop; and encouraging, supporting, or joining in with others on the severe,
persistent, or pervasive harmful conduct against a youth.
City Partner. Any person who:
(1)   Enters into a written agreement with the city to provide goods or
services to or on behalf of the city, or to collaborate or cooperate with the
city on the provision of public services, that are directed in whole or in part
toward youths; or
(2)   Obtains a permit from the city to hold an activity on a public street,
sidewalk, or other city property, including but not limited to a parade, street
fair, or protest.
   City partner excludes any person who enters into a written agreement with
the city primarily for the purpose of providing grant funding or charitable
contributions to the city.
City Program. Any program, service, activity, event, or function that is
provided, sponsored, or funded, in whole or in part, by the city.
City Property. Any grounds, buildings, or facilities that are owned, leased, or
otherwise controlled by the city, excluding property owned by the city but
under the control of the Hawaii department of education.
Cyberbullying. Bullying through the use of technology or any form of electronic
communication, including a transfer of words, signs, signals, images, sounds,
or other data through a computer, tablet, cell phone, or other electronic
device that has the capability of sending and receiving data. Cyberbullying
includes, but is not limited to:
(1)   Sending, posting, or otherwise spreading false rumors, derogatory or
defamatory material, or highly private or embarrassing information about the
targeted youth, such as nude images of the targeted youth;
(2)   Threatening to hurt the targeted youth or telling the targeted youth to
injure or kill themselves or other youth;
(3)   Pretending to be someone else online or “catfishing” in order to deceive
the targeted youth into providing embarrassing or personal images or
information about the targeted youth, then sharing that information with
others; and
(4)   Publicly identifying or publishing private information about a targeted
youth.
   Cyberbullying may occur through electronic mail, apps, social media, text
messaging, direct or instant messaging, or in chatrooms, online forums, online
gaming communities, message boards, and other electronic forums.
Gender Expression. The manner in which a person represents or expresses their
gender to others, often through behavior, clothing, hairstyles, activities,
voice, or mannerisms.
Gender Identity. A person’s internal, deeply-felt sense of being male, female,
or other, whether or not that gender identity is different from the person’s
physiology or assigned sex at birth.
Physical Bullying. Hitting, slapping, shoving, kicking, tripping, spitting on,
or otherwise touching a targeted youth in an offensive manner, threatening any
of the foregoing behaviors, or impeding the legitimate passage of the targeted
youth.
Relational Bullying. Isolating or excluding a targeted youth, causing a
targeted youth to feel rejected socially, creating or spreading hurtful or mean
rumors or lies about the targeted youth, or manipulating the targeted youth’s
relationships with their peers.
Retaliation. An adverse action taken against a person who witnessed, or who has
made or intends to make a good faith report of, or otherwise participate in an
investigation into, a suspected incident of bullying that occurred in a city
program or on city property.
Targeted Youth. A youth who is the target of bullying.
Verbal Bullying. Teasing, insulting, or humiliating a targeted youth, taunting
or attempting to provoke a violent response from the targeted youth, making
unwanted sexual comments to the targeted youth, or speaking to the targeted
youth using threatening, offensive, or coarse language.
Youth. An individual 18 years of age or younger or any student enrolled in a
public or private high school, even if over 18 years of age.
(Added by Ord. 23-1)
§ 2-44.3 Prohibitions.
(a)   The following acts are prohibited:
(1)   Bullying of a targeted youth by any person while actively participating
in a city program or on city property; and
(2)   Retaliation by any person.
(b)   This section may not be construed to apply to any constitutionally-
protected activity or speech.
(Added by Ord. 23-1)
§ 2-44.4 City partners.
   Each city partner is expected to comply with this article in the performance
of their agreement with the city; in the provision of any goods or services
for, on behalf of, or in collaboration with the city; or in exercising a permit
that has been granted to them by the city.
(Added by Ord. 23-1)
§ 2-44.5 Agency and department policies.
(a)   Each executive city agency or department that provides one or more city
programs in which youths may participate, or that manages or controls city
property where youths are regularly present or congregate, shall establish a
clear policy for identifying, reporting, responding to, and preventing bullying
and retaliation, as set forth in this article. Among other things, the policy
must include the following components:
(1)   Annual training on identifying and preventing bullying, and on the
department’s or agency’s policies and procedures related to bullying, for all
staff whose duties involve interacting with youths;
(2)   Procedures for reporting, including anonymous reporting, and promptly
investigating suspected incidents of bullying or retaliation, and for promptly
protecting targeted youths from further incidents of bullying and for
protecting persons from retaliation;
(3)   Sanctions and remedies for bullying or retaliation, including but not
limited to reprimands; bans or suspensions from city programs or city property;
permit revocation; and removal from city property; provided that the sanctions
and remedies must:
(A)   Be designed to stop the bullying or retaliation, protect targeted youths
or targets of retaliation, and prevent further occurrences of bullying or
retaliation; and
(B)   Account for the unique circumstances of each case, including but not
limited to the nature, severity, and pervasiveness of the offense, and the
disciplinary history, age, and developmental status of the persons involved;
(4)   An appeals process for parties dissatisfied with the outcome of a
bullying or retaliation investigation;
(5)   Procedures for notifying the parents or guardians of youths suspected of
bullying another youth or of retaliation, as appropriate, and procedures for
notifying the parents or guardians of a targeted youth with the youth’s consent
and as appropriate;
(6)   Procedures for referrals to social or counseling services for targeted
youths, youths who bully, and youths who witness bullying;
(7)   Procedures to report suspected incidents of bullying or retaliation to
law enforcement or the State department of education, where appropriate; and
(8)   Procedures for ensuring that the city partners of the agency or
department comply with the requirements of this article.
(b)   The policies and procedures established by agencies and departments
pursuant to this section must be:
(1)   Maintained on a publicly-accessible platform or agency or department
website; and
(2)   Updated at least every two years to improve the agency’s or department’s
response to incidents of bullying or retaliation.
(Added by Ord. 23-1)
§ 2-44.6 Annual report.
   Each agency or department subject to §
2-44.5 shall submit a report to the mayor’s office no later than January 1 of
each year, regarding the aggregate incidents of bullying that have been
reported; the agency’s or department’s response thereto, and an assessment of
the effectiveness of its bullying policy; and any changes that will be
implemented to improve its response to incidents of bullying or retaliation.
The reports may not disclose the names or other identifying information by
which either suspected violators of this article or targeted youth may be
identified.
(Added by Ord. 23-1)
§ 2-44.7 No new private right action.
   This article does not create a new private right of action or provide a
statutory basis for a claim for damages against the city, its employees, or
city partners.
(Added by Ord. 23-1)
§ 2-44.8 Severability.
   If any provision of this article, or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance, is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other
provisions or applications of the article that can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this
article are severable.
(Added by Ord. 23-1)
ARTICLE 45: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
2-45.1   Periodic review of reporting requirements
§ 2-45.1 Periodic review of reporting requirements.
(a)   Executive agencies shall review Table 3 (Reporting Requirements) to
determine whether the reporting requirements applicable to the agency, any
board or commission administratively attached to the agency, or any city
contractor contracting with the agency should be retained, amended, or repealed
in accordance with the following schedule:
(1)   2024, and every four years thereafter:
(A)   Mayor;
(B)   Managing director, including the office of economic revitalization, the
office of climate change, sustainability and resiliency, the office of culture
and the arts, and the office of housing;
(C)   Royal Hawaiian band; and
(D)   Neighborhood commission;
(2)   2025, and every four years thereafter:
(A)   Corporation counsel;
(B)   Facility maintenance;
(C)   Enterprise services;
(D)   Environmental services;
(E)   Design and construction;
(F)   Medical examiner; and
(G)   Information technology;
(3)   2026, and every four years thereafter:
(A)   Budget and fiscal services;
(B)   Emergency services;
(C)   Transportation services;
(D)   Planning and permitting;
(E)   Land management;
(F)   Police department; and
(G)   Community services; and
(4)   2027, and every four years thereafter:
(A)   Human resources;
(B)   Fire department;
(C)   Parks and recreation;
(D)   Emergency management;
(E)   Customer services; and
(F)   Prosecuting attorney.
(5)   The managing director’s review shall include those reporting requirements
that are applicable generally to all executive branch departments.
(b)   No later than January 31 of each calendar year, each agency scheduled to
review reporting requirements during that year shall submit to the council a
report containing the following information:
(1)   A statement of whether the reporting requirement should be retained
without change, amended, or repealed; and
(2)   If applicable, suggested modifications and revisions to the reporting
requirement, including changes to the due date or frequency of the report, and
suggested amendatory language.
(Added by Ord. 23-9)
ARTICLE 46: COMMERCIAL PROPERTY ASSESSED FINANCING PROGRAM
Section
   
2-46.1   Definitions
   
2-46.2   C-PACE program
   
2-46.3   Participation in program—Limited obligations of the city—Program
administrator
   
2-46.4   C-PACE administration agreement with program administrator
Editor’s note:
   Act 41, Session Laws of Hawaii 2024, which was enacted and signed into law
on May 30, 2024, repealed the counties' authority to administer commercial
property assessed financing programs and delegates all existing administrative
responsibilities of the counties under the commercial property assessed
financing program to the Hawaii Green Infrastructure Authority. Thus, the
City's C-PACE program established under Ordinance 23-24, codified as Chapter 2,
Article 46 is subject to repeal.
§ 2-46.1 Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
C-PACE Administration Agreement. The program administration agreement to be
negotiated and entered into by the city and the program administrator with
respect to the administration of the C-PACE program.
C-PACE Assessment. A non-ad valorem special tax assessment levied on qualifying
property that secures the repayment of the C-PACE financing, as provided in
this article and the C-PACE administration agreement.
C-PACE Financing. Financing approved by the program administrator and the C-
PACE lender in favor of an owner of a qualifying property to finance a
qualifying improvement in accordance with this article and the C-PACE
administration agreement.
C-PACE Financing Agreement. The financing contract under the C-PACE program, by
and among one or more C-PACE lenders, one or more owners of qualifying
property, and the program administrator for the acquisition or installation of
qualifying improvements.
C-PACE Lender or Lender. A financial institution as defined in HRS § 412:1-109
or a private or public lender approved by the program administrator to
originate C-PACE financing agreements, and which may include any successor or
assignee of the lender as provided in the C-PACE financing agreement.
C-PACE Program. A program to finance qualifying improvements on qualifying
properties that are repaid through C-PACE assessments levied and collected in
accordance with this article and the C-PACE administration agreement, to the
extent permitted by law.
Director. The director of budget and fiscal services or the director’s
designee.
Program Administrator. The Hawaii Green Infrastructure Authority, an
instrumentality of the State.
Program Guidelines. A comprehensive document setting forth the procedures,
eligibility rules, restrictions, program fees and costs, responsibilities, and
other requirements applicable to the governance and administration of the C-
PACE program.
Qualifying Improvement. A septic system or aerobic treatment unit system or
connection to sewer systems, clean energy technology, efficiency technology,
resiliency measure, or other improvement approved by the program administrator
that is or will be affixed to or connected to a building, facility, or real
property.
Qualifying Property or Property. Has the same meaning as “commercial property”
as defined in HRS § 196-61.
(Added by Ord. 23-34)
§ 2-46.2 C-PACE program.
   The C-PACE program is authorized for the purpose of financing certain
qualifying improvements provided under this article. The C-PACE program must be
available throughout the city; provided that the owner of the qualifying
property, the qualifying property, the proposed qualifying improvements, and
the C-PACE lender all qualify for the C-PACE program, as determined by the
program administrator.
(Added by Ord. 23-34)
§ 2-46.3 Participation in program—Limited obligations of the city—Program
administrator.
   (a)   Subject to the provisions of this article and the C-PACE
administration agreement, the city may participate in the C-PACE program
established within the city and administered by the program administrator.
   (b)   The obligations of the city with respect to the C-PACE program are
limited to those described in this article and the C-PACE administration
agreement. The obligations of the city may include the following: the levy of
C-PACE assessments, collection and payment to the program administrator of
amounts collected, and the enforcement of liens for delinquent C-PACE
assessments. The city may assign or delegate any of its obligations as provided
by this article and the C-PACE administration agreement, to the extent
permitted by law. The city shall have no other obligations with respect to the
C-PACE program or any C-PACE financing agreement, and no responsibility for
amounts owed under any C-PACE financing agreement.
   (c)   The responsibilities of the program administrator include those
described in this article and the C-PACE administration agreement. The
responsibilities of the program administrator may include the following:
creating the program guidelines and modifying the program guidelines as
necessary, processing C-PACE applications to determine eligibility for C-PACE
financing and related qualifying improvements, promoting the C-PACE program,
certifying that prospective C-PACE lenders are eligible to participate in the
C-PACE program, and billing, collection, and enforcement of C-PACE assessments.
(Added by Ord. 23-34)
§ 2-46.4 C-PACE administration agreement with program administrator.
   (a)   The city’s participation in the C-PACE program must be in accordance
with the C-PACE administration agreement negotiated and entered into by the
city, acting through the director, and the program administrator prior to the
execution of the first C-PACE contract within the city.
   (b)   The director shall present the proposed C-PACE administration
agreement negotiated with the program administrator to the council for its
review and approval by resolution prior to the agreement taking effect.
(Added by Ord. 23-34)
ARTICLE 47: SPONSORSHIP OF CITY ASSETS
Section
   
2-47.1   Declaration of legislative intent—Purpose
   
2-47.2   Definitions
   
2-47.3   Exclusions
   
2-47.4   Granting of naming rights for a facility as sponsorship recognition
   
2-47.5   Authorization required
   
2-47.6   Funds received from sponsorship agreements
   
2-47.7   Sponsorship rules
   
2-47.8   Sponsorship requirements
   
2-47.9   Applicability of certain provisions under Chapter 22 to sponsorships
authorized pursuant to this article
§ 2-47.1 Declaration of legislative intent—Purpose.
   In an effort to utilize and maximize the community’s resources, it is in the
best interest of the city to create and enhance public-private relationships,
including with individuals, corporations, and other organizations, through the
creation of commercial sponsorships. Private sponsorship arrangements are
deemed to not constitute a public forum for communication and debate, and the
rights established by the private sponsorships are established and remain in
effect upon the terms and conditions established by the city. Private
sponsorships will create alternate revenue streams that will increase the
city’s ability to deliver services and to maintain city assets, including its
facilities, parks, programs, equipment, and tangible property, and provide
enhanced levels of service and maintenance beyond the core levels funded from
the city’s general fund for the benefit of users and the community at large.
   In appreciation of such support, it is the policy of the city to equitably
acknowledge the contribution of private sponsors; however, such recognition
should adhere to the aesthetics and purposes of the city’s assets. In addition,
such recognition should not detract from the public’s best interests, nor
should it be perceived as creating a proprietary interest in a city asset.
Finally, sponsorship recognition must be made in conformance with all
applicable laws and rules.
   The purpose of this article is to establish the criteria and parameters for
the granting of sponsorship opportunities in relation to city assets. This
article provides executive agencies the authority to consider and approve
sponsorship opportunities for an appropriate person or entity that has provided
a financial contribution to support a city asset.
(Added by Ord. 25-21)
§ 2-47.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Cash Sponsorship. A type of sponsorship where a sponsor provides cash.
   City Asset. A city facility, park, program, equipment, or real or personal
property.
   Equipment. Any vehicle, construction equipment, machine, device, gear,
apparatus, tool, or multiple pieces of equipment with a value in excess of
$25,000 used in the operation of the city but does not include city-operated
buses or special transit service vehicles.
   Facility. Any building, including any stadium; arena; station; or any
portion of any building, including any stadium, arena, or station, owned,
managed, or operated by the city.
   Financial Contribution. Cash, goods, or services paid or provided to the
city at such time or times as set forth in the sponsorship agreement.
   In-Kind Sponsorship. A type of sponsorship where a sponsor provides a good
or service.
   Person. Has the same meaning as defined in §
1-4.1.
   Program. Any program activity, festival, contest, event, fair, athletic
race, gala, or similar event provided by a city department in connection with
the operations of a department.
   Sponsor. A person that enters into a sponsorship agreement with the city.
   Sponsorship. A mutually beneficial arrangement between the city and a
person, wherein the person provides a financial contribution to the city in
return for sponsorship recognition on or in connection with one or more city
assets, for a specified period of time.
   Sponsorship Agreement. A written agreement executed between the city and a
sponsor governing a sponsorship, on terms and conditions acceptable to the city
and the sponsor. A sponsorship agreement may include provisions that allow for
sponsorship recognition. Sponsorship agreements will not be deemed to be
private grant agreements, as that term is defined in § 1-8.1, and are not
subject to the requirements related to private grant agreements in
Chapter 1, Article 8.
   Sponsorship Recognition. The issuance of a tangible acknowledgement and
expression of gratitude or the granting of naming rights for facilities as part
of a sponsorship agreement.
(Added by Ord. 25-21)
§ 2-47.3 Exclusions.
   This article does not apply to:
   (1)   Gifts, grants, or unsolicited donations where no sponsorship agreement
exists or is required;
   (2)   Parades or events sponsored or co-sponsored by the city pursuant to
other ordinances or rules;
   (3)   Facilities in Kapiolani Regional Park; and
   (4)   Facilities in Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve.
(Added by Ord. 25-21)
§ 2-47.4 Granting of naming rights for a facility as sponsorship recognition.
(a)   Notwithstanding §§
22-9.3 to
22-9.5 and in accordance with §
2-47.9, the city and a sponsor may enter into a proposed sponsorship agreement
that grants naming rights for a facility subject to the requirements in §
2-47.8(b).
(b)   If the city and a sponsor desire to enter into a proposed sponsorship
agreement that grants naming rights for a facility and issues a tangible
acknowledgement and expression of gratitude, two separate agreements (one for
the granting of naming rights for a facility and the other for the issuance of
a tangible acknowledgement and expression of gratitude) must be executed and
approved in accordance with the procedures in this article.
(Added by Ord. 25-21)
§ 2-47.5 Authorization required.
(a)   City assets are intended and exclusively used for operations of the city
in providing governmental services and programs to and for the public, and
except as required by law or expressly established by an affirmative action by
the council, a person may not access or use any city asset for any purpose
other than the intended and authorized governmental purpose or service.
Placement of messages related to a sponsorship agreement upon a city asset
requires specific authorization.
(b)   The city has and retains the sole and final decision-making authority for
determining the appropriateness of a sponsorship agreement and reserves the
right to refuse to enter into any proposed sponsorship agreement.
(c)   Approvals of sponsorship agreements are subject to the following:
   (1)   A director of an executive agency may enter into a sponsorship
agreement, pursuant to the rules to be adopted under §
2-47.7, that is for:
      (A)   A term of less than five years; and
      (B)   A financial contribution of less than $50,000;
   (2)   All sponsorship agreements involving a financial contribution of
$50,000 or more must be approved by a resolution adopted by the council; and
   (3)   All sponsorship agreements for a term of five years or more must be
approved by a resolution adopted by the council.
(Added by Ord. 25-21)
§ 2-47.6 Funds received from sponsorship agreements.
   All funds received pursuant to sponsorship agreements must be deposited into
the appropriate fund as determined by the director of budget and fiscal
services; provided that the funds are expended for their designated purpose.
(Added by Ord. 25-21)
§ 2-47.7 Sponsorship rules.
   The director of budget and fiscal services or other director as designated
by the mayor shall adopt rules, in accordance with HRS Chapter 91, for the
implementation, administration, and enforcement of this article.
(Added by Ord. 25-21)
§ 2-47.8 Sponsorship requirements.
(a)   The following requirements apply to sponsorship agreements that solely
confer a tangible acknowledgement and expression of gratitude for the sponsor
for purposes of sponsorship recognition:
(1)   The city may not relinquish any aspect of the city’s right to direct,
manage, and control the city asset;
(2)   The tangible acknowledgement and expression of gratitude, publications
relating to the tangible acknowledgement and expression of gratitude, and any
publicity relating to the tangible acknowledgement and expression of gratitude
must conform to all applicable laws and rules, including but not limited to
Chapter 21, Article 7, pertaining to sign regulations, and HRS Chapter 445,
Part IV, pertaining to outdoor advertising, including billboards;
(3)   The sponsorship may not create a conflict of interest for the city as
determined by the corporation counsel;
(4)   The sponsorship agreement may not confer a personal benefit, directly or
indirectly, to any particular city officer or employee as determined by the
sponsorship agreement and applicable rules and regulations;
(5)   Sponsorships may not constitute an endorsement of the sponsor or its
services and products, or create any proprietary interest of the sponsor in the
city or the city assets as determined by the sponsorship agreement and
applicable rules and regulations;
(6)   Except as specifically provided in the sponsorship agreement, the city’s
name, seal, or logo may not be used in materials, communications, or
advertisements, including but not limited to, print, video, internet,
broadcast, or display items developed to promote or communicate the
sponsorship;
(7)   The sponsorship may not discriminate against any person on the basis of
race, color, creed, religion, sex, including gender identity and expression,
sexual orientation, age, marital status, ancestry, national origin, or
disability;
(8)   The tangible acknowledgement and expression of gratitude, branding for
the tangible acknowledgement and expression of gratitude, publicity for the
tangible acknowledgement and expression of gratitude, and advertising for the
tangible acknowledgement and expression of gratitude in conjunction with the
sponsorship agreement may not contain the following:
(A)   Obscenity;
(B)   Pornography;
(C)   Incitement to imminent lawless action;
(D)   Speech presenting a grave and imminent threat;
(E)   Fighting words;
(F)   Fraudulent material;
(G)   True threats;
(H)   Defamatory, libelous, or slanderous material;
(I)   Solicitations to commit, or speech integral to, criminal conduct;
(J)   The promotion of drugs, alcohol, tobacco, gambling, or adult
entertainment;
(K)   Political campaign speech, or speech that:
(i)   Supports or opposes or appears to support or oppose:
(aa)   A ballot measure or initiative; or
(bb)   Any legislative proposal that is currently pending before any
legislative body in the State; or
(ii)   Refers to any person in or campaigning for public office;
provided that this paragraph must not be construed to prohibit the display of
any speech content that is protected under the First Amendment of the United
States and State Constitutions as determined by the corporation counsel; or
(L)   Religious speech that advocates or opposes a religion or religious
belief;
(9)   The sponsorship agreement must specify whether the sponsorship for a
particular asset will be exclusive or non-exclusive;
(10)   For the sponsorship of programs, recognition of the sponsor must be as
determined by the sponsorship agreement and applicable rules and regulations
and may include the following, or any combination thereof, during the term of
the sponsorship agreement:
(A)   Appropriate mention in media releases and promotional materials of the
sponsor for the city program;
(B)   Appropriate sponsorship recognition or display at the city program
location;
(C)   Appropriate recognition on the program website as a sponsor for the
program; or
(D)   Other possible benefits as negotiated;
(11)   Sponsorship agreements, at the discretion of the director of an
executive agency, may provide that the sponsor must defend, indemnify, and hold
harmless the city, its officers, agents, and employees against all liability,
loss, damage, cost, and expense, including attorneys’ fees, arising out of or
resulting from the acts or omissions of the sponsor, its directors, employees,
officers, agents, or contractors, in connection with the sponsorship and the
sponsorship agreement;
(12)   Sponsorship agreements must expressly provide the terms under which the
sponsorship agreement may be terminated by the parties, including for city
termination, when the sponsorship is no longer in the best interest of the
city;
(13)   Sponsorship agreements must expressly provide that the city retains its
rights and discretion to exercise full editorial control over the placement,
content, appearance, and wording of the tangible acknowledgement and expression
of gratitude, affiliations, and messages; and
(14)   Sponsorship agreements must expressly prohibit materials that advocate,
contain price information or an indication of associated savings or value,
request a response, or contain comparative or qualitative descriptions of
products, services, or organizations.
(b)   The following requirements apply to sponsorship agreements that solely
confer naming rights for a facility to the sponsor for purposes of sponsorship
recognition:
(1)   The city may not relinquish any aspect of the city’s right to direct,
manage, and control the facility except with respect to the name of the
facility for the duration of the sponsorship agreement;
(2)   Any physical form of the name of the facility on the facility itself,
publications for the facility, and publicity for the facility must conform to
all applicable laws and rules, including but not limited to
Chapter 21, Article 7, pertaining to sign regulations, and HRS Chapter 445,
Part IV, pertaining to outdoor advertising, including billboards;
(3)   The sponsorship may not create a conflict of interest for the city as
determined by the city’s corporation counsel;
(4)   Sponsorships may not constitute an endorsement of the sponsor or its
services and products or create any proprietary interest of the sponsor in the
city or the facility as determined by the sponsorship agreement and applicable
rules and regulations;
(5)   The sponsorship may not discriminate against any person on the basis of
race, color, creed, religion, sex, including gender identity and expression,
sexual orientation, age, marital status, ancestry, national origin, or
disability;
(6)   The name of the facility and any branding, publicity, and advertising for
the facility in conjunction with the naming rights conferred by the sponsorship
agreement may not contain the following:
(A)   Obscenity;
(B)   Pornography;
(C)   Incitement to imminent lawless action;
(D)   Speech presenting a grave and imminent threat;
(E)   Fighting words;
(F)   Fraudulent material;
(G)   True threats;
(H)   Defamatory, libelous, or slanderous material;
(I)   Solicitations to commit, or speech integral to, criminal conduct;
(J)   The promotion of drugs, alcohol, tobacco, gambling, or adult
entertainment;
(K)   Political campaign speech, or speech that:
(i)   Supports or opposes or appears to support or oppose:
(aa)   A ballot measure or initiative; or
(bb)   Any legislative proposal that is currently pending before any
legislative body in the State; or
(ii)   Refers to any person in or campaigning for public office;
provided that this paragraph must not be construed to prohibit the display of
any speech content that is protected under the First Amendment of the United
States and State Constitutions, as determined by the corporation counsel; or
(L)   Religious speech that advocates or opposes a religion or religious
belief;
(7)   Sponsorship agreements, at the discretion of the director of an executive
agency, may provide that the sponsor must defend, indemnify, and hold harmless
the city, its officers, agents, and employees against all liability, loss,
damage, cost, and expense, including attorneys’ fees, arising out of or
resulting from the acts or omissions of the sponsor, its directors, employees,
officers, agents, or contractors, in connection with the sponsorship and the
sponsorship agreement;
(8)   Sponsorship agreements must expressly provide the terms under which the
sponsorship agreement may be terminated by the parties, including for city
termination, when the sponsorship is no longer in the best interest of the
city;
(9)   Sponsorship agreements must expressly provide that the city retains its
rights and discretion to exercise full editorial control over the placement,
content, and appearance of the name of the facility and the facility’s
affiliations and messages; and
(10)   Sponsorship agreements must expressly prohibit materials that advocate,
contain price information or an indication of associated savings or value,
request a response, or contain comparative or qualitative descriptions of
products, services, or organizations.
(c)   The following sponsorships will not be accepted:
(1)   Sponsorships by persons that practice or promote discrimination based on
race, color, creed, religion, sex, including gender identity and expression,
sexual orientation, age, marital status, ancestry, national origin, or
disability;
(2)   Sponsorships by persons opposing the city in a pending or ongoing legal
proceeding; and
(3)   Sponsorships that involve situations where the corporation counsel
determines that there would be or are conflicts of interest.
(Added by Ord. 25-21)
§ 2-47.9 Applicability of certain provisions under Chapter 22 to sponsorships
authorized pursuant to this article.
   Sponsorship agreements approved under this article that involve the granting
of naming rights for a facility are not subject to the requirements of §§
22-9.3 and
22-9.5.
(Added by Ord. 25-21)
CHAPTER 3: ADDITIONAL BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES
Articles
   
1.   Temporary Vacancies on Boards, Commissions, and Committees
   
2.   Commission on Culture and the Arts
   
3.   Reserved
   
4.   Reserved
   
5.   Animal Control
   
6.   Ethics Commission
   
7.   Salary Commission
   
8.   Reserved
   
9.   Appointment on Boards, Commissions, and Committees
   
10.   Oahu Historic Preservation Commission
   
11.   Rate Commission
   
12.   Sunshine Law Training
   
13.   Registration of Lobbyists
   
14.   Ethics Board of Appeals
   
15.   Periodic Review of Boards and Commissions
ARTICLE 1: TEMPORARY VACANCIES ON BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES
Sections
   
3-1.1   Purpose
   
3-1.2   Filling of temporary vacancies
   
3-1.3   When confirmation necessary by council
   
3-1.4   Termination of appointment
   
3-1.5   Temporary appointments to attain quorum for contested case hearings
   
3-1.6   Inapplicability
§ 3-1.1 Purpose.
   This article is enacted pursuant to the Charter § 13-103.1(e), which
provides that temporary vacancies on boards, commissions, and committees shall
be filled by the mayor as provided by ordinance.
(Sec. 3-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 1, § 3-1.1)
§ 3-1.2 Filling of temporary vacancies.
(a)   The mayor is authorized to fill, subject to council approval, temporary
vacancies on boards, commissions, or committees for which the mayor has been
initially authorized by charter, law, or ordinance to make an original
appointment on boards, commissions, or committees when a regularly appointed
member of a board, commission, or committee is ill, incapacitated, out of the
State, or when such office becomes temporarily vacant for any other reason.
(b)   Whenever the mayor fills a temporary vacancy on boards, commissions, or
committees for less than 120 calendar days, no confirmation by council is
necessary.
(c)   The mayor’s written request for approval to fill a temporary vacancy of
less than 120 calendar days shall include the effective date of appointment,
the effective date of termination, and the reasons for appointment.
(d)   No reappointment permitted. The mayor shall not reappoint the same
temporary appointee who has been appointed to fill a temporary vacancy on
boards, commissions, or committees for less than 120 calendar days on the same
board, commission, or committee upon the expiration of the initial 120 calendar
days.
(e)   This section shall not apply to temporary appointments made pursuant to §
3-1.5.
(Sec. 3-1.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 1, § 3-1.2) (Am.
Ord. 08-6)
§ 3-1.3 When confirmation necessary by council.
(a)   Filling of temporary vacancies in excess of 120 calendar days. The mayor
is authorized to fill temporary vacancies on boards, commissions, or committees
for which the mayor has been initially authorized by Charter, law, or ordinance
to make an original appointment on boards, commissions, or committees when a
regularly appointed member of a board, commission, or committee is:
(1)   Ill;
(2)   Incapacitated;
(3)   Out of the State; or
(4)   When such office becomes temporarily vacant for any other reason in
excess of 120 calendar days; provided such temporary appointee shall be subject
to confirmation by the council as provided in Charter § 3-107.9 (public
hearing).
(b)   No reappointment. The mayor shall not reappoint the same temporary
appointee who has been appointed to fill a temporary vacancy on boards,
commissions, or committees in excess of 120 calendar days on the same boards,
commissions, or committees upon the expiration of the initial temporary
appointment.
(c)   Date of termination. In any message from the mayor stating that the
temporary vacancy is to be filled in excess of 120 calendar days, the mayor
shall state the date of termination of such appointment.
(d)   No confirmation of council necessary—when. When the mayor fills a
temporary vacancy on boards, commissions, or committees pursuant to this
section, no confirmation by the council is necessary where the Charter does not
require confirmation by the council of original appointees of the mayor on such
boards, commissions, or committees.
(Sec. 3-1.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 1, § 3-1.3)
§ 3-1.4 Termination of appointment.
   All appointments, with the exception of the temporary appointments made
under §
3-1.5, shall terminate on the date noted on the mayor’s letter of appointment.
(Sec. 3-1.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 1, § 3-1.4) (Am.
Ord. 08-6)
§ 3-1.5 Temporary appointments to attain quorum for contested case hearings.
(a)   When a board lacks a quorum to adjudicate a specific contested case due
to the recusal or disqualification of one or more regularly appointed members,
the mayor may make temporary appointments to the board. For the purposes of
this section, “board” has the same meaning as any board, commission, or
committee that has the power to conduct a contested case as defined in HRS
Chapter 91.
(b)   The number of temporary appointments the mayor may make to the board
shall not exceed the minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum
to adjudicate the specific contested case.
(c)   Any temporary appointee appointed pursuant to this section shall
substitute for and have the qualifications, experience, and training as
required of the member who has been disqualified or recused from the contested
case.
(d)   The appointment of a temporary appointee under this section shall be
limited to the duration of the specific contested case and shall terminate upon
the adoption of the final decision and order in the contested case by the
board.
(e)   Temporary appointments made pursuant to this section shall not be subject
to confirmation by the council.
(f)   The mayor shall give written notice to the council when temporary
appointments are made pursuant to this section. Such notice shall identify the
contested case, the effective date of appointment, and reasons for appointment.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 1, § 3-1.5) (Added by Ord. 08-6)
§ 3-1.6 Inapplicability.
(a)   This article shall not apply to temporary appointments on boards,
commissions, or committees for which the mayor is not required by law, Charter,
ordinance, or rules to have either the council’s approval or confirmation.
(b)   This article also shall not apply to the rate commission established
under Charter § 6-1704.
(Sec. 3-1.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 1, § 3-1.6) (Am.
Ords. 97-02, 08-6)
ARTICLE 2: COMMISSION ON CULTURE AND THE ARTS
Sections
   
3-2.1   Definitions
   
3-2.2   Creation
   
3-2.3   Rules—Meetings
   
3-2.4   Objectives, powers, duties, and functions
   
3-2.5   Compensation
   
3-2.6   Administrative services
   
3-2.7   Art in city buildings
   
3-2.8   Art inspection, inventory, and maintenance
§ 3-2.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Arts. Includes music, dance, painting, drawing, sculpture, architecture, drama,
poetry, prose, crafts, industrial design, interior design, fashion design,
photography, television, motion picture art, and all other creative activity of
imagination and beauty.
Commission. The commission on culture and the arts established pursuant to §
3-2.2.
Culture. Includes the arts, customs, traditions, and mores of all of the
various ethnic groups of Hawaii.
(Sec. 3-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 2, § 3-2.1) (Am.
Ord. 95-68)
§ 3-2.2 Creation.
(a)   There shall be a commission on culture and the arts consisting of 11
members, excluding ex officio members, who shall be appointed by the mayor with
the approval of the council. There shall be one member for each of the below-
listed categories, except for the category specified in subdivision (3) that
shall have two members:
(1)   Design: graphic, industrial, visual;
(2)   Urban design: architecture, landscape architecture, and interior design;
(3)   Drawing, painting, printmaking, and sculpture;
(4)   Crafts: ceramics, weaving, woodworking, etc.;
(5)   Music: contemporary and classical;
(6)   Theater arts: drama;
(7)   Dance;
(8)   Multi-media: cinematography, photography, television;
(9)   Literature: prose, poetry; and
(10)   At large.
(b)   Each member of the commission shall be appropriately qualified to fulfill
the roles of the commission within each member’s respective category. Of the
members originally appointed:
(1)   Two shall serve for a term of one year;
(2)   Three shall serve for a term of two years;
(3)   Two shall serve for a term of three years;
(4)   Two shall serve for a term of four years; and
(5)   Two shall serve for a term of five years.
Thereafter, each member shall be appointed for a term expiring five years from
the date of expiration of the term of the member’s predecessor, or in the case
of a vacancy, for the remainder of the unexpired term. Each member shall serve
until the member’s successor has been appointed and qualified. The commission
shall annually select a chair and a vice-chair from its members, whose duties
shall be as set forth in this article and in the rules adopted by the
commission.
(Sec. 3-3.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 2, § 3-2.2)
§ 3-2.3 Rules—Meetings.
   The commission shall adopt the necessary procedural rules which will enable
it to conduct its business and to carry out its powers, duties, and functions.
Meetings of the commission shall be held at the call of the chair but at least
once each calendar quarter. Six members shall constitute a quorum and the
affirmative vote of a majority of members present at such meeting, a quorum
being present, shall be necessary to take any action.
(Sec. 3-3.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 2, § 3-2.3)
§ 3-2.4 Objectives, powers, duties, and functions.
   The objectives of the commission shall be to assist the city in attaining
national preeminence in culture and the arts, to assist the city in the
preservation of the artistic and cultural heritages of all its people, to
promote a community environment which provides equal and abundant opportunity
for exposure to culture and the arts in all its forms, and to encourage and
provide equal opportunity for the development of cultural and artistic talents
of the people of Honolulu. In the furtherance of these objectives, the
commission shall have the following powers, duties, and functions.
(a)   The commission shall decide on and purchase the specific works of art to
be acquired under §
3-2.7. In doing so, the commission shall be responsible for the evaluation,
selection, commissioning of artists, reviewing of design, reviewing of
implementation and works in progress, purchasing of works of art not
specifically commissioned by the commission, and placement of art in city
buildings and facilities. In performing this function, the commission shall
consult with the affected agencies and departments.
In addition, the commission shall determine the acceptability of works of art
offered as gifts to the city. If monetary gifts are made to the city for the
acquisition of works of art pursuant to Charter § 13-113, the commission shall
be responsible for the acquisition of such works of art.
(b)   In the area of community aesthetics, the commission shall review the
architectural, landscape, and interior design of all planned and existing city
buildings, grounds, and facilities, and make recommendations to the executive
and legislative branches of the city with respect to the establishment of
aesthetic standards.
(c)   In the development of the city’s program for the preservation,
advancement, and dissemination of culture and the arts to its citizens, the
commission shall make recommendations and submit proposals to the various
branches, departments, agencies, and offices of the city with respect to the
formulation of new arts and culture programs and the expansion of existing
programs.
(Sec. 3-3.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 2, § 3-2.4) (Am.
Ord. 95-68)
§ 3-2.5 Compensation.
   The members of the commission shall receive no compensation, but shall be
entitled to reimbursement of expenses incurred by them in the performance of
their duties.
(Sec. 3-3.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 2, § 3-2.5)
§ 3-2.6 Administrative services.
(a)   The commission shall be attached to the office of the mayor for
administrative purposes and the mayor shall cause employees of the mayor’s
office to furnish such services as may be needed by the commission. The mayor
shall designate an employee of the city to serve as coordinator and provide
liaison between the commission and the various city agencies, departments, and
offices.
(b)   In addition to the coordinator, the following officials, or their
designated representatives, shall attend and participate ex officio in all
meetings of the commission:
(1)   The director of community services;
(2)   The director of parks and recreation;
(3)   The director of planning and permitting;
(4)   The director of enterprise services; and
(5)   The Royal Hawaiian bandmaster.
   The ex officio representatives shall have no vote in proposed actions of the
commission.
(Sec. 3-3.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 2, § 3-2.6) (Am.
Ords. 96-58, 97-17)
§ 3-2.7 Art in city buildings.
(a)   An amount equal to not less than 1 percent of the construction phase
appropriation for the original construction of any city building shall be
appropriated to the commission for the acquisition of works of art. The moneys
shall be used solely for the following purposes:
(1)   Costs related to the acquisition of works of art, including the
commissioning of artists and the purchase of art work;
(2)   Site modifications, display, and interpretive work necessary for the
exhibition of works of art;
(3)   Upkeep services, including maintenance, repair, and restoration of works
of art; and
(4)   Storing and transporting works of art.
(b)   Notwithstanding the foregoing limitation on the amount of the
appropriation for acquisition of works of art, an amount in excess of 1 percent
may be set aside upon recommendation of the commission and with the concurrence
of the council. If the amount shall not be required in total or in part for any
project, the unrequired amounts may be accumulated and expended for the
purposes specified in subsection (a).
(c)   (1)   The commission shall consider, unless impracticable, placing the
works of art acquired pursuant to this section in or at the following city
buildings listed in their order of priority:*
(A)   In or at the city building to which the 1 percent funding for art
requirement applies; provided that the building is frequented by the public;
(B)   If the city building described in paragraph (A) is not a building
frequented by the public, in or at a city building frequented by the public
that is within close proximity to the building described in paragraph (A);
(C)   If neither the city building described in paragraph (A), nor any city
building in close proximity thereto, is frequented by the public, in or at any
other city buildings frequented by the public; and
(D)   If it is impracticable to place works of art acquired in accordance with
subsection (a) in any of the city buildings described in paragraphs (A), (B),
or (C), in or at other city buildings.
(2)   For the purposes of this subsection:
(A)   A work of art shall be placed “in or at a city building” if it is placed
in or outside of, as an integral part of, or attached to the building;
(B)   The placement of works of art at a particular building shall be deemed
“impracticable” if the art would be exposed to damage, abnormal wear, or threat
of vandalism or theft, if there is no suitable surface at the building for the
display of art, if there already is an adequate number of works of art
displayed at the building, or if for other reasons, the commission finds that
the placement of the art at the particular building would be inadvisable; and
(C)   “City buildings that are frequented by the public” include:
(i)   Publicly owned buildings, any part of which is routinely visited by the
public; and
(ii)   Those portions of privately owned buildings that are leased to city
agencies and routinely visited by the public.
(d)   Moneys that the commission was unable to expend or encumber in the
immediately preceding calendar year for the acquisition of works of art before
their lapsing pursuant to Charter § 9-106.3 may be reappropriated in the
capital budget effective July 1 of the fiscal year next following the lapsing
of such funds.
(Sec. 3-3.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 2, §
3-2.7) (Am. Ords. 95-68, 96-52, 14-24)
Editor’s note:
   * Ord. 96-52 shall not apply to nonmoveable works of art that are already on
display in or at a city building, or have been commissioned by the city on or
after the effective date of the ordinance (July 31, 1996), and are intended to
be exhibited or displayed at a particular location. See § 4 of Ord. 96-52.
§ 3-2.8 Art inspection, inventory, and maintenance.
(a)   To preserve and account for the city’s movable and permanent works of
art, the mayor’s designated coordinator and liaison to the commission, referred
to as the arts coordinator, shall:
(1)   Annually inspect and conduct an inventory of such works of art;
(2)   Develop an annual maintenance, preservation, and restoration program and
budget for the city’s movable and permanent works of art; and
(3)   File with the city clerk on a biennial basis a report on the art
inspections and inventories conducted since the immediately prior report.
The arts coordinator may engage consultants as is necessary to assist in the
performance of these duties.
(b)   On or before March 1 of every year, the arts coordinator shall submit to
the mayor and the council:
(1)   An annual maintenance, preservation, and restoration program for the
city’s art inventory, including a description of the program, its needs and
accomplishments; and
(2)   The amount of funds budgeted for the upcoming fiscal year for the annual
inspection and inventory, and for the maintenance, preservation, and
restoration program.
(c)   To accomplish the duties provided in this section, the arts coordinator
may request funds through the annual operating budget.
(d)   For the purposes of this section, “movable and permanent works of art”
means a work of art, as defined in §
3-2.1, purchased or otherwise acquired by the city or made an integral part of
a city building.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 2, § 3-2.8) (Added by Ord. 90-82; Am. Ord. 14-24)
ARTICLE 3: RESERVED
ARTICLE 4: RESERVED
ARTICLE 5: ANIMAL CONTROL
Sections
   
3-5.1   Definitions
   
3-5.2   Authorization to issue summons
   
3-5.3   Expenses incurred—Appropriations
   
3-5.4   Annual report required
   
3-5.5   Authorization to impound cats
§ 3-5.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definition apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Animal Control Contractor. The duly incorporated humane society or organization
formed for the prevention of cruelty to animals which is contracted by the city
to perform animal control services.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 5, § 3-5.1) (Added by Ord. 02-54)
§ 3-5.2 Authorization to issue summons.
   Officers of the animal control contractor, having the duty of seizing and
impounding stray dogs pursuant to
Chapter 12, Article 4, who are deputized as special officers by the chief of
police for the purpose of enforcing this article, are authorized and empowered
to issue summonses according to the procedures set forth in
Chapter 12, Article 4, to violators of
Chapter 12, Articles 4 and
6.
(Sec. 3-6.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 5, § 3-5.2) (Am.
Ords. 95-21, 02-54)
§ 3-5.3 Expenses incurred—Appropriations.
   All expenses of seizing, impounding, and disposing of stray dogs shall be
borne by the animal control contractor; provided that the council may from time
to time make such appropriations to assist the contractor, as in its discretion
and judgment shall be deemed necessary.
(Sec. 3-6.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 5, § 3-5.3) (Am.
Ord. 02-54)
§ 3-5.4 Annual report required.
   The animal control contractor shall render a full report of its activities
and operations relating to the impounding of stray dogs and cats to the
department of customer services and council within one month after the end of
each fiscal year. The report must include, among other things, the number of
impounded dogs and cats that were adopted, the number of impounded dogs and
cats that were placed in foster care, and the number of impounded dogs and cats
that were euthanized.
(Sec. 3-6.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 5, § 3-5.4) (Am.
Ords. 02-54, 20-1)
§ 3-5.5 Authorization to impound cats.
   The animal control contractor is authorized and empowered to impound any cat
released to the animal control contractor and to dispose of the same pursuant
to
Chapter 12, Article 6.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 5, § 3-5.5) (Added by Ord. 95-21; Am. Ord. 02-54)
ARTICLE 6: ETHICS COMMISSION*
Sections
   
3-6.1   Membership, term, and appointment
   
3-6.2   Rules—Meetings
   
3-6.3   Powers, duties, and functions
   
3-6.4   Requirements applicable to the rendering of advisory opinions
   
3-6.5   Requests for advice
   
3-6.6   Complaints
   
3-6.7   Prohibiting political management or activity or candidacy to an
elective political office
   
3-6.8   Training of officers and employees on standards of conduct
   
3-6.9   Definitions
   
3-6.10   Confidentiality of commission records
Editor’s note:
   * See also
Chap. 3, Art. 8.
§ 3-6.1 Membership, term, and appointment.
   The number, term, and appointment of members of the ethics commission shall
be subject to Charter § 11-107.
(Sec. 3-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 6, § 3-6.1) (Am.
Ord. 01-51)
§ 3-6.2 Rules—Meetings.
   Meetings of the commission shall be held at the call of the chair and the
affirmative vote of a majority of the entire membership shall be necessary to
take any action.
(Sec. 3-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 6, § 3-6.2)
§ 3-6.3 Powers, duties, and functions.
(a)   The commission shall render advisory opinions at any time at the request
of an officer or employee of the city involving the possible conflict of
interest or unethical conduct on the part of or the solicitation, acceptance,
or receipt of a gift by such officer or employee.
(b)   The commission shall also render advisory opinions regarding complaints.
(c)   The commission shall have jurisdiction for purposes of investigation and
taking appropriate action over a complaint or request for an advisory opinion
alleging a violation of the standards of conduct established in Charter Article
XI or of
Chapter 1, Article 19 by a current or former officer or employee that has been
submitted to the ethics commission within six years after the alleged violation
occurred. Any investigation commenced by the commission on its own initiative
into an alleged violation of Charter Article XI or of
Chapter 1, Article 19 by a current or former officer or employee shall be
commenced within six years after the alleged violation occurred.
(d)   The commission shall recommend to the appointing authority or the
council, in the case of a councilmember, appropriate disciplinary action
against officers and employees found to have violated the standards of conduct
established in Charter Article XI or
Chapter 1, Article 19.
(e)   The commission may impose civil fines as set forth in § 3-8.5.
(f)   The commission may submit to the mayor and council recommendations and
reports that it deems advisable and that pertain to the standards of conduct
contained in Charter Article XI, to the administration referred to in Article
XI or to any other matter relating to the fostering and maintenance of ethical
conduct.
(g)   The commission may initiate or make investigations and hold hearings.
(h)   The commission may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and take
testimony relating to matters before the commission and issue subpoenas for the
production for examination of any books, papers, or other documents relative to
any matter under investigation or in question before the commission. The
commission may exercise its subpoena power upon the signature of a subpoena by
the chair of the commission, by the vice chair, or by a vote of the majority of
the members of the commission.
(i)   The commission may, from time to time adopt, amend, and repeal such
rules, not inconsistent with the provisions herein and of
Chapter 1, Article 19, as in the judgment of the commission seem appropriate
for the carrying out of the provisions herein and of
Chapter 1, Article 19, and for the efficient administration thereof, including
every matter or thing required to be done or which may be done with the
approval or consent or by order or under the direction or supervision of or as
prescribed by the commission. The rules, when approved, adopted, and filed as
provided in HRS Chapter 91, shall have the force and effect of law.
(j)   The commission may disclose the name of any officer or employee who has
been determined by the commission, following an investigation and a hearing or
opportunity for a hearing, to have violated
Chapter 1, Article 19 or of Charter Article XI in accordance with HRS Chapter
92F.
(k)   The commission may submit information or records to another agency, a
State agency, an agency of another state, or to an agency of the federal
government, or a foreign law enforcement agency or authority as permitted under
HRS Chapter 92F.
(Sec. 3-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 6, § 3-6.3) (Am.
Ords. 92-17, 93-113, 94-49, 02-15, 07-43, 12-1)
§ 3-6.4 Requirements applicable to the rendering of advisory opinions.
(a)   In addition to this section, requests for advisory opinions that are
complaints shall also meet the requirements specified in §
3-6.6.
(b)   Except in the case of a written request by the officer or employee
concerned, the commission may, for good cause, refuse to entertain a request
for an advisory opinion. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the
commission may refuse to entertain a request where:
(1)   The request is speculative or purely hypothetical and does not involve an
actual situation; or
(2)   The request is frivolous.
(c)   The commission shall acknowledge the receipt of the request in writing to
the person submitting the request. If the request involves an employee or
officer and the request is made by a person other than such employee or
officer, a copy of the request shall be sent to the employee or officer so
involved with the name of the person making the request deleted so that such
person’s name will not be disclosed.
(d)   Within 30 days after a request for an opinion, or within 30 days after a
hearing on any request shall have been concluded, whichever is later, the
commission shall render its opinion in writing. All formal advisory opinions
rendered by the commission shall be in writing and shall be published in such
form and with such deletions as may be necessary to prevent the disclosure of
the identity of the persons involved, unless disclosure is in accordance with
applicable law.
(e)   After an opinion has been rendered, the commission shall notify the
appointing authority of the officer or employee involved, or the council in the
case of elected officials, of its decision and shall recommend appropriate
disciplinary action against officers and employees found to have violated
standards of conduct established by the Charter or by ordinance. The appointing
authority or the council shall take whatever action is deemed necessary, and
report the action taken and the reasons for the action to the commission within
15 days after receiving the decision and recommendation of the commission.
(Sec. 3-2.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 6, §
3-6.5) (Am. Ords. 96-58, 12-1)
§ 3-6.5 Requests for advice.
(a)   Any officer or employee may make a request for advice from the commission
relating to any situation involving such officer or employee which may give
rise to the possibility of a conflict of interest under Charter Article XI. Any
officer or employee also may make a request for advice from the commission on a
situation which may give rise to the possibility of unethical conduct under
this article. Any officer or employee also may request advice from the
commission relating to the solicitation, acceptance, or receipt of a gift.
(b)   The request for advice may be written or oral and shall set forth the
pertinent facts, if known.
(Sec. 3-2.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 6, §
3-6.6) (Am. Ords. 93-113, 94-49, 02-15, 12-1)
§ 3-6.6 Complaints.
(a)   Any person may submit a written complaint to the commission, which shall
be signed by the complainant. The complaint shall relate to an actual situation
and shall set forth the pertinent facts if known, including the names of those
involved and the nature of the alleged acts or omissions. The commission shall
not consider any complaint that is not submitted in writing and signed by the
complainant, except that it may consider one initiated by the commission.
(b)   The employee or officer whose conduct is the subject of the complaint
shall have an opportunity to respond in writing within 15 days after receipt of
a copy of the complaint. The response may include a request for a hearing
before the commission.
(c)   Where no hearing is requested by the officer or employee whose conduct is
the subject of the complaint, the commission shall render its opinion on the
basis of the information available; provided that the commission may request
for additional information when deemed necessary.
(d)   The commission shall, upon receipt of a request for a hearing within the
period above referred to by the officer or employee involved, set a time and
place for the hearing for the purpose of determining the facts. The complainant
and the employee or officer whose conduct is the subject of the complaint shall
have the opportunity to appear at the hearing, alone or by counsel, and to
present any and all evidence, including testimony and exhibits, which are
relevant to the issue involved. No testimony shall be excluded, except for
irrelevancy.
(e)   All meetings or hearings before the commission involving an alleged
violation of the standard of conduct by any employee or officer shall be held
in executive session, provided that a public hearing or meeting may be held
where the officer or employee alleged to have violated the standards of
conduct, consents thereto.
(Sec. 3-2.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 6, §
3-6.7) (Am. Ord. 12-1)
§ 3-6.7 Prohibiting political management or activity or candidacy to an
elective political office.
(a)   Except for exercising the right to vote or making a campaign contribution
to a candidate for elective public office, no member of the ethics commission
shall support, advocate or aid in, or manage, the election or defeat of any
candidate for public office.
No member of the ethics commission shall be a candidate for any elective public
office nor engage in campaigning for such office.
(b)   Any member of the ethics commission who violates this section shall be
removed by the mayor, since such person serves at the pleasure of the mayor.
(Sec. 3-2.9, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 6, §
3-6.9) (Am. Ord. 01-51)
§ 3-6.8 Training of officers and employees on standards of conduct.
(a)   Each officer or employee shall complete a training program on the
standards of conduct established under Charter Article XI and
Chapter 1, Article 19.
For purposes of this section, “officer” includes a person who is an officer due
to membership on a board or commission, including the board of water supply and
the board of the Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation. The term does not
include a member of an advisory committee established under the executive
branch pursuant to Charter § 4-103 or under the council pursuant to council
rule or resolution.
The program shall provide training and information that gives the officer or
employee knowledge of at least the following:
(1)   The various standards of conduct applicable to officers and employees,
and former officers or employees who appear before the officer’s or employee’s
agency;
(2)   Actions that officers or employees must or may take to avoid a violation
of a standard of conduct;
(3)   Actions that the officer or employee may take when ordered or requested
by a superior officer or employee to violate a standard of conduct;
(4)   Remedies that may be sought by the officer or employee when knowing or
suspecting that another person has violated a standard of conduct; and
(5)   Requirements concerning the filing of financial disclosures and conflict
of interest disclosures by officers and employees.
(b)   The ethics commission shall formulate the training program and provide it
to officers or employees according to the following timetable:
(1)   Officers or employees employed on June 22, 2012*, who have not previously
received ethics training shall receive the training within two years of that
date; and
(2)   Officers or employees elected, appointed, or hired after June 22, 2012*
shall receive ethics training within six months of the election, appointment,
or hiring date of the officer or employee. The ethics commission, however, may
exempt an officer or employee from the training program of this subdivision if
the officer or employee previously completed the program while occupying a
former position.
(c)   The ethics commission shall determine the time interval at which officers
and employees shall receive retraining on the standards of conduct.
(d)   The ethics commission may request the department of human resources to
assist in formulating, providing, and scheduling the training program. The
department may provide the assistance if able and willing to do so.
(e)   An officer or employee who fails to timely obtain ethics training may be
subject to discipline or penalty pursuant to §
1-19.5.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 6, § 3-6.10) (Added by Ord. 01-35; Am. Ords. 02-15, 12-
25, 12-31)
Editor’s note:
   * “June 22, 2012” is submitted for “the effective date of this ordinance.”
§ 3-6.9 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Advisory Opinion. A written or oral response by the commission or its staff to
a request for advice or a complaint.
Complaint. A written statement of facts or allegations giving rise to a
reasonable inference that a violation of the standards of conduct by an officer
or an employee has occurred, which statement is either:
(1)   Submitted to the ethics commission by a person other than the person
whose conduct is in question; or
(2)   Initiated by the commission, based on written or nonwritten information.
Employee. Has the same meaning as defined in Charter § 13-101.3 and shall
include employees of the board of water supply and the Honolulu Authority for
Rapid Transportation.
Formal Advisory Opinion. A written opinion in response to a request for advice
or a complaint approved by an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire
membership of the commission.
Officer. Has the same meaning as defined in Charter § 13-101.4 and shall
include officers of the board of water supply and the Honolulu Authority for
Rapid Transportation.
Request for Advice. A written or oral request to the commission for an opinion
whether the conduct of an officer or employee would be a violation of the
standards of conduct.
Standards of Conduct. The provisions regarding ethical conduct stated in
Charter Article XI and
Chapter 1, Article 19.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 6, § 3-6.11) (Added by Ord. 12-1; Am. Ord. 12-31)
§ 3-6.10 Confidentiality of commission records.
(a)   All advisory opinions, files, records, reports, writings, documents,
exhibits, electronic records, and other information prepared or received by the
commission or its staff or consultants relating to a request for advice or a
complaint shall be held in confidence and no information as to the contents
thereof shall be disclosed, unless such disclosure is:
(1)   The result of the information being presented to or received by the
commission at a hearing or meeting that is open to the public;
(2)   Ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction;
(3)   Reasonably required by the commission, its staff, or consultant to
investigate or otherwise discharge its duties regarding the request for advice
or the complaint, including but not limited to providing information to the
appointing authority or council, in the case of a councilmember, in support of
the commission’s advisory opinion and recommended disciplinary action, unless
otherwise protected by law. If disciplinary action is taken against an
employee, the employee’s exclusive representative shall also be entitled to the
information, unless otherwise protected by law; or
(4)   Allowed or required by applicable law.
(b)   Any commission member, commission staff member, or consultant who
discloses information related to a request for advice or complaint, unless
disclosure is allowed pursuant to subsection (a), shall be subject to Charter §
11-106 and §
1-19.5.
(c)   The disclosures of conflicts of interests as provided in the Charter
shall be made matters of public record at any time that such a conflict becomes
apparent.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 6, § 3-6.12) (Added by Ord. 12-1)
ARTICLE 7: SALARY COMMISSION
Sections
   
3-7.1   Convening of commission
   
3-7.2   Powers, duties, and functions
§ 3-7.1 Convening of commission.
   The commissioners shall be appointed and the commission shall convene its
first meeting pursuant to Charter § 3-122. The commission may reconvene at any
time, but not less than at intervals of two years.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 7, § 3-7.1) (Added by Ord. 88-42)
§ 3-7.2 Powers, duties, and functions.
   The commission shall perform all duties required by Charter § 3-122. The
commission shall establish rules of procedure and adopt rules pursuant to law.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 7, § 3-7.2) (Added by Ord. 88-42)
ARTICLE 8: RESERVED
ARTICLE 9: APPOINTMENT ON BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES
Sections
   
3-9.1   Purpose
   
3-9.2   Method of appointment on boards, commissions, and committees
   
3-9.3   Termination of appointment
   
3-9.4   Inapplicability
   
3-9.5   Composition on boards and commissions
   
3-9.6   Removal of members of boards, commissions, and committees
§ 3-9.1 Purpose.
   This article is enacted pursuant to the Charter § 13-103(b), which provides
that members of boards and commissions shall be appointed by the mayor and
confirmed by the council.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 9, § 3-9.1) (Added by Ord. 90-54)
§ 3-9.2 Method of appointment on boards, commissions, and committees.
(a)   The mayor is authorized to appoint, subject to council approval, members
to boards, commissions, or committees for which the mayor has been initially
authorized by charter, law, or ordinance to make such original appointment.
(b)   The mayor shall submit proposed appointments to boards, commissions, or
committees in accordance with the following requirements:
(1)   All boards, commissions, or committees shall, no later than 90 days
before the expiration of a member’s appointed term, advise the mayor and
council of the pending expiration of the appointed member’s term; and
(2)   Within 30 days of the issuance of such notice of pending expiration, the
mayor shall submit to the council a written request for approval of appointment
to the respective board, commission, or committee.
(c)   The mayor’s written request for approval for appointment to a board,
commission, or committee shall include the effective date of such appointment,
effective date of expiration, and reasons for appointment.
(d)   Newly created boards, commissions, or committees. In the case of newly
created boards, commissions, or committees, the mayor shall submit a written
request for approval of appointment to the council no later than 90 days from
the effective date of the action establishing such board, commission, or
committee.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 9, § 3-9.2) (Added by Ord. 90-54; Am. Ord. 97-57)
§ 3-9.3 Termination of appointment.*
   All appointments covered by this article shall terminate on the expiration
date noted on the mayor’s letter of appointment, and in no instance shall such
appointees immediately continue to serve in the same capacity beyond the
expiration date whether as a temporary appointee or as a reappointed member for
a full consecutive term.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 9, § 3-9.3) (Added by Ord. 90-54; Am. Ord. 97-57)
Editor’s note:
   *The Hawaii Supreme Court in Fasi v. City Council of the City and County of
Honolulu, 72 Haw. 513, 823 P.2d 742 (1992), held that the City Council could
not enact this provision which forbids members of certain boards and
commissions from holding over until their successors have been appointed and
qualified.
§ 3-9.4 Inapplicability.
(a)   This article shall not apply to appointments to boards, commissions, or
committees for which the mayor is not required by law, charter, ordinance, or
rule to have either the council’s approval or confirmation.
(b)   This article also shall not apply to appointments for temporary vacancies
as provided for in
Chapter 3, Article 1.
(c)   This article also shall not apply to appointments to the rate commission
established under Charter § 6-1704.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 9, § 3-9.4) (Added by Ord. 90-54; Am. Ords. 97-02, 97-
57)
§ 3-9.5 Composition on boards and commissions.
   The mayor shall nominate and appoint, subject to council confirmation,
representatives of both genders to serve as members of each city board and
commission. This requirement is in addition to any other qualifications that
may be required for a city board or commission governed by charter or by law.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 9, § 3-9.5) (Added by Ord. 92-58)
§ 3-9.6 Removal of members of boards, commissions, and committees.
(a)   When a member of a board, commission, or committee to which this article
applies has:
(1)   Failed to attend four or more consecutive regularly scheduled meetings of
the board, commission, or committee spanning a period in excess of one month;
(2)   Failed to attend more than one-third of the regularly scheduled meetings
of the board, commission, or committee in any calendar year; or
(3)   Failed to provide to the chair the certification of participation
required by §
3-12.5 within 30 days following the applicable deadline established in §
3-12.3(a) or (b), and, after having been given written notice by the chair that
the member has 30 days from the date of that notice to provide the
certification, the member fails to provide the certification to the chair by
the chair’s 30-day deadline,
the chair of the board, commission, or committee shall provide written notice
of the fact to the mayor.
(b)   In addition to the notice referred to in subsection (a), the chair shall
provide the mayor with the following:
(1)   A record of the attendance of the board, commission, or committee member,
from the time of the council’s approval of the appointment;
(2)   Minutes of the meetings not attended by the board, commission, or
committee member and any written communications and records of any telephonic
communications from the board, commission, or committee member to the chair or
staff of the board, commission, or committee stating why the meetings would not
be or were not attended; and
(3)   A statement that the board, commission, or committee member has or has
not provided certification of participation in the sunshine law training
program before the deadline established by the chair under subsection (a)(3).
(c)   Within 10 days of the mayor’s receipt of the notice referred to in
subsection (a), the following shall be mailed by the mayor or the mayor’s
designee to the board, commission, or committee member at the member’s last
known address on file with the board, commission, or committee:
(1)   A copy of the notice referred to in subsection (a);
(2)   A copy of this section;
(3)   If the notice to the mayor included a statement that the member of the
board, commission, or committee had not provided the certification required
under §
3-12.5, a copy of
Chapter 3, Article 12; and
(4)   A statement of the deadline for response, as specified in subsection (d).
It shall be the responsibility of the member to keep the board, commission, or
committee apprised of the member’s current address.
(d)   The board, commission, or committee member shall have 30 days following
the notification of the mayor in which to provide the mayor with a written
statement that the member:
(1)   Wishes to continue to serve on the board, commission, or committee; or
(2)   Wishes to resign from the board, commission, or committee.
(e)   If the member states that the member wishes to continue to serve, the
member shall provide the mayor with one or more of the following:
(1)   True information or documentation refuting the record of nonattendance or
nonparticipation;
(2)   A true statement as to why the member failed to attend the meetings
referred to in subsection (a), to timely participate in the sunshine law
training program, or to timely certify participation in the sunshine law
training program; or
(3)   A true statement of other mitigating circumstances.
(f)   If the board, commission, or committee member provides a statement
pursuant to subsection (d) that the member wishes to continue to serve, the
mayor may, following the 30-day period referred to in subsection (d), but
before 90 days following the notification given to the mayor pursuant to
subsection (a):
(1)   Issue a notice of removal of the board, commission, or committee member
from the board, commission, or committee;
(2)   Issue a notice of conditional retention of the board, commission, or
committee member setting forth conditions under which the mayor will not remove
the member; or
(3)   Issue a notice of unconditional retention of the board, commission, or
committee member.
Before the issuance of the notice, the mayor may consult with, among others,
the director of the department or agency to which the board, commission, or
committee is attached and the administrator of the sunshine law training
program. The mayor’s notice of removal, conditional retention, or retention
shall be mailed to the board, commission, or committee member at the member’s
last known address on file with the board, commission, or committee. A copy of
the mayor’s notice of removal, conditional retention, or retention shall be
given to the chair of the board, commission, or committee. If the mayor fails
to issue a notice under this subsection before the end of the 90-day period,
the board, commission, or committee member shall be retained.
(g)   If the mayor finds that a board, commission, or committee member has not
abided by the conditions of a notice of conditional retention, the mayor may,
after notifying the member of this finding and giving the member 14 days in
which to respond, issue a notice of removal of the board, commission, or
committee member and notify the board, commission, or committee member and
chair in the manner provided in subsection (f).
(h)   The chair of a board, commission, or committee who provides the mayor a
notice pursuant to subsection (a) may also provide a copy of the notice to the
director of any department or the head of any agency to which the board,
commission, or committee is attached and the department’s director or the
agency’s head may make to the mayor any recommendation deemed appropriate.
(i)   In the event the board, commission, or committee member referred to in
subsection (a) is the chair of a board, commission, or committee, the vice-
chair of the board, commission, or committee shall act in the place of, and
receive the notices provided for, the chair under this section.
(j)   Two days following the issuance of a notice of removal, the board,
commission, or committee member named in the notice shall be deemed removed as
a member of the board, commission, or committee and the mayor shall notify the
council that the board, commission, or committee member has been removed from
office. Notwithstanding §
3-9.3, the removed board, commission, or committee member may continue to serve
on the board, commission, or committee until a replacement has been appointed
by the mayor and confirmed by the council.
(k)   Notwithstanding this section, a member of a board, commission, or
committee who is convicted of providing a false certification of participation
in the sunshine law training program in violation of §
3-12.5(b), or is convicted of providing false information or documentation or a
false statement to the mayor in violation of subsection (e) shall, upon
conviction, be immediately removed as a member of the board, commission, or
committee.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 9, § 3-9.6) (Added by Ord. 97-03; Am. Ord. 03-30)
ARTICLE 10: OAHU HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
Sections
   
3-10.1   Purpose and intent
   
3-10.2   Definitions
   
3-10.3   Commission established
   
3-10.4   Officers and expenses
   
3-10.5   Staff
   
3-10.6   Meetings
   
3-10.7   Powers and duties
   
3-10.8   Reserved
   
3-10.9   Reserved
   
3-10.10   Guidelines
   
3-10.11   Accounting and funding
§ 3-10.1 Purpose and intent.
(a)   The council finds that preservation of historic properties enhances the
educational, cultural, economic, and general welfare of the county. It is
deemed essential that the qualities relating to the history and culture of the
city be preserved through comprehensive historic preservation planning and
administration. Implementation of HRS Chapter 6E on historic preservation, the
Honolulu general plan, and the adopted Oahu development plans provide the means
to perpetuate the value of various cultures of which our community is
comprised.
(b)   It is the intent of this article to:
(1)   Protect and preserve historic properties and artifacts in the county and
encourage, where appropriate, their special emphasis and attention to the
cultural resources of the native Hawaiian people;
(2)   Encourage the restoration, rehabilitation, and continued functional use
of historic properties;
(3)   Encourage the identification, preservation, maintenance, development,
promotion, and enhancement of those historic properties which represent or
reflect distinctive elements of cultural, social, economic, political, and
architectural history, and to encourage the designation of historic properties,
thereby ensuring that our cultural and historic heritage will be imparted to
present and future generations of residents and visitors; and
(4)   Formulate county-wide, comprehensive, historic preservation polices,
programs, and plans.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 10, § 3-10.1) (Added by Ord. 93-55)
§ 3-10.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Commission. The Oahu Historic Preservation Commission.
Department. The department of planning and permitting.
Historic Preservation. The research, identification, protection, restoration,
rehabilitation, maintenance, and interpretation of districts, sites, buildings,
structures, areas, or objects significant to the history, architecture,
archaeology, or culture of the county, State, or nation.
Historic Properties. Any prehistoric or historic district, site, building,
structure, area, or object significant in the history, architecture,
archaeology, or culture of the county, State, and nation, including but not
limited to those listed on the Hawaii or national registers of historic places
and those that are of historic or cultural significance to the indigenous
people of this island.
Mayor. The mayor of the City and County of Honolulu.
Professional. A person with qualifications enumerated in 36 CFR Part 61,
Appendix A.
State. The State of Hawaii.
State Historic Preservation Division. The State of Hawaii Department of Land
and Natural Resources, State historic preservation division.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 10, § 3-10.2) (Added by Ord. 93-55; Am. Ord. 22-33 )
§ 3-10.3 Commission established.
(a)   There is established a commission to be known as the “Oahu Historic
Preservation Commission” which shall be attached to the department of planning
and permitting.
(b)   The commission shall consist of nine members appointed by the mayor and
confirmed by the council. The commission members shall be appointed from among
professionals and persons with special interest in the following disciplines:
(1)   Architecture;
(2)   History;
(3)   Archaeology;
(4)   Planning;
(5)   Architectural history;
(6)   Hawaiian culture;
(7)   Anthropology;
(8)   Ethnography; and
(9)   Sociology;
provided that the commission shall include an expert in Native Hawaiian culture
issues and concerns and in archaeology. All members of the commission shall
have professional, educational, or demonstrated work experience, or a
combination thereof, in the disciplines listed in subdivisions (1) through (9).
Members also shall reflect an ethnic diversity to carry out the purposes of the
commission to identify, protect, preserve, and restore historic properties and
artifacts of all ethnic cultures. The mayor shall solicit lists of two or more
persons, recommended by the community and professional organizations, and
appropriate ethnic organizations dedicated to preserving unique cultural
heritages, including but not limited to the Center for Hawaiian Studies at the
University of Hawaii-Manoa, the Hawaii Civic clubs, the Honolulu Chapter of the
American Institute of Architects, and others, for consideration in making
commission appointments. All commission members shall have a demonstrated
interest, competence, and knowledge in historic preservation.
(c)   The disciplines of archaeology, architecture, architectural history, and
history shall have professional representation on the commission, to the extent
such professionals are available to the community. In the event such expertise
is not available within the county, experts from the statewide community may be
appointed to the commission. When one of the aforementioned disciplines is not
professionally represented, the commission shall seek, through a consultant
contract or other appropriate means, the expertise in the unrepresented
discipline when considering national register nominations and other activities
that will affect properties that are normally evaluated by a professional in
such a discipline.
(d)   Whenever possible, the commission shall include members from different
areas of the county who possess a knowledge and interest in local area history.
(e)   Applicability of charter. Except as otherwise provided in this article,
Charter § 13-103, as amended, shall apply to the commission.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 10, § 3-10.3) (Added by Ord. 93-55; Am. Ord. 22-33 )
§ 3-10.4 Officers and expenses.
(a)   The commission shall annually elect a chair and vice chair from its
membership.
(b)   The commission members shall serve without compensation, but shall be
reimbursed for expenses necessary for the performance of their duties.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 10, § 3-10.4) (Added by Ord. 93-55)
§ 3-10.5 Staff.
   The department shall employ a full-time commission staff to include, but not
be limited to a staff archaeologist.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 10, § 3-10.5) (Added by Ord. 93-55; Am. Ord. 22-33 )
§ 3-10.6 Meetings.
(a)   The commission shall hold meetings at least quarterly. All meetings shall
be held in accordance with HRS Chapter 92, and any person, agency, or a
representative thereof shall be entitled to appear and be heard on any matter
before the commission.
(b)   Special meetings may be called by the chair or by any three members of
the commission.
(c)   The commission shall publish minutes of its meetings in a newspaper of
general circulation in the county.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 10, § 3-10.6) (Added by Ord. 93-55)
§ 3-10.7 Powers and duties.
   The commission:
(1)   Shall advise and assist federal, State, and county government agencies in
carrying out their historic preservation responsibilities;
(2)   Shall provide public information, public advocacy, education, training,
and technical assistance relating to the national and State historic
preservation programs;
(3)   May initiate nominations of historic properties for inclusion in the
Hawaii or national registers of historic places;
(4)   Shall accept, review, and recommend to the State historic preservation
division, nominations of historic properties in the city to the national
register of historic places. This activity must be consistent and coordinated
with the identification, evaluation, and preservation priorities of the
statewide comprehensive historic preservation planning process, and consistent
with the requirements of § 101(c)(2) of the National Historic Preservation Act;
(5)   Shall maintain and make public an Oahu historic property system for the
survey, identification, and inventory of historic properties and archaeological
sites within the city. This system must be subject to provisions for
withholding from the public information on the location, character, or
ownership of historic properties where disclosure may cause a significant
invasion of privacy, adversely impact the historic properties, or impede the
use of a traditional religious site by practitioners. This system must be
integrated into the department’s planning, application, review, and compliance
system, and coordinated with and be complementary to that of the State historic
preservation division, but shall not be limited to that agency’s system;
(6)   Shall administer the certified local government program of federal
assistance for historic preservation within the city;
(7)   Shall develop and implement a comprehensive citywide historic
preservation identification and planning process that is consistent and
coordinated with the statewide comprehensive historic preservation planning
process. The commission shall submit information pertaining to the city
inventory of historic properties to the State historic preservation division;
(8)   Shall make recommendations to the council for the expenditure or other
use of gifts and grants accepted by the council for projects connected with the
identification, rehabilitation, restoration, and reconstruction of historic
properties, the historic preservation planning process, and the promotion of
exhibits and other information activities in connection therewith;
(9)   Shall adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 for the implementation of
this article and the administration and enforcement of the city’s historic
preservation program;
(10)   May review and comment on:
(A)   Archaeological reports and cultural impact assessments submitted to the
department as part of development proposal applications; and
(B)   Proposed projects upon request from the department, including projects
located on historic properties identified in the O‘ahu historic property
system.
If the commission recommends measures to mitigate adverse impacts to historic
resources resulting from the project, the commission shall submit its
recommendations to the State historic preservation division for its
consideration;
(11)   May undertake any other action or activity necessary or appropriate to
implement its powers and duties, and to implement the purpose of this article.
More specifically, these may include but are not limited to the following:
(A)   Recommend new ordinances establishing special districts and
archaeological districts;
(B)   Review and recommend amendments to current policies and laws relating to
historic properties;
(C)   Continually reevaluate building code requirements and recommend
amendments that are more sympathetic to historic preservation or that provide
exemptions for historic properties;
(D)   Encourage the city, State, and federal governments, and the private
sector, to implement appropriate management strategies, curatorships, and
meaningful interpretive programs at significant historical and archaeological
structures, sites, and districts; and
(E)   Assist in programs of historic preservation including presentations,
films, exhibits, conferences, publications, and other educational means that
increase public awareness and participation in preserving the past;
(12)   With respect to city-owned or controlled land having historical
significance, carry out the policies and provisions of
Chapter 40, Article 10;
(13)   Shall prepare an annual report that reviews and evaluates the state of
historic preservations in the city, which includes but is not limited to the
commission’s achievements, concerns, and recommendations; and
(14)   May provide design review assistance and comment to appropriated
agencies on projects proposed to be located within locally-designated historic
and other special districts.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 10, § 3-10.7) (Added by Ord. 93-55; Am. Ord. 22-33 )
§ 3-10.8 Reserved.
§ 3-10.9 Reserved.
§ 3-10.10 Guidelines.
   The following documents must be placed on file in the department and used as
a guide in matters pertaining to the review functions of the commission:
(1)   “Oahu revised general plan”;
(2)   “State historic preservation plan” prepared by the state department of
land and natural resources;
(3)   “Historic preservation program guidelines” prepared by the National Park
Service;
(4)   “National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended”;
(5)   “Guidelines for the Consideration of Traditional Native Hawaiian Cultural
Values in Historic Preservation Review,” prepared by the State office of
Hawaiian affairs; and
(6)   Other reports, plans, studies, issue papers, and memos as may be adopted
by the commission.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 10, § 3-10.10) (Added by Ord. 93-55; Am. Ord. 22-33 )
§ 3-10.11 Accounting and funding.
(a)   The commission shall recommend a yearly budget that shall be administered
by the director of planning and permitting.
(b)   Subject to
Chapter 1, Article 8 and Charter § 13-113, the commission may receive public
and private funds, and subject to council appropriation, spend such funds for
the purpose of implementing this article. Funds received from outside sources
shall not replace appropriated governmental sources.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 10, § 3-10.11) (Added by Ord. 93-55)
ARTICLE 11: RATE COMMISSION
Sections
   
3-11.1   Applicability to rate commission
   
3-11.2   Definitions
   
3-11.3   Gender representation
   
3-11.4   Appointment to fill temporary vacancy
§ 3-11.1 Applicability to rate commission.
   This article applies to the rate commission established under Charter § 6-
1704.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 11, § 3-11.1) (Added by Ord. 97-02)
§ 3-11.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Appointing Authority. Any of the following:
(1)   The mayor with respect to members of the rate commission who are
appointed by the mayor, whether with or without council confirmation; and
(2)   The council with respect to members of the rate commission who are
appointed by the council.
Commission. The rate commission referred to under §
3-11.1.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 11, § 3-11.2) (Added by Ord. 97-02)
§ 3-11.3 Gender representation.
   An appointing authority shall make its appointments to the commission so
that both genders are represented by the authority’s appointed members at any
point in time.
   This section shall not be deemed violated during any period a gender is not
represented among an authority’s appointed members because of a vacancy.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 11, § 3-11.3) (Added by Ord. 97-02)
§ 3-11.4 Appointment to fill temporary vacancy.
(a)   When the commission finds that a member cannot serve temporarily because
of illness, incapacity, or absence, the commission shall notify the appointing
authority for that member. Then, the appointing authority may appoint a
temporary replacement to serve until the earliest of the following:
(1)   The date on which the replaced member resumes service on the commission;
(2)   The date of expiration of the replaced member’s term on the commission;
or
(3)   The date that is 120 days after the effectiveness of the temporary
replacement’s appointment.
If the replaced member cannot resume service after the 120th day of subdivision
(3), but has an unexpired term remaining, the appointing authority may appoint
a different temporary replacement.
(b)   For the purposes of this section only, council confirmation shall not be
required of a temporary replacement for a member who was appointed by the mayor
and confirmed by the council.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 11, § 3-11.4) (Added by Ord. 97-02)
ARTICLE 12: SUNSHINE LAW TRAINING
Sections
   
3-12.1   Definitions
   
3-12.2   Establishment of sunshine law training program
   
3-12.3   Requirement for participation in training program
   
3-12.4   Contents of program
   
3-12.5   Certification of participation
§ 3-12.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Administrator. The city officer or employee designated by the mayor to
administer this article.
Board. Any agency, board, commission, authority, or committee of the executive
branch of the city that is created by constitution, statute, charter,
ordinance, rule, or executive order, to have supervision, control,
jurisdiction, or advisory power over specific matters and that is required to
conduct meetings and to take official actions, and includes the neighborhood
boards and the city’s community visioning teams.
Date of Taking Office. Any of the following:
(1)   For a member of a board who is appointed by the mayor and confirmed by
the council, the date of the council confirmation;
(2)   For a member of a board who is appointed by the mayor or a department
head, without the necessity of council confirmation, the date of the
appointment, even if the appointing document is received by the member on a
later date;
(3)   For a member of a board who is appointed by the council, the council
chair, a council committee or a council committee chair, the date of the
appointment, even if the appointing document is received by the member on a
later date;
(4)   For a member of a neighborhood board, the date on which the member is
sworn into office; and
(5)   For a person who has attended a meeting of a community visioning team,
the date on which the person attends the person’s third meeting of the
community visioning team for a particular geographical area.
Meeting. The convening of a board for which a quorum is required to make a
decision or to deliberate toward a decision upon a matter over which the board
has supervision, control, jurisdiction, or advisory power.
Office of Information Practices. The State office of information practices or
any successor State agency designated by State law to administer the sunshine
law.
Sunshine Law. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS Chapter 92, Part I.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 12, § 3-12.1) (Added by Ord. 03-30)
§ 3-12.2 Establishment of sunshine law training program.
(a)   The city administration shall establish a sunshine law training program
for members of city boards no later than July 1, 2004.
(b)   The program shall be under the supervision and control of an
administrator designated by the mayor and shall be conducted by the office of
information practices; provided that if the office of information practices
cannot or will not conduct the program, it shall be conducted by:
(1)   The administrator or a city officer or employee designated by the
administrator;
(2)   Persons with whom the administrator contracts to conduct the program; or
(3)   A combination of the foregoing.
(c)   The administrator shall maintain records on all persons participating in
the program. The records shall be open to the public and shall include, for
each participant, the participant’s full name, the name of the applicable
board, the participant’s affiliation with the board, and the date of
participation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 12, § 3-12.2) (Added by Ord. 03-30)
§ 3-12.3 Requirement for participation in training program.
(a)   A board member whose date of taking office is before July 1, 2004 and who
continues to serve as a board member on July 1, 2004 shall participate in the
sunshine law training program as soon as practicable, but no later than
December 31, 2004.
(b)   Any board member whose date of taking office is after July 1, 2004 shall
participate in the sunshine law training program within three months from the
date of taking office.
(c)   A board member shall not be required to participate in the sunshine law
training program again if, on the date of taking office, the board member had
participated in the sunshine law training program within the two immediately
preceding calendar years.
(d)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a member of a
community visioning team who has participated in the sunshine law training
program need not participate again, unless the member is appointed or elected
to a board other than a community visioning team.
(e)   The following may participate in the sunshine law training program on a
space available basis in the following order of priority:
(1)   City officers or employees who are not members of a board, but who
prepare agendas or minutes for, or otherwise provide service to a board;
(2)   Persons who have been appointed, but not yet confirmed, as a member of a
board; and
(3)   Candidates for election to the neighborhood boards.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 12, § 3-12.3) (Added by Ord. 03-30)
§ 3-12.4 Contents of program.
(a)   If the office of information practices conducts the sunshine law training
program, the program content shall be as prescribed by that office. The office
is encouraged to include, at a minimum, the information enumerated in
subsection (b).
(b)   If the office of information practices does not conduct the program, the
program shall, at a minimum, include information on the following:
(1)   The purposes of the sunshine law;
(2)   Agenda and notice requirements;
(3)   Open meeting requirements, including the requirements on the acceptance
of oral public testimony;
(4)   Permitted and prohibited interactions among members of a board;
(5)   Permissible grounds and required procedures for holding a meeting closed
to the public;
(6)   The taking of, and public availability requirements for, minutes of board
meetings;
(7)   Penalties for sunshine law violations; and
(8)   Administration of the sunshine law.
The program may include such additional information as the administrator and
persons conducting the program deem appropriate.
(c)   Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit board members from
participating in the sunshine law training program by viewing an online
training video; provided that an online training video that is not created and
maintained by the office of information practices shall comply with subsection
(b).
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 12, § 3-12.4) (Added by Ord. 03-30; Am. Ord. 12-5)
§ 3-12.5 Certification of participation.
(a)   A member of a board, other than a member of a community visioning team,
shall provide the chair of the board with a certification of the member’s
participation in the sunshine law training program no later than:
(1)   Thirty days after the date of participation; or
(2)   Thirty days after date of taking office;
whichever is later; provided that if the member is the chair of the board, the
certification shall be provided to the board’s vice-chair. The certification of
participation may be mailed or hand-delivered, and, if mailed, shall be deemed
to have been provided on the postmark date.
(b)   No member of a board shall provide false certification of participation
in the sunshine law training program to the chair or vice-chair of the board.
(c)   A standard form certification shall be prescribed by the administrator
and shall be provided to all participants in the sunshine law training program.
(d)   A board member who participates in the sunshine law training program by
viewing an online training video shall sign a notice of self-certification, as
prescribed by the administrator.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 12, § 3-12.5) (Added by Ord. 03-30; Am. Ord. 12-5)
ARTICLE 13: REGISTRATION OF LOBBYISTS
Sections
   
3-13.1   Declaration of intent
   
3-13.2   Definitions
   
3-13.3   Registration and reporting
   
3-13.4   Certification of registration and report forms
   
3-13.5   Certification of registration
   
3-13.6   Prohibition
   
3-13.7   Additional duties of the ethics commission
   
3-13.8   Penalties
   
3-13.9   Severability
§ 3-13.1 Declaration of intent.
   The council declares that the operation of responsible democratic government
requires that the fullest opportunity be afforded to the people to petition
their government for the redress of grievances and to express freely to
individual members of the council, to committees of the council, and to
officers of the executive branch their opinions on pending legislation and
rules involved in the city’s policy making process. However, the preservation
and maintenance of the integrity of the policy making process require the
identification in certain instances of persons and groups who engage in efforts
to persuade members of the council or officers of the executive branch to take
specific action. It is the purpose of this article to require registration of
lobbyists to make available to the council, the executive branch, and the
public information relating to the activities of such persons and groups.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 13, § 3-13.1) (Added by Ord. 05-33)
§ 3-13.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Agency. Has the same meaning as defined in Charter § 13-101.
Contribution. A gift, subscription, loan, advance, or deposit of money or
anything of value and includes a contract, promise, or agreement, whether or
not legally enforceable, to make a contribution.
Lobbying. Certain activities of a person who is included in the definition of a
“lobbyist” as defined in this section and not specifically excluded under §
3-13.3(e). Lobbying shall be deemed to include the representation, by any
person, whether or not compensated, of an association, corporation, or
organization that accepts membership dues or contributions with the
understanding that a portion of the funds so received will be used to influence
the policy making process of the City and County of Honolulu.
Lobbyist. Any person who engages oneself for pay or other consideration for the
purpose of influencing, directly or indirectly, and whether by such person or
through any agent or employee or other person in any manner, the policy making
process of the City and County of Honolulu. A person who accepts membership
dues or contributions made, or a fee or salary paid, with the understanding
that the person accepting the same intends to devote a portion of the funds
contributed or the time for which the salary is paid to lobbying activities
shall be deemed to have “engaged oneself” to conduct such activities.
Officer or Employee of the City and County of Honolulu. Any officer or employee
as defined in Charter § 13-101.
Person. An individual, partnership, committee, association, corporation, and
any other organization or group of individuals.
The Policy Making Process. Any action taken by an officer or employee of the
City and County of Honolulu with respect to any bill, resolution, or other
measure in the council, or with respect to any rule, regulation, standard,
rate, or other regulatory enactment of any city agency.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 13, § 3-13.2) (Added by Ord. 05-33)
§ 3-13.3 Registration and reporting.
(a)   Each lobbyist shall, not later than five days after engaging the
lobbyist’s to conduct lobbying activities or receiving contributions,
membership dues, or a fee or salary as set forth in §
3-13.2, file a registration form with the ethics commission.
(b)   Such registration form shall be developed by the ethics commission and
shall include the registrant’s full name and address; place of business; the
full name and complete address of each person, whether or not an employee, who
will lobby on behalf of the registrant; the full name of each person by whom
the registrant is retained or employed or on whose behalf the registrant
lobbies; duration of such person’s employment; and a description of the matters
on which the registrant expects to lobby. If the registrant lobbies or purports
to lobby on behalf of members, such registration form shall include a statement
of the number of members, and a full and complete description of the methods by
which the members develop and make decisions about positions on policy. In
addition thereto, each registration form shall be accompanied by a written
authorization from each person (as defined in § 3-13.2) by whom the registrant
is employed or authorized to lobby. In a situation where the “person” is other
than a natural person, i.e., a corporation, association, partnership, or any
organization consisting of groups of individuals, written authorization shall
be executed by the president or an officer delegated such power by the
president or the organization’s board of directors.
(c)   Each lobbyist shall file with the ethics commission an annual report
concerning the lobbyist’s activities during the preceding calendar year ending
December 31 by January 10 of each year, or, if the date falls on a Saturday,
Sunday, or holiday, the next business day, as long as such lobbyist continues
to engage in the activity described in §
3-13.2. The annual report form shall be developed by the ethics commission and
shall include, in addition to an up-to-date statement of the information
required to be supplied in the registration form, such information for the
preceding calendar year concerning:
(1)   Contributions, membership fees, and other receipts relating to lobbying
activities of the lobbyist;
(2)   Amounts expended for lobbying by the lobbyist; and
(3)   Each decision of the policy making process the reporting lobbyist sought
to influence, as the ethics commission deems necessary to effectuate the
purposes of this article.
(d)   Each lobbyist shall file a supplementary registration form with the
ethics commission no later than 10 days after any change in the information
supplied in the lobbyist’s last registration form under subsection (b). Such
supplementary registration form shall include a complete description of the
information that has changed.
(e)   The registration and reporting requirements set forth herein shall not
apply to:
(1)   Any person who merely appears at a public hearing before the council, its
committees, or city agencies to express such person’s opinion on pending
legislation or rules involved in the city’s policy making process, or both;
(2)   Any federal, State, or county official or employee acting in such
person’s official capacity;
(3)   Any elected public official acting in such person’s official capacity;
(4)   Any newspaper or other regularly published periodical, radio, or
television station (including any individual who owns, publishes, or is
employed by a newspaper or periodical or radio or television station), which in
the ordinary course of business, publishes news items, editorials or other
comments, or paid advertisements, which directly or indirectly urge the taking
of legislative or executive action, if the newspaper, periodical, radio, or
television station or individual engages in no further or other activities in
connection with influencing decisions in the policy making process of the City
and County of Honolulu;
(5)   Any person representing a bona fide church solely for the purpose of
protecting the public right to practice the doctrines of the church;
(6)   Any unpaid volunteer representing a nonprofit organization, association,
or corporation; provided that the organization, association, or corporation:
(A)   Is registered in accordance with this section; and
(B)   Files a written authorization with the ethics commission specifically
designating such person to represent it;
and such persons may engage in the activities described in this subsection
without being holders of a certificate of registration.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 13, § 3-13.3) (Added by Ord. 05-33)
§ 3-13.4 Certification of registration and report forms.
   Each registration and report form required to be filed under this article
shall be certified by the registrant, or, if the registrant is a person other
than an individual, by an appropriate officer of such registrant.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 13, § 3-13.4) (Added by Ord. 05-33; Am. Ord. 22-24 )
§ 3-13.5 Certification of registration.
(a)   Within 10 working days after receipt of a registration form completed as
provided in §
3-13.3(b) and certified as provided in §
3-13.4, the ethics commission shall either issue a certificate of registration
to the registrant or notify the registrant that the form lacks relevant
information or is improperly filled out, and no certificate of registration
will be issued unless the omission is rectified or the form properly filled
out.
(b)   Within 10 working days after receipt of the annual report form prescribed
by §
3-13.3(c), the ethics commission shall renew the registrant’s certificate of
registration or shall, upon notice to the registrant, suspend the certificate
until such time as the registrant’s annual report form has been brought into
compliance with the requirements of this article.
(c)   The initial certificate and any renewed certificate shall remain in force
until 10 working days following the next succeeding annual reporting date as
set forth in §
3-13.3(c), except that a certificate may be suspended or revoked as set forth
in subsections (d) and (e).
(d)   If, either prior or after the issuance or renewal of a certificate of
registration, the ethics commission obtains information leading it to believe
that the registration or report form under consideration or on which issuance
or renewal of a certificate has been based contains a material misstatement of
fact, the ethics commission, after notice and a hearing, may suspend or revoke,
for a period of up to one year following hearing on the misstatement, any
effective certificate and may decline to issue or renew a certificate for a
period of up to one year following the hearing. In exercising its discretion
with respect to suspending or revoking or declining to issue or renew
certificates of registration, the ethics commission shall grant a hearing to
the aggrieved registrant at which it shall consider the nature of the material
misstatement of fact, whether it was made intentionally or inadvertently, and
any other circumstances surrounding the making of the material misstatement of
fact.
(e)   If, after filing of the registration form and issuance of the
certificate, the ethics commission obtains information leading it to believe
that a change in the information set forth in the registration form occurred
and was not reflected in a supplementary registration form filed as required by
§
3-13.3(d), the ethics commission may, upon notice to the registrant, suspend
the certificate of registration until a supplementary report containing the
appropriate information is on file.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 13, § 3-13.5) (Added by Ord. 05-33; Am. Ord. 22-24 )
§ 3-13.6 Prohibition.
   No person who is not the holder of a current certificate of registration
issued by the ethics commission under this article shall engage in lobbying
activities.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 13, § 3-13.6) (Added by Ord. 05-33)
§ 3-13.7 Additional duties of the ethics commission.
   In addition to other duties prescribed by law, it shall be the duty of the
ethics commission:
(1)   To prescribe registration and report forms required to be filed under
this article, and to furnish and make available such forms to city agencies
affected by, and persons required to register and report under, this article;
(2)   To accept and file any information voluntarily supplied that exceeds the
requirements of this article;
(3)   To make registration and report forms filed with it available for public
inspection and copying during regular office hours; a reasonable charge for
reproducing copies may be assessed for the reimbursement of costs thereof;
(4)   To preserve such registration and report forms for a period of five years
from the date of receipt;
(5)   To report suspected violations of law to the appropriate law enforcement
authorities;
(6)   To establish procedures for the orderly processing of lobbyist
registration; and
(7)   To adopt rules, if needed, in accordance with HRS Chapter 91, for the
implementation, administration, and enforcement of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 13, § 3-13.7) (Added by Ord. 05-33)
§ 3-13.8 Penalties.
   Except as otherwise provided in this article, the ethics commission may
suspend or revoke the certificate of registration of a lobbyist who has been
found to have violated this article. No certificate shall be suspended or
revoked, except after a notice has been issued to the violator and a hearing
held. The suspension or revocation shall not exceed one year from the date of
the hearing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 13, § 3-13.8) (Added by Ord. 05-33)
§ 3-13.9 Severability.
   If any provision of this article, or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance, is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of this article
and the application of such provisions to other persons and circumstances shall
not be affected thereby.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 13, § 3-13.9) (Added by Ord. 05-33)
ARTICLE 14: ETHICS BOARD OF APPEALS
Sections
   
3-14.1   Establishment of ethics board of appeals
   
3-14.2   Restrictions on conduct
   
3-14.3   Appeals to the board
§ 3-14.1 Establishment of ethics board of appeals.
   There shall be an ethics board of appeals that shall consist of five
members. The ethics board of appeals shall be governed by the provisions of
Charter § 13-103 and HRS Chapter 91.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 14, § 3-14.1) (Added by Ord. 07-43)
§ 3-14.2 Restrictions on conduct.
(a)   Except for exercising the right to vote or making a campaign contribution
to a candidate for elective public office, no member of the ethics board of
appeals shall support, advocate or aid in, or manage, the election or defeat of
any candidate for public office. No member of the ethics board of appeals shall
be a candidate for any elective public office nor engage in campaigning for
such office.
(b)   Any member of the ethics board of appeals who violates this section shall
be removed by the mayor, since such person serves at the pleasure of the mayor.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 14, § 3-14.2) (Added by Ord. 07-43)
§ 3-14.3 Appeals to the board.
   Any person aggrieved by a civil fine imposed by the ethics commission may
appeal the civil fine to the ethics board of appeals within 30 days of the
mailing or service of the decision by the ethics commission.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 14, § 3-14.3) (Added by Ord. 07-43)
ARTICLE 15: PERIODIC REVIEW OF BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Sections
   
3-15.1   Application
   
3-15.2   Periodic review required
   
3-15.3   Schedule of review
   
3-15.4   Reports by board or commission
   
3-15.5   Action by the council
   
3-15.6   Establishment of additional boards or commissions
§ 3-15.1 Application.
(a)   This article applies to all city boards and commissions established by
charter or by ordinance, except those specified in subsection (b).
(b)   This article does not apply to:
(1)   The board of water supply;
(2)   The board of directors of the Honolulu Authority for Rapid
Transportation;
(3)   Boards or commissions mandated or established pursuant to federal or
State law; and
(4)   Periodic commissions, including reapportionment commissions and charter
commissions.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 15, § 3-15.1) (Added by Ord. 17-44)
§ 3-15.2 Periodic review required.
   The council shall review each board or commission in accordance with the
schedule established by §
3-15.3 to determine whether the charter provisions or ordinances establishing
the board or commission should be retained, amended, or repealed.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 15, § 3-15.2) (Added by Ord. 17-44)
§ 3-15.3 Schedule of review.
   The Council shall review each board or commission in accordance with the
following schedule:
(a)   The council shall review each board or commission in accordance with the
following schedule:
(1)   2018, and every five years thereafter:
(A)   Board of parks and recreation;
(B)   Building board of appeals;
(C)   Neighborhood commission; and
(D)   Citizens advisory commission on emergency management;
(2)   2019, and every five years thereafter:
(A)   Commission on culture and the arts; and
(B)   Ethics board of appeals;
(3)   2020, and every five years thereafter:
(A)   Fire commission;
(B)   Grants in aid advisory commission;
(C)   Oahu historic preservation commission;
(D)   Youth commission; and
(E)   Economic revitalization commission;
(4)   2021, and every five years thereafter:
(A)   Planning commission;
(B)   Real property tax boards of review I, II, and III; and
(C)   Salary commission;
(5)   2022, and every five years thereafter:
(A)   Clean water and natural lands advisory commission;
(B)   Rate commission;
(C)   Zoning board of appeals; and
(D)   Climate change commission.
(b)   Boards or commissions established after August 24, 2017, unless provided
by its establishing provisions or by amendment to this article, will be
reviewed in accordance with §
3-15.6.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 15, § 3-15.3) (Added by Ord. 17-44; Am. Ords. 18-37,
24-20 )
§ 3-15.4 Reports by board or commission.
(a)   No later than January 31 of each calendar year, each board or commission
scheduled for review during that year shall submit to the council a report
containing the following information:
(1)   A statement of the purpose for which the board or commission was created;
(2)   A summary of the accomplishments of the board or commission during the
preceding five-year period;
(3)   Factors that aided or inhibited the achievement of the accomplishments,
including but not limited to the composition and purpose of the board or
commission and staff support;
(4)   A statement of the measures implemented by the board or commission to
enhance transparency in its operations;
(5)   A statement of the measures implemented by the board or commission to
ensure responsiveness to inquiries and comments from the mayor, the council,
and the public;
(6)   The annual costs of operation of the board or commission for each year of
the preceding five-year period;
(7)   A statement of whether the charter or ordinance provisions establishing
the board or commission should be retained without change, amended, or
repealed; and
(8)   If applicable, suggested modifications and revisions to membership number
and qualifications; organization; purpose; or powers, duties, and functions to
better enable the board or commission to serve its purpose, including
justification and suggested amendatory language.
(b)   The agency to which the board or commission is administratively attached,
if any, or the council, in the case of the salary commission, shall assist the
board or commission in the preparation of the report required by this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 15, § 3-15.4) (Added by Ord. 17-44)
§ 3-15.5 Action by the council.
(a)   Upon receipt by the council of a report required by §
3-15.4, the presiding officer of the council shall refer the report to an
appropriate standing committee of the council, which shall consider the report,
evaluate the board or commission, and make recommendations to the council by
committee report. If the committee recommends amendments to or repeal of the
charter provisions or ordinances establishing the board or commission, the
committee shall submit as part of its recommendations a proposed resolution or
bill to implement its recommendations. The committee shall submit its
recommendations no later than May 31 of that year.
(b)   The council shall consider the report and any recommendations of the
standing committee and, no later than August 31 of that year, shall determine
whether to retain the board or commission in its current form, propose
amendments to the charter or ordinance provisions establishing the board or
commission, or propose abolition of the board or commission. The council shall
make its determination by adoption of the committee report, and shall hold a
public hearing on the matter.
(c)   If the council’s determination pursuant to subsection (b) is to propose
amendments to or repeal of the board or commission’s establishing provisions,
the presiding officer of the council shall introduce the appropriate resolution
or bill for consideration by the council; provided that if the council’s
determination requires a charter amendment that would be presented to the
electorate at the same general election in which a charter commission will
present proposals to the electorate, the resolution shall submit the proposal
to the charter commission rather than initiate the amendment or repeal.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 15, § 3-15.5) (Added by Ord. 17-44)
§ 3-15.6 Establishment of additional boards or commissions.
   Unless otherwise provided by its establishing provisions or by amendment to
this article, any board or commission established by charter or by ordinance
after August 24, 2017* shall be subject to this article and shall be reviewed
under this section commencing in the calendar year five years after the
calendar year of its establishment, and every five years thereafter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 3, Art. 15, § 3-15.6) (Added by Ord. 17-44)
Editor’s note:
   * “August 24, 2017” is substituted for “the effective date of this article.”
CHAPTER 4: ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF COUNCIL AND LEGISLATIVE AGENCIES
Articles
   
1.   Reserved
   
2.   Oahu Metropolitan Planning Organization
   
3.   Office of Council Services
   
4.   Legislative Hearings and Procedures
   
5.   Registration of Voters at Driver’s Licensing Sites
   
6.   Services for Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing Persons Regarding Council and
Committee Meetings
   
7.   Report on Status of Anticipated or Ongoing Collective Bargaining
   
8.   Public Infrastructure Maps
   
9.   Office of the City Clerk
   
10.   Office of the City Auditor
   
11.   Council Committees
ARTICLE 1: RESERVED
ARTICLE 2: OAHU METROPOLITAN PLANNING ORGANIZATION
Sections
   
4-2.1   Definitions
   
4-2.2   Cooperation
   
4-2.3   Committee membership
   
4-2.4   General work elements
   
4-2.5   City official authorized to execute comprehensive agreement with Oahu
metropolitan planning organization
   
4-2.6   Severability
§ 4-2.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Mayor’s Appointee. The person appointed by the mayor to the policy committee of
the Oahu metropolitan planning organization.
Policy Committee. The policy committee of the Oahu metropolitan planning
organization.
Project. A project subject to §
4-2.2. The term includes a work element for the overall work program.
Short-Range Transit Plan. The document specifying the operating plan and
capital program for the public transit system.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 2, § 4-2.1) (Added by Ord. 91-27)
§ 4-2.2 Cooperation.
(a)   Officers and department heads of the city shall cooperate, in a timely
and satisfactory manner, with the Oahu metropolitan planning organization and
provide whatever pertinent or necessary report, information, or data required
or requested by the Oahu metropolitan planning organization in the preparation
and updating of the Oahu regional transportation plan, short-range transit
plan, and other planning documents required under federal law or regulation.
(b)   (1)   All projects for which the department of transportation services or
department of planning and permitting desires assistance under the Urban Mass
Transportation Act of 1964, as amended, or the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1973
or any other federal act, program, or regulations involving or affecting the
Oahu metropolitan planning organization shall be initiated by submission of the
proposed project to the council for its prior approval. Upon approval by the
council, the project description, along with all required accompanying data,
shall be forwarded to the Oahu metropolitan planning organization for
appropriate review and action.
(2)   Only proposed projects approved by the department of transportation
services shall be submitted to the council. The director of transportation
services shall coordinate the submission to the council of projects proposed by
the department of transportation services and department of planning and
permitting. The director of transportation services shall forward proposed
projects approved by the council to the Oahu metropolitan planning
organization. If the director of transportation services is not the mayor’s
appointee, the director shall forward the proposed projects approved by the
council to the Oahu metropolitan planning organization through the mayor’s
appointee.
(c)   In addition, any department desiring to implement a transportation
project not requiring federal funds shall so inform the Oahu metropolitan
planning organization so that such project may be included in the Oahu regional
transportation plan, short-range transit plan, or other appropriate planning
document.
(Sec. 4-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 2, § 4-2.2) (Am.
Ord. 91-27, 96-58, 97-02)
§ 4-2.3 Committee membership.
(a)   The mayor’s appointee to the policy committee of the Oahu metropolitan
planning organization shall represent the interests of the department of
transportation services and department of planning and permitting. If the
expressed interests of the departments are incompatible on an issue, the
mayor’s appointee shall take the action on the issue that, in the appointee’s
judgment, is in the best, overall interest of the city.
Before taking any official action at a policy committee meeting:
(1)   If the mayor’s appointee is the director of transportation services or
the director of planning and permitting, the appointee shall solicit the advice
and recommendations of the other officer; or
(2)   If the mayor’s appointee is not the director of transportation services
or the director of planning and permitting, the appointee shall solicit the
advice and recommendations of both officers.
(b)   The department of transportation services and department of planning and
permitting shall each be represented by at least one member on every technical
or other committee of the Oahu metropolitan planning organization, except:
(1)   The citizens advisory committee; and
(2)   Any committee on which city representation is not requested by the policy
committee or executive head of the Oahu metropolitan planning organization.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 2, § 4-2.3) (Added by Ord. 91-27; Am. Ord. 96-58, 97-
02)
§ 4-2.4 General work elements.
   The department of transportation services and department of planning and
permitting shall be responsible for their respective general work elements as
established by the participating agencies of the Oahu metropolitan planning
organization. Exhibit 1* that is incorporated by reference in and made a part
of Ordinance 4570 shall be superseded upon the establishment of general work
elements conforming to this article.
(Sec. 4-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 2, § 4-2.4) (Am.
Ords. 91-27, 96-58, 97-02)
Editor’s note:
   * See Ord. 4570 for general work elements.
§ 4-2.5 City official authorized to execute comprehensive agreement with Oahu
metropolitan planning organization.
   The presiding officer and chair of the council shall be authorized to
execute the comprehensive agreement on behalf of the city.
(Sec. 4-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 2, § 4-2.5) (Am.
Ord. 91-27)
§ 4-2.6 Severability.
   It is the intention of the council that this article and every provision
thereof shall be considered severable, and the invalidity of any section,
clause, provision, or part thereof, shall not affect the validity of any other
portion of this article.
(Sec. 4-2.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 2, § 4-2.6) (Am.
Ord. 91-27)
ARTICLE 3: OFFICE OF COUNCIL SERVICES
Sections
   
4-3.1   Office established
   
4-3.2   Purpose
   
4-3.3   Authority of the director of council services
   
4-3.4   Director—Appointment, tenure, removal, suspension, compensation, and
vacancy
   
4-3.5   Report on changes to reporting requirements
§ 4-3.1 Office established.
   The office of council services is established.
(Sec. 4-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 3, § 4-3.1)
§ 4-3.2 Purpose.
   The purpose of the office of council services shall be:
(1)   To provide a comprehensive research and reference service for the
council;
(2)   To conduct research, including legal research, as may be necessary for
the enactment or consideration of legislation;
(3)   To serve in an advisory or a consultative capacity to the council and its
committees on all matters within its competencies and responsibilities;
(4)   To assist the council to carry out its responsibilities under Charter §
3-114:
(A)   To conduct an annual financial audit of all operations of the city and
all operations for which the city is responsible and of their funds and
accounts for each fiscal year; and
(B)   To conduct performance audits of any or all of the agencies and
operations of the city and all operations for which the city is responsible;
(5)   To serve as special counsel to the council consistent with the Charter;
(6)   To serve as the revisor of ordinances pursuant to
Chapter 1, Article 16; and
(7)   To perform such other duties as may be assigned by the council or by the
presiding officer of the council.
(Sec. 4-3.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 3, § 4-3.2) (Am.
Ords. 94-52, 94-89)
§ 4-3.3 Authority of the director of council services.
   The director of council services shall:
(1)   Have the same powers with respect to the personnel of the office of
council services as department heads of the executive branch, unless otherwise
expressly limited by the Charter or ordinance. The attorneys in the office of
council services shall be licensed to practice in the State of Hawaii and in
good standing before the Supreme Court of the State of Hawaii; and
(2)   Be authorized to administer oaths and, in the name of the council,
subpoena witnesses and compel the production of books, papers, documents,
records, and any government record as that term is defined in HRS § 92F-3,
relevant to a financial or performance audit authorized by the council. This
authorization is granted to the director or a person duly designated by the
director in exercise of the council’s investigative power established in
Charter § 3-120.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 3, § 4-3.3) (Added by Ord. 94-52; Am. Ord. 94-89)
§ 4-3.4 Director—Appointment, tenure, removal, suspension, compensation, and
vacancy.
(a)   The presiding officer of the council shall appoint, with the concurrence
of the council, a director of the office of council services, who shall serve
for a term of six years, and thereafter until a successor is appointed. The
council, by a two-thirds vote of its entire membership, may remove or suspend
the director from office, but only for cause.
(b)   If the office of the director becomes vacant, the deputy director shall
become the acting director until a successor is duly appointed.
(c)   The salary of the director shall be equal to that of the majority of
executive department heads who are subject to the salary commission. If no
majority of such department heads is entitled to the same salary, then the
salary of the director shall be equal to the salary of the director of budget
and fiscal services.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 3, § 4-3.4) (Added by Ord. 94-89; Am. Ord. 03-34)
§ 4-3.5 Report on changes to reporting requirements.
   No later than May 1 of each calendar year, the director of council services
shall submit to the council a report of any new reporting requirements added to
Table 3 (Reporting Requirements) for the prior calendar year.
(Added by Ord. 23-9)
ARTICLE 4: LEGISLATIVE HEARINGS AND PROCEDURES
Sections
   
4-4.1   Purpose
   
4-4.2   Definitions
   
4-4.3   Establishment of investigating committees
   
4-4.4   Finances and staff
   
4-4.5   Membership—Quorum—Voting
   
4-4.6   Hearings
   
4-4.7   Issuance of subpoenas
   
4-4.8   Notice to witnesses
   
4-4.9   Conduct of hearing
   
4-4.10   Right to counsel and submission of questions
   
4-4.11   Testimony
   
4-4.12   Interested persons
   
4-4.13   Contempt
   
4-4.14   Penalties
   
4-4.15   Government officers and employees to cooperate
   
4-4.16   Limitation
§ 4-4.1 Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to establish procedures governing legislative
investigating committees to provide for the creation and operation of
legislative investigating committees in a manner which will enable them to
perform properly the powers and duties vested in them, including the conduct of
hearings, in a fair and impartial manner, consistent with protection of the
constitutional rights of persons called to testify at such hearings and
preservation of the public good.
(Sec. 4-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.1)
§ 4-4.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Hearing. Any meeting in the course of an investigatory proceeding, other than a
preliminary conference or interview at which no testimony is taken under oath,
conducted by an investigating committee for the purpose of taking testimony or
receiving other evidence. A hearing may be open to the public or closed to the
public in conformance with HRS § 92-5.
Investigating Committee. Any of the following that are authorized to compel the
attendance and testimony of witnesses or the production of books, records,
papers, and documents for the purpose of securing information on a specific
subject for the use of the council:
(1)   A standing committee;
(2)   A special committee; or
(3)   A committee of the whole of the council.
Public Hearing. Any hearing open to the public, or the proceedings of which are
made available to the public.
(Sec. 4-4.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.2)
§ 4-4.3 Establishment of investigating committees.
(a)   An investigating committee may exercise its powers pursuant to Charter §
3-120 or by council resolution by which the committee was established or from
which it derives its investigatory powers.
(b)   The resolution establishing an investigating committee shall state the:
(1)   Committee’s purposes;
(2)   Powers;
(3)   Duties and duration (when ascertainable);
(4)   The subject matter and scope of its investigatory authority; and
(5)   The number of its members.
(Sec. 4-4.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.3) (Am.
Ord. 96-58)
§ 4-4.4 Finances and staff.
   Each investigating committee may employ such professional, technical,
clerical, or other personnel as necessary for the proper performance of its
duties, to the extent of funds made available to it for such purpose and
subject to such restrictions and procedures relating thereto as may be provided
by law or any applicable rules or procedures of the council.
(Sec. 4-4.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.4)
§ 4-4.5 Membership—Quorum—Voting.
(a)   An investigating committee shall consist of not less than five members.
(b)   A quorum shall consist of a majority of the total authorized membership
of the committee.
(c)   No action shall be taken by a committee at any meeting, unless a quorum
is present. The committee may act by a majority vote of the members present and
voting at a meeting at which there is a quorum.
(Sec. 4-4.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.5)
§ 4-4.6 Hearings.
(a)   An investigating committee may hold hearings appropriate for the
performance of its duties, at such times and places as the committee
determines.
(b)   Each member of the committee shall be given at least three days’ written
notice of any hearing to be held. The notices shall include a statement of the
subject matter of the hearing. A hearing, and any action taken at a hearing,
shall not be deemed invalid solely because notice of the hearing was not given
in accordance with this requirement.
(c)   Any investigating committee shall not conduct a hearing unless a quorum
is present.
(Sec. 4-4.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.6)
§ 4-4.7 Issuance of subpoenas.
(a)   The presiding officer of either the council or any committee of the
council, as the case may be, may issue subpoenas requiring the attendance of
witnesses and subpoenas duces tecum requiring the production of books,
documents, or other evidence, in any matter pending before either the council
or committee, as the case may be.
(b)   Every investigating committee may issue, by majority vote of all its
members, subpoenas requiring the attendance of witnesses and subpoenas duces
tecum requiring the production of books, documents, or other evidence, in any
matter pending before the committee.
(c)   Any subpoena issued under the authority of the council or its authorized
committee shall run in the name of the City and County of Honolulu and shall be
addressed to any or all of the following officers:
(1)   The sergeant at arms or bailiff of the council;
(2)   The sheriff or the sheriff’s deputies;
(3)   The chief of police of any county or the chief of police’s deputies; or
(4)   Any police officer of the State or any county.
The subpoena shall:
(1)   Be signed by the officer authorized to issue it;
(2)   Set forth the officer’s official title;
(3)   Contain a reference to Charter § 3-120 or resolution, or other means, by
which the taking of testimony or other evidence was authorized; and
(4)   In the case of a summons or subpoena, set forth in general terms the
matter or question with reference to which the testimony or other evidence is
to be taken.
(d)   Any officer to whom such process is directed, if within such officer’s
territorial jurisdiction, shall serve or execute the same upon delivery thereof
to the officer without charge or compensation, except in the case of the
sheriff or the sheriff’s deputies where the council shall pay the customary
service fee plus the mileage expenses.
(Sec. 4-4.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.7) (Am.
Ord. 96-58)
§ 4-4.8 Notice to witnesses.
(a)   Service of a subpoena requiring the attendance of a person at a hearing
of an investigating committee shall be made at least five days before the date
of the hearing unless a shorter period of time is authorized by majority vote
of all the members of the committee in a particular instance when, in their
opinion, the giving of five days’ notice is not practicable; but if a shorter
period of time is authorized, the person subpoenaed shall be given reasonable
notice of the hearing, consistent with the particular circumstances involved.
(b)   Any person who is served with a subpoena to attend a hearing of an
investigating committee also shall be served with a copy of the resolution or
the Charter provision establishing the committee, a copy of the ordinance under
which the committee functions, a general statement informing such person of the
subject matter of the committee’s investigation or inquiry, and a notice that
such person may be accompanied at the hearing by counsel of such person’s own
choosing.
(Sec. 4-4.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.8)
§ 4-4.9 Conduct of hearing.
(a)   All hearings of an investigating committee shall be public, unless the
committee, by two-thirds vote of all its members, determines that a hearing may
not be open to the public in a particular instance.
(b)   The chair of an investigating committee, if present and able to act,
shall preside at all hearings of the committee and shall conduct the
examination of witnesses or supervise examination by other members of the
committee, the committee’s counsel, or members of the committee’s staff who are
so authorized. In the chair’s absence or disability, the vice-chair shall serve
as presiding officer. In the absence or disability of both the chair and the
vice-chair, an acting chair shall be selected from among the remaining members
of the committee.
(Sec. 4-4.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.9)
§ 4-4.10 Right to counsel and submission of questions.
(a)   Every witness at a hearing of an investigating committee may be
accompanied by counsel of such person’s own choosing, who may advise the
witness as to such person’s rights, subject to reasonable limitations that the
committee may prescribe to prevent obstruction of or interference with the
orderly conduct of the hearing.
(b)   Any witness at a hearing, or such person’s counsel, may submit to the
committee proposed questions to be asked of the witness or any other witness
relevant to the matters upon which there has been any questioning or submission
of evidence, and the committee shall ask such of the questions as are
appropriate to the subject matter of the hearing.
(Sec. 4-4.10, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.10)
§ 4-4.11 Testimony.
(a)   An investigating committee shall cause a record to be made of all
proceedings in which testimony or other evidence is demanded or adduced, which
record shall include rulings of the chair, questions of the committee and its
staff, the testimony or responses of witnesses, sworn written statements
submitted to the committee, and such other matters as the committee or its
chair may direct.
(b)   All testimony given or adduced at a hearing shall be under oath or
affirmation, unless the requirement is dispensed with in a particular instance
by majority vote of the committee members present at the hearing.
(c)   The presiding officer of either the council or of an investigating
committee may administer an oath or affirmation to a witness at a hearing of
such committee.
(d)   The presiding officer at a hearing may direct a witness to answer any
relevant question or furnish any relevant book, paper, or other document, the
production of which has been required by subpoena duces tecum. Unless the
direction is overruled by majority vote of the committee members present,
disobedience shall constitute a contempt. The proper court, upon request of the
council, shall have power to compel obedience to any process of the council and
require such witness to answer questions put to such person and to punish as
contempt of the court, any refusal to comply therewith without good cause shown
therefor.
(e)   A witness at a hearing or such person’s counsel, with the consent of a
majority of the committee members present at the hearing, may file with the
committee for incorporation into the record of the hearing sworn written
statements relevant to the purpose, subject matter, and scope of the
committee’s investigation or inquiry.
(f)   A witness at a hearing, upon such person’s advance request and at such
person’s own expense, shall be furnished a certified transcript of the person’s
testimony at the hearing.
(g)   Testimony and other evidence given or adduced at a hearing closed to the
public shall not be made public unless authorized by majority vote of all of
the members of the committee, which authorization shall also specify the form
and manner in which the testimony or other evidence may be released.
(h)   All information of a defamatory or highly prejudicial nature received by
or for the committee other than in an open or closed hearing shall be
confidential. No such information shall be made public unless authorized by
majority vote of all of the members of the committee for legislative purposes,
or unless its use is required for judicial purposes.
(Sec. 4-4.11, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.11)
§ 4-4.12 Interested persons.
(a)   Any person whose name is mentioned or who is otherwise identified during
a hearing of an investigating committee and who, in the opinion of the
committee, may be adversely affected thereby, may, upon such person’s request
or upon the request of any member of the committee, appear personally before
the committee and testify in such person’s own behalf, or with the committee’s
consent, file a sworn written statement of facts or other documentary evidence
for incorporation into the record of the hearing.
(b)   Upon the consent of a majority of its members, an investigating committee
may permit any other person to appear and testify at a hearing or submit a
sworn written statement of facts or other documentary evidence for
incorporation into the record thereof. No request to appear, appearance, or
submission of evidence shall limit in any way the investigating committee’s
power of subpoena.
(c)   Any person who appears before an investigating committee pursuant to this
section shall have all the rights, privileges, and responsibilities of a
witness provided by this article.
(Sec. 4-4.12, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.12)
§ 4-4.13 Contempt.
   A person shall be in contempt if such person:
(1)   Fails or refuses to appear in compliance with a subpoena or, having
appeared, fails or refuses to testify or, having appeared, fails or refuses to
testify under oath or affirmation;
(2)   Fails or refuses to answer any relevant question or fails or refuses to
furnish any relevant book, paper, or other document subpoenaed by or on behalf
of an investigating committee; or
(3)   Commits any other act or offense against an investigating committee that,
if committed against the council, would constitute a contempt.
(Sec. 4-4.13, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.13)
§ 4-4.14 Penalties.
(a)   A person guilty of contempt under this article shall be fined not more
than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than one year or both. Prosecutions in such
cases shall be as provided by law for the prosecution of misdemeanors.
(b)   If any investigating committee fails in any material respect to comply
with the requirements of this article, any person subject to a subpoena or a
subpoena duces tecum who is injured by the failure shall be relieved of any
requirement to attend the hearing for which the subpoena was issued or, if
present, to testify or produce evidence therein; and the failure shall be a
complete defense in any proceeding against the person for contempt or other
punishment.
(c)   Any person other than the witness concerned or such person’s counsel who
violates §
4-4.11(g) or (h) shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than
six months, or both. The corporation counsel or special counsel for the
council, depending upon the discretionary judgment of the council on such
person’s own motion or on the application of any person claiming to have been
injured or prejudiced by an unauthorized disclosure may institute proceedings
for trial of the issue and imposition of the penalties provided herein. Nothing
in this subsection shall limit any power which the council may have to
discipline a member or employee or to impose a penalty in the absence of action
by a prosecuting officer or court.
(Sec. 4-4.14, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.14)
§ 4-4.15 Government officers and employees to cooperate.
   The officers and the employees of the State and of each county shall
cooperate with any investigating committee or committees or with their
representatives and furnish to them or to their representatives such
information as may be called for in connection with the investigative and
research activities of the committees.
(Sec. 4-4.15, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.15)
§ 4-4.16 Limitation.
   Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to limit or prohibit
the acquisition of evidence or information by an investigating committee by any
lawful means not provided for herein.
(Sec. 4-4.16, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.16)
ARTICLE 5: REGISTRATION OF VOTERS AT DRIVER’S LICENSING SITES
Sections
   
4-5.1   Arrangement for voter registration at driver’s licensing sites
   
4-5.2   Definitions
§ 4-5.1 Arrangement for voter registration at driver’s licensing sites.
(a)   The city clerk, subject to the availability of funds, may arrange for the
registration of voters:
(1)   At driver’s licensing sites;
(2)   During the days and hours when the driver’s licensing sites are open to
the general public, except when the registration of voters is closed under
State law; and
(3)   As:
(A)   Part of or simultaneous to the processing of applications for an
original, renewed, or duplicate driver’s license; or
(B)   A function distinct from and conducted before or after the processing of
applications for an original, renewed, or duplicate driver’s license.
(b)   Any arrangement for the registration of voters with personnel or
facilities under the control of another city agency at driver’s licensing sites
shall require the approval of the appropriate head of the other agency.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 5, § 4-5.1) (Added by Ord. 89-148)
§ 4-5.2 Definitions.
(a)   For the purposes of this article, “driver’s licensing site” means a
location where the general public may apply for an original, renewed, or
duplicate driver’s license or instruction permit.
(b)   For the purposes of this article, “driver’s license” and “instruction
permit” has the same meaning as defined in §
15A-2.1.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 5, § 4-5.2) (Added by Ord. 89-148)
ARTICLE 6: SERVICES FOR DEAF AND HARD-OF-HEARING PERSONS REGARDING
COUNCIL AND COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Sections
   
4-6.1   Definitions
   
4-6.2   Real-time captioning of televised council or committee meeting
   
4-6.3   Qualified interpretive services
   
4-6.4   Substitution of more advanced system
   
4-6.5   Council chair responsibility
§ 4-6.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Committee Meeting. A regular meeting, special meeting, hearing, or
informational meeting of a standing committee, special committee, or advisory
committee of the council.
Council Meeting. A regular meeting, special meeting, public hearing, or
informational meeting of the full council.
Qualified Interpreter. An interpreter who is able to interpret effectively,
accurately, and impartially both receptively and expressively, using any
necessary specialized vocabulary.
Qualified Interpretive Services. The services of a qualified interpreter.
Real-Time Captioning. The simultaneous transcription of spoken words during a
televised council or committee meeting for appearance on a television screen.
Regular Council Meeting. A council meeting fulfilling the requirement of
Charter § 3-107.8.
Televised Council or Committee Meeting. A council or committee meeting that is
televised on a live or delayed basis under a broadcast production of the
council.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 6, § 4-6.1) (Added by Ord. 94-37)
§ 4-6.2 Real-time captioning of televised council or committee meeting.
(a)   Subject to this article, the council:
(1)   Shall provide for the real-time captioning of each televised regular
council meeting; and
(2)   May provide for the real-time captioning of any other televised council
or committee meeting at the discretion of the council chair.
(b)   The real-time captioning provided pursuant to this section shall:
(1)   Transcribe the spoken words of each participant at the televised council
or committee meeting; and
(2)   Be visible on all properly equipped televisions tuned to the televised
council or committee meeting.
(c)   The council shall include terms and conditions to implement this section
in each contract with a person responsible for the broadcast production of
televised council and committee meetings.
(d)   This section shall not be construed as requiring:
(1)   The real-time captioning of any council or committee meeting that is not
televised; or
(2)   The real-time captioning of any portion of a council or committee meeting
televised under a noncouncil broadcast production.
(e)   The council shall conduct a pilot program of the real-time captioning of
selected televised council and committee meetings. The purpose of the pilot
program shall be to discover and then correct problems associated with real-
time captioning before full implementation. The council shall review the pilot
program and, if necessary, modify this article and the real-time captioning to
be provided.
Full implementation of real-time captioning in accordance with this section
shall be initiated upon adoption by the council of an authorizing resolution.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 6, § 4-6.2) (Added by Ord. 94-37)
§ 4-6.3 Qualified interpretive services.
(a)   Except as provided under subsection (b), the council shall make available
qualified interpretive services for a deaf or hard-of-hearing person requesting
the services to personally attend a council or committee meeting and understand
or participate in the proceedings. The council shall make the services
available at no charge to the requesting deaf or hard-of-hearing person.
(b)   The council shall not be required to make available qualified
interpretive services for a deaf or hard-of-hearing person at a council or
committee meeting when:
(1)   A qualified interpreter cannot be retained for the deaf or hard-of-
hearing person after reasonable effort by the council;
(2)   The request for qualified interpretive services is not made before a
deadline established by the council chair for a council meeting or a committee
chair for a committee meeting; or
(3)   The cost of the qualified interpretive services would place an undue
financial burden on the council, as determined and justified in writing by the
council chair.
(c)   This section shall not be construed as requiring the council to pay for
the services of a qualified interpreter retained without the appropriate
council approval. The council shall have no responsibility or liability for
those services.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 6, § 4-6.3) (Added by Ord. 94-37)
§ 4-6.4 Substitution of more advanced system.
   The council may substitute a more advanced system for real-time captioning
or qualified interpretive services when:
(1)   The system becomes commercially available at an affordable cost to the
council; and
(2)   The system improves the accessibility of deaf and hard-of-hearing persons
to council and committee meetings.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 6, § 4-6.4) (Added by Ord. 94-37)
§ 4-6.5 Council chair responsibility.
   The council chair shall establish policies and be responsible for the
implementation of this article. The policies shall be consistent with this
article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 6, § 4-6.5) (Added by Ord. 94-37)
ARTICLE 7: REPORT ON STATUS OF ANTICIPATED OR ONGOING
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
Sections
   
4-7.1   Definitions
   
4-7.2   Mayor’s prerogative to withhold information
   
4-7.3   Executive session
   
4-7.4   Mayoral authority in collective bargaining
   
4-7.5   Nonapplicability to council or committee meeting on other collective
bargaining issue— Nonapplicability to investigating committee meeting
§ 4-7.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Bargaining Unit. A bargaining unit of public employees established pursuant to
HRS § 89-6.
Collective Bargaining. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 89-2.
Committee. A standing committee, special committee, or committee of the whole
of the council. The term does not include a council-established committee, the
membership of which includes persons who are not councilmembers.
Committee Meeting. A regular or special meeting of a committee.
Cost Items. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 89-2.
Council Meeting. A regular or special meeting of the council.
Exclusive Representative. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 89-2.
Impasse. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 89-2.
Ongoing Collective Bargaining. The collective bargaining negotiation and
impasse resolution process undertaken before the public employers and exclusive
representative of a bargaining unit enter into a written agreement on wages,
hours, and other terms and conditions of employment.
Public Employer. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 89-2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 7, § 4-7.1) (Added by Ord. 98-49)
§ 4-7.2 Mayor’s prerogative to withhold information.
   At a council or committee meeting, the mayor or designated representative
may withhold information if determining that disclosure will result in:
(1)   A prohibited practice charge under HRS Chapter 89;
(2)   The breach of a written or oral confidentiality agreement with the
exclusive representative, another public employer, the Hawaii labor relations
board, or a mediator, fact-finding board, or arbitration panel;
(3)   The violation of an existing, valid written agreement with the exclusive
representative;
(4)   The violation of any law; or
(5)   The weakening of the public employers’ position in the collective
bargaining negotiations.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 7, § 4-7.3) (Added by Ord. 98-49)
§ 4-7.3 Executive session.
   At the recommendation of the corporation counsel, the council or committee
may recess a meeting and convene in executive session to discuss an ongoing
collective bargaining matter with the mayor or designated representative. The
corporation counsel shall make such a recommendation if finding that, based on
the matter to be discussed, an executive session is permissible under HRS
Chapter 92 and the Charter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 7, § 4-7.4) (Added by Ord. 98-49)
§ 4-7.4 Mayoral authority in collective bargaining.
   This article shall not affect the mayor’s authority under HRS Chapter 89
regarding collective bargaining with an exclusive representative of city
employees.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 7, § 4-7.5) (Added by Ord. 98-49)
§ 4-7.5 Nonapplicability to council or committee meeting on other collective
bargaining issue— Nonapplicability to investigating committee meeting.
(a)   This article shall not apply to a council or committee meeting at which a
collective bargaining agreement executed by the public employers and exclusive
representative is to be considered. This article also shall not apply to a
council or committee meeting at which a term or condition of an executed
collective bargaining agreement is to be considered.
(b)   This article also shall not apply to a council or committee meeting at
which a proposed appropriation for a collective bargaining cost item is to be
considered.
A council or committee meeting on an executed agreement or a term, condition,
or cost item of such an agreement shall be subject to other applicable law,
Charter, ordinance, or council rule.
(c)   This article shall not apply to a hearing or meeting of a council
investigating committee established pursuant to
Article 4. Such a hearing or meeting shall be subject to
Article 4.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 7, § 4-7.6) (Added by Ord. 98-49)
ARTICLE 8: PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE MAPS
Sections
   
4-8.1   General provisions
   
4-8.2   Procedure for the adoption and revision of public infrastructure maps
   
4-8.3   Types of public infrastructure to be shown on public infrastructure map
   
4-8.4   Applicability criteria
§ 4-8.1 General provisions.
(a)   The council shall adopt public infrastructure maps reflecting major
public infrastructure projects, as defined in §
4-8.4, that impact adopted growth policies or needed public facility policies
for each of the development plan areas in the city as each of the development
plans is revised and adopted pursuant to the 1992 charter amendments.
(b)   The public infrastructure maps shall not be deemed part of the
development plans, shall be adopted by resolution, and shall be revised by
resolution in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
4-8.2. The city shall, when making any land use decision, consider the
potential impact of the decision on those proposed projects that are
represented by symbols on the public infrastructure maps.
(c)   The public infrastructure maps shall include symbols showing the general
locations of major public infrastructure, as defined in §
4-8.4. Symbols for publicly funded facilities for a development plan area for
which a public infrastructure map has been adopted shall be shown on the
applicable public infrastructure map before the appropriation of land
acquisition or construction funds. In addition, no funds for land acquisition
or construction shall be expended or encumbered for a project, unless either
the symbol for the project is shown on the public infrastructure map or the
project does not meet the applicability criteria specified in § 
4-8.4 and, therefore, a symbol for the project is not required to be on the
public infrastructure map. However, when time is of the essence in order for
the city to comply with a State or federal consent decree or court-ordered
deadlines, or when there is an imminent threat to public health, safety, or
property, funding for capital improvement projects may be initiated and
appropriations may be made therefor without amending the public infrastructure
map.
(d)   The department of planning and permitting shall consider all phases of a
project when determining whether a project meets the applicability criteria
specified in §
4-8.4. All phases of a project shall be presented to the council before its
adoption of the resolution revising the public infrastructure map to include a
symbol for the project. Intentional parceling of projects to avoid the
designation of a project as “major public infrastructure” pursuant to §
4-8.4 shall be prohibited.
Land acquisition for the purpose of preserving open space or protecting scenic
viewplanes shall not constitute parceling and shall not require a revision to
the public infrastructure map. Future use of the land for any public
improvement project of a type that meets the criteria specified in §
4-8.4, however, will require a revision to the public infrastructure map.
(e)   Any questions of interpretation regarding whether a project requires
placement of a symbol therefor on the public infrastructure map, or relocation
of an existing symbol, shall be resolved by the council.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 8, § 4-8.1) (Added by Ord. 99-69; Am. Ords. 02-03, 07-
37)
§ 4-8.2 Procedure for the adoption and revision of public infrastructure maps.
(a)   During the initial preparation of the public infrastructure maps,
projects that are designated on the public facilities map for each development
plan area on the effective date of the new area development plan, that are of a
type enumerated in §
4-8.3 and that meet the criteria set forth in §
4-8.4 shall have a symbol therefor placed on the public infrastructure map for
that development plan area. The public infrastructure maps shall be drawn at a
scale no smaller than 1:24,000 (1 inch on the map equals no more than 2,000
feet).
(b)   Revisions of the public infrastructure maps shall be made by council
resolution. The council shall consider the public infrastructure map in its
review of the city’s annual budget. Any public infrastructure map symbol may be
administratively deleted by the department of planning and permitting once the
improvement or land acquisition is completed. The council shall be informed of
the administrative deletion of any public infrastructure map symbol.
(c)   The council resolution revising the map shall include but not be limited
to:
(1)   The general location of the proposed public infrastructure; and
(2)   A description of the project including a description of the project’s
size and function.
(d)   Revisions of the public infrastructure maps shall be made only for those
public infrastructure projects that are of a type enumerated in §
4-8.3, that meet the criteria set forth in §
4-8.4, and that are consistent with the general plan, the development plans,
any applicable special area plans, and the appropriate functional plans.
Any revision of a public infrastructure map may be proposed by the director of
planning and permitting or proposed by the council. Upon introduction of a
council-proposed resolution to revise a public infrastructure map, the city
clerk shall transmit a copy of the resolution to the director of planning and
permitting.
The department of planning and permitting shall have 75 days following
introduction of the council-proposed resolution to review the proposal, consult
with other governmental agencies and with appropriate community organizations,
and prepare a report to the council making a recommendation to the council.
Unless a report is received by the council, the council shall not take action
on the resolution before the expiration of the 75 days except on a motion
supported by two-thirds of the entire membership of the council.
The need to revise by resolution the location of an existing symbol when a
selected site differs from the location of a symbol on the public
infrastructure map shall be determined by the department of planning and
permitting on a case-by-case basis based on the distance between the two
locations, different environmental and urbanization conditions between the two
locations, a change in the neighborhood board area, and past public comments.
The director of planning and permitting shall timely notify the council of any
decision that an existing symbol need not be relocated, and that decision shall
be subject to review and action by the council pursuant to §
4-8.1(e).
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 8, § 4-8.2) (Added by Ord. 99-69; Am. Ords. 02-03, 07-
37)
§ 4-8.3 Types of public infrastructure to be shown on public infrastructure
map.
(a)   Symbols for the following types of public improvement projects shall be
shown on the public infrastructure maps; provided that they meet the
applicability criteria specified in §
4-8.4:
(1)   Corporation yard;
(2)   Desalination plant;
(3)   Drainage way (open channel);
(4)   Fire station;
(5)   Government building;
(6)   Golf course (municipal);
(7)   Park (includes neighborhood, urban, community, district, and regional
parks, beach parks, shoreline parks, dog parks, nature parks and preserves,
zoos and botanical gardens, and stream greenbelts);
(8)   Police station;
(9)   Parking facility;
(10)   Water reservoir;
(11)   Sewage treatment plant;
(12)   Solid waste facility;
(13)   Rapid transit corridor;
(14)   Transit station (includes park and rides, bus transit centers, and rapid
transit stations);
(15)   Major collector or arterial roadway;
(16)   Sewage pump station; and
(17)   Potable water well.
(b)   The alignment of linear facilities, and the location of project
boundaries, shall be considered approximate and conceptual.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 8, § 4-8.3) (Added by Ord. 99-69; Am. Ords. 02-03, 06-
50, 07-001, 07-37)
§ 4-8.4 Applicability criteria.
   “Major public infrastructure” means any public improvement project that is
of a type enumerated in §
4-8.3 and that meets any one or more of the following criteria:
(1)   It has a significant impact on surrounding land uses or the natural
environment;
(2)   It establishes a new facility;
(3)   It substantially changes the function of an existing facility; or
(4)   It involves modification (replacement or renovation) of an existing
facility that would permit significant new development or redevelopment.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 8, § 4-8.4) (Added by Ord. 99-69; Am. Ord. 02-03, 07-
37)
ARTICLE 9: OFFICE OF THE CITY CLERK
Section
   
4-9.1   City clerk—Appointment, tenure, suspension, removal, and compensation
§ 4-9.1 City clerk—Appointment, tenure, suspension, removal, and compensation.
(a)   The city clerk shall be appointed by the council to serve for a term of
six years and thereafter until a successor is appointed. The council, by two-
thirds vote of its entire membership, may remove or suspend the city clerk from
office, but only for cause.
(b)   The salary of the city clerk shall be equal to that of the majority of
executive department heads who are subject to the salary commission. If no
majority of such department heads is entitled to the same salary, then the
salary of the city clerk shall be equal to the salary of the director of budget
and fiscal services.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 9, § 4-9.1) (Added by Ord. 03-34)
ARTICLE 10: OFFICE OF THE CITY AUDITOR
Section
   
4-10.1   City auditor—Appointment, tenure, suspension, removal, and
compensation
§ 4-10.1 City auditor—Appointment, tenure, suspension, removal, and
compensation.
(a)   The city auditor shall be appointed by the council to serve for a term of
six years as provided in Charter § 3-501 and thereafter until a successor is
appointed. The council, by two-thirds vote of its entire membership, may remove
or suspend the city auditor from office for cause.
(b)   The salary of the city auditor shall be equal to that of the majority of
executive department heads who are subject to the salary commission. If no
majority of such department heads is entitled to the same salary, then the
salary of the city auditor shall be equal to the salary of the director of
budget and fiscal services.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 10, § 4-10.1) (Added by Ord. 03-34)
ARTICLE 11: COUNCIL COMMITTEES
Section
   
4-11.1   Standing committees—Quorum—Number of votes necessary to validate acts
§ 4-11.1 Standing committees—Quorum—Number of votes necessary to validate acts.
(a)   The number of members necessary to constitute a quorum for a council
standing committee to do business shall be a majority of the number of voting
members to which the committee is entitled.
(b)   The number of members necessary to make the action of a council standing
committee valid shall be:
(1)   When a majority is required, a majority of the number of voting members
to which the committee is entitled; or
(2)   When a supermajority vote is required, that supermajority of the number
of voting members to which the committee is entitled.
(c)   The numbers specified in subsections (a) and (b) shall be unaffected by a
nonvoting member of a standing committee serving as a voting member under
particular circumstances, such as due to the lack of a quorum of voting members
or to break a tie vote, pursuant to council rules.
(1990 Code, Ch. 4, Art. 11, § 4-11.1) (Added by Ord. 08-16)
CHAPTER 5: SALARIES, EMPLOYMENT, AND BONDING REQUIREMENTS OF
ELECTED OFFICIALS AND NON-CIVIL-SERVICE OFFICERS
Articles
   
1.   Bonds of Elected Officials, Officers, and Employees
   
2.   Pay Plan in the Offices of the Corporation Counsel and the Prosecuting
Attorney
   
3.   Salaries of Various City Officers
ARTICLE 1: BONDS OF ELECTED OFFICIALS, OFFICERS, AND EMPLOYEES
Sections
   
5-1.1   Bonds of elected officials
   
5-1.2   Bonds of officers and employees
   
5-1.3   Procurement of bonds
   
5-1.4   Liability of officers and employees on bonds
§ 5-1.1 Bonds of elected officials.
   Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, each
councilmember and the mayor must be covered by an individual bond in the amount
of $25,000, conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties of their
respective offices.
(Sec. 6-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 5, Art. 1, § 5-1.1)
§ 5-1.2 Bonds of officers and employees.
   All officers and employees of the city, except the board of water supply,
shall be covered by a public employee’s faithful performance blanket position
bond in the amount of $25,000 for each officer and employee, subject to excess
indemnity coverage in the following amounts for the below-listed officers and
employees:
Officer/Employee Excess Indemnity Coverage
Officer/Employee                              Excess Indemnity Coverage
Director of budget and fiscal services        $225,000
Deputy director of budget and fiscal services $225,000
Chief of treasury                             $225,000
Assistant chief of treasury                   $225,000
Treasury head teller                          $75,000
Director of enterprise services               $75,000
Deputy director of enterprise services        $75,000
Enterprise services fiscal officer            $75,000
Enterprise services accountant V              $75,000
Enterprise services box office manager        $25,000
Enterprise services box office accountant     $25,000
 
(Sec. 6-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 5, Art. 1, § 5-1.2) (Am.
Ords. 91-27, 97-02)
§ 5-1.3 Procurement of bonds.
   The bonds specified in §§
5-1.1 and 5-1.2 shall be procured by the director of budget and fiscal services
as the director may deem in the best interest of the city, subject to the
following conditions:
(1)   That such bonds be procured from companies licensed to do business in
Hawaii; and
(2)   That such bonds be in favor of, and the premiums thereof shall be borne
by, the city; provided that if any undertaking or project involving joint
participation between the city and the United States or any agency of the
United States, and is conditioned on the requirement that the officers of the
city entrusted with the receipt and disbursement of funds be covered by a
faithful performance or fidelity bond, then the United States may be named as
co-obligee in the bond.
(Sec. 6-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 5, Art. 1, § 5-1.3)
§ 5-1.4 Liability of officers and employees on bonds.
   If any bonded city officer or employee refuses or neglects to account for
and pay over all moneys received by such person by virtue of such person’s
office or employment, such person shall be liable for such refusal or neglect
upon such person’s official bond, and the director of budget and fiscal
services shall bring an action against such person for the recovery thereof, in
the name of the city and recover in such action, in addition to the amount so
received, 50 percent thereon by way of damages. No order of the council shall
be necessary to bring such action. The director of budget and fiscal services’s
reasonable expenses, including any attorney fees, if necessarily incurred,
shall be a city charge.
(Sec. 6-2.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 5, Art. 1, § 5-1.4)
ARTICLE 2: PAY PLAN IN THE OFFICES OF THE CORPORATION COUNSEL
AND THE PROSECUTING ATTORNEY
Sections
   
5-2.1   Deputies and clerks
   
5-2.2   Variations from pay plan
§ 5-2.1 Deputies and clerks.
   The salary ranges and schedules of the deputies and law clerks of the
departments of the corporation counsel and prosecuting attorney shall be set by
the corporation counsel and prosecuting attorney respectively with the salary
range and schedule of the highest ranking deputy to be 5 percent less than that
of the corporation counsel or prosecuting attorney and for subsequent salary
ranges and schedules in descending order with a 5 percent differential between
salary ranges and schedules.
(Sec. 6-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 5, Art. 2, § 5-2.1)
§ 5-2.2 Variations from pay plan.
   The department heads are authorized to set a salary of any deputy between
the salary range of one LS position to another LS position, including entry
level.
(Sec. 6-3.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 5, Art. 2, § 5-2.2)
ARTICLE 3: SALARIES OF VARIOUS CITY OFFICERS
Sections
   
5-3.1   Salaries of elected officials
   
5-3.2   Salaries of appointed officials of the executive branch
   
5-3.3   Salaries of appointed officials of the council
   
5-3.4   Salaries of other employees of the executive branch
§ 5-3.1 Salaries of elected officials.
   The salaries of all elected officials shall be established by an independent
salary commission, pursuant to the charter.
(Sec. 6-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 5, Art. 3, § 5-3.1) (Am.
Ord. 88-12)
§ 5-3.2 Salaries of appointed officials of the executive branch.
   The annual salaries of appointed officials of the executive branch, other
than the manager and chief engineer of the board of water supply, shall be
established by an independent salary commission pursuant to the charter. Any
action of the commission altering salaries shall be by resolution accompanied
by findings of fact. The resolution shall be forwarded to the mayor and the
council but shall take effect without their concurrence 60 calendar days after
its adoption, unless rejected by a three-quarters vote of the council’s entire
membership. The council may reject either the entire resolution or any portion
of it. All such salaries shall be paid semimonthly out of the city treasury.
(Sec. 6-4.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 5, Art. 3, §
5-3.2) (Am. Ords. 88-12, 91-27, 91-59, 93-82, 97-02)
§ 5-3.3 Salaries of appointed officials of the council.
(a)   The salary of the city clerk shall not exceed an amount equal to the
salaries of the department heads of the executive branch, payable semimonthly
out of the city treasury.
(b)   The salaries of the deputy city clerk and the deputy director of the
office of council services shall not exceed an amount equal to the salaries of
the first deputy department heads of the executive branch, payable semimonthly
out of the city treasury.
(c)   Positions of staff attorney. All positions of staff attorney in the
office of council services shall be compensated at rates consistent with those
attorneys in the department of the corporation counsel, payable semimonthly out
of the city treasury.
(d)   Positions of legislative analyst. All positions of legislative analyst in
the office of council services shall be compensated at rates not to exceed the
highest amount payable to an employee at SR-31 in the salary schedule
applicable to city and county civil service employees, payable semimonthly out
of the city treasury.
(e)   Positions of legislative aide. The salaries of legislative aides shall be
set by the chair of the council, with the concurrence of the council, payable
semimonthly out of the city treasury.
(Sec. 6-4.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 5, Art. 3, §
5-3.3) (Am. Ords. 88-12, 90-48, 94-89)
§ 5-3.4 Salaries of other employees of the executive branch.
(a)   Students. The salary rates of students hired under Charter § 6-1103(e),
shall be set by the director of human resources, payable semimonthly out of the
city treasury.
(b)   Personal services. The salaries of personal services employees hired
under Charter § 6-1103(f), (g), (h) or (j), shall be consistent with the
position classification plan established under Charter § 6-1109, and shall be
payable semimonthly out of the city treasury.
(c)   Administrative or executive assistants of the prosecuting attorney.
Positions of administrative or executive assistants of the prosecuting attorney
under Charter § 6-1103(c), shall have salaries that are consistent with the
position classification plan established under Charter § 6-1109, and those
salaries shall be payable semimonthly out of the city treasury.
(1990 Code, Ch. 5, Art. 3, § 5-3.4) (Added by Ord. 93-82)
TITLE II: TAXATION AND FINANCES
   Chapters
      
6.   FUNDS, FEES, AND LOAN PROGRAMS
      
7.   RESERVED
      
8.   REAL PROPERTY TAX
      
8A.   TAXATION OF TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS
CHAPTER 6: FUNDS, FEES, AND LOAN PROGRAMS
Articles
   
1.   Addition of Unpaid Civil Fines to Taxes, Fees, or Charges Collected by the
City
   
2.   Payrolls Clearance Fund
   
3.   Highway Fund
   
4.   Treasury Trust Fund
   
5.   General Trust Fund
   
6.   Improvement District Bond and Interest Redemption Fund
   
7.   Housing and Community Development Revolving Fund
   
8.   General Obligation Bond and Interest Redemption Fund
   
9.   Reserved
   
10.   Service Fees for Disposition of Real Property
   
11.   Fee Schedule for Public Records
   
12.   Overtime Inspection Fees
   
13.   Federal Grants Fund
   
14.   Special Projects Fund
   
15.   Furnishing of Electronic Data Processing Services
   
16.   General Improvement Bond Fund
   
17.   Highway Improvement Bond Fund
   
18.   Transportation Fund
   
19.   Federal Revenue Sharing Fund
   
20.   Highway Beautification and Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles Revolving Fund
   
21.   Bikeway Fund
   
22.   Community Development Fund
   
23.   Housing and Community Development Section 8 Contract Fund
   
24.   Honolulu Zoo Fund
   
25.   Parks and Playgrounds Fund
   
26.   Housing and Community Development Rehabilitation Loan Fund
   
27.   State Special Use Permit
   
28.   The Waipio Peninsula Soccer Park Fund
   
29.   Standards for the Appropriation of Funds to Private Organizations
   
30.   Liquor Commission Fund
   
31.   The Patsy T. Mink Central Oahu Regional Park Fund
   
32.   Establishing Maximum Interest Rate for Urban Renewal Project Notes
   
33.   Establishing Maximum Interest for General Obligation Bonds
   
34.   Housing Loan and Mortgage Programs
   
35.   Reserved
   
36.   Capital Projects Fund
   
37.   Federal Grants Capital Projects Fund
   
38.   Reserved
   
39.   Landscaping and Beautification
   
40.   Application Fees for General Plan and Development Plan Amendments
   
41.   Fee Schedule for Land Use Ordinance—Applications and Variances
   
42.   Deferred Compensation Fund
   
43.   Charges by Municipal Reference and Records Center for Computer Online
Service
   
44.   Fees and Charges for Services of the Honolulu Police Department
   
45.   Rental Assistance Fund
   
46.   Housing Development Special Fund
   
47.   Wastewater System Facility Charge
   
48.   Solid Waste Improvement Bond Fund
   
49.   Solid Waste Special Fund
   
50.   Reserved
   
51.   Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve Fund
   
52.   Grants in Aid Fund
   
53.   Special Events Fund
   
54.   Sewer Revenue Bond Improvement Fund
   
55.   Transit Construction Mitigation Fund
   
56.   Reserve for Fiscal Stability Fund
   
57.   Golf Fund
   
58.   Contributions to the County
   
59.   Land Conservation Fund
   
60.   Transportation Surcharge—Use of Funds
   
61.   Transit Fund
   
62.   Clean Water and Natural Lands Fund
   
63.   Affordable Housing Fund
   
64.   Reserved
   
65.   Transit Improvement Bond Fund
   
66.   Waiver of Certain City Fees for Centenarian Residents
   
67.   Taxable General Improvement Bond Fund
   
68.   Climate Resiliency Fund
ARTICLE 1: ADDITION OF UNPAID CIVIL FINES TO TAXES, FEES, OR CHARGES
COLLECTED BY THE CITY*
Sections
   
6-1.1   Definitions
   
6-1.2   Judicial authority
   
6-1.3   Executive authority
   
6-1.4   Administrative procedures
   
6-1.5   Collection procedures
Editor’s note:
   *Sec. 3 of Ord. 93-109 originally provided that this article (then Ch. 1,
Art. 19) be repealed as of June 30, 1997; however, Ord. 96-42 deleted the
repeal provision to make this article (then Ch. 1, Art. 19), permanent.
§ 6-1.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Civil Fines. Any monetary penalty, imposed by competent judicial or executive
authority, on a person for violation of city ordinances, rules, or regulations.
Civil Fines Program. Any duly adopted program for imposing civil fines as a
means of enforcing violations of city ordinances, rules, or regulations.
Unpaid Civil Fines. Any outstanding civil fines due and owing to the city by a
person, in whole or in part.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 19, § 1-19.1) (Added by Ord. 93-109)
§ 6-1.2 Judicial authority.
   The addition of any unpaid civil fines to any taxes, fees, or charges
collected by the city may be ordered by any court of competent jurisdiction.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 19, § 1-19.2) (Added by Ord. 93-109)
§ 6-1.3 Executive authority.
(a)   Any unpaid civil fines that remain due, after all rights to
administrative appeal or judicial review have been exhausted, and as may be
further provided in §
6-1.5, may then be added by administrative order to any taxes, fees, or charges
collected by the city by any administrative agency empowered to collect such
civil fines pursuant to §
6-1.5. The city may condition the issuance or renewal of any city license,
approval, or permit for which a fee or charge is assessed, except for water for
residential use and sewer charges, on payment of the unpaid civil fines, and
any such license, approval, or permit may be withheld until full payment of all
such unpaid civil fines has been made.
(b)   Upon recordation of a notice of unpaid civil fines in the bureau of
conveyances, the amount of the civil fine, including any increase in the amount
of the fine that the city may assess, and any enforcement cost, shall
constitute a lien upon all real property belonging to any person liable for the
unpaid civil fines.
(c)   The lien in favor of the city shall be subordinate to any lien in favor
of any person recorded or registered before the recordation of the notice of
unpaid civil fines and senior to any lien recorded or registered after the
recordation of the notice. The lien shall continue until the unpaid civil fines
are paid in full or until a certificate of release or partial release of the
lien, prepared by the city at the owner’s expense, is recorded. The notice of
unpaid civil fines shall state the amount of the fine as of the date of the
notice and maximum permissible daily increase of the fine. The city shall not
be required to include a social security number, State general excise taxpayer
identification number, or federal employer identification number on the notice.
Recordation of the notice in the bureau of conveyances shall be deemed, at such
time, for all purposes and without any further action, to procure a lien on
land registered in land court under HRS Chapter 501.
(d)   All remedies and penalties under this article may be enforced in civil
proceedings by the corporation counsel.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 19, § 1-19.3) (Added by Ord. 93-109; Am. Ord. 05-35)
§ 6-1.4 Administrative procedures.
(a)   Notices of order. Notices of order for violations of city ordinances,
rules, or regulations, for which civil fines are imposed, shall include, in
addition to any other required content, the following:
(1)   A statement declaring that the civil fines being imposed, if unpaid
within the time periods prescribed therein, can be added to specified taxes,
fees, or charges collected by the city; and
(2)   A statement or statements advising persons receiving notices of order
that their rights to an administrative appeal or judicial review, as
appropriate, shall also involve all potential remedies, including the addition
of unpaid civil fines to certain taxes, fees, or charges collected by the city,
and specified in the notice of order.
(b)   Rules. Only the executive agency administering a specific civil fines
program shall be able to administratively add those unpaid civil fines imposed
under their authority to specified taxes, fees, or charges collected by the
city. Before administratively adding unpaid civil fines to any taxes, fees, or
charges collected by the city, each eligible executive agency shall adopt or
amend appropriate rules, pursuant to
Chapter 1, Article 9, for administratively adding unpaid civil fines, and such
rules shall specify, at least, the following:
(1)   The particular taxes, fees, or charges to which unpaid civil fines may be
added;
(2)   The manner whereby written notification shall be made to the executive
agency responsible for administering, and thereby collecting, the unpaid civil
fines after their addition to each particular tax, fee, or charge;
(3)   The period of delinquency that must elapse before any unpaid civil fines
may be added to any taxes, fees, or charges;
(4)   The manner whereby written notification shall be made to any person
affected by the addition of unpaid civil fines to any taxes, fees, or charges
collected by the city, pursuant to this section. The express purpose of such
notice shall be only to properly inform an affected person of the action taken;
and such notice shall not be construed to provide any additional rights for
further review or appeal, other than the appeal rights already provided by this
article. Such notice shall provide statements specifying, at a minimum:
(A)   The particular tax, fee, or charge to which any unpaid civil fine has
been administratively added as provided in the notice of order;
(B)   The effective date of the addition of the unpaid civil fine to the tax,
fee, or charge; and
(C)   The amount of the unpaid civil fine that has been added to the tax, fee,
or charge; and
(5)   Where daily civil fines are accruing, unpaid civil fines shall be added
to taxes, fees, or charges, as fixed amounts, subject to the following
alternative methods:
(A)   Unpaid civil fines may be added to any taxes, fees, or charges at such
time when the civil fines cease to accrue, whereby the accrual shall cease at a
point in time specified in the rules, and the total fine at the cessation of
accrual shall become the total unpaid civil fine deemed due and owing; or
(B)   Unpaid civil fines may continue to accrue so long as a violation is
outstanding, whereby the unpaid balance due and owing each year may then be
added to the tax, fee, or charge, as specified in the rules, and unpaid
balances accruing after this date may be added annually in subsequent years, in
the same manner, until paid in full.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 19, § 1-19.4) (Added by Ord. 93-109)
§ 6-1.5 Collection procedures.
(a)   After any unpaid civil fines are added to any taxes, fees, or charges
collected by the city, the unpaid civil fines shall be deemed immediately due,
owing and delinquent, and shall be collected in any lawful manner. The
executive agency with direct authority for the collection of a particular tax,
fee, or charge shall be responsible for the collection of any unpaid civil fine
after its addition to the particular tax, fee, or charge.
(b)   The procedure for collection of any unpaid civil fines shall be in
addition to any other procedures for collection available to the city by
ordinance, or rule or regulation, or to any court of competent jurisdiction.
(1990 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 19, § 1-19.5) (Added by Ord. 93-109; Am. Ord. 05-35)
ARTICLE 2: PAYROLLS CLEARANCE FUND
Sections
   
6-2.1   Creation
   
6-2.2   Authorization
§ 6-2.1 Creation.
   There is created a working capital fund to be known as the “payrolls
clearance fund.”
(Sec. 5-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 2, § 6-2.1)
§ 6-2.2 Authorization.
   The director of budget and fiscal services is authorized to approve claims
payable out of the payrolls clearance fund, only when such claims are
accompanied by properly executed distribution vouchers, requesting the issuance
of warrants chargeable to the respective funds or appropriation accounts
against which the segregated amounts of the total payrolls listed on such
claims are legally chargeable, and payable to the payrolls clearance fund in
amounts, the total of which is equal to the total of payroll claims sought to
be charged to the payrolls clearance fund.
(Sec. 5-3.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 2, § 6-2.2)
ARTICLE 3: HIGHWAY FUND*
Section
   
6-3.1   Redesignation
§ 6-3.1 Redesignation.
   The special fund designated as “road fund” is redesignated “highway fund”
pursuant to HRS § 249-18, as amended.
(Sec. 5-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 3, § 6-3.1)
Editor’s note:
   *Establishment, see HRS § 249-18, as amended.
ARTICLE 4: TREASURY TRUST FUND
Sections
   
6-4.1   Creation
   
6-4.2   Purpose
   
6-4.3   Administration
   
6-4.4   Disposition of unclaimed moneys
§ 6-4.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special trust fund to be known as the
“treasury trust fund.”
(Sec. 5-6.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 4, § 6-4.1)
§ 6-4.2 Purpose.
   All moneys received by the various agencies of the city for specific
purposes, as trustee, escrow agent, custodian, or security holder and which
moneys are found by the director of budget and fiscal services, in view of the
nature of the purposes for which the same have been received, to require
expeditious disbursement shall be deposited into the treasury trust fund from
which the director of budget and fiscal services may authorize disbursements
through checking accounts. Such moneys shall be maintained by separate accounts
according to, and used for, the purposes for which such moneys are received.
(Sec. 5-6.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 4, § 6-4.2)
§ 6-4.3 Administration.
   The administrative head of each city agency shall be responsible for the
administration of the respective agency account or accounts in the treasury
trust fund under such procedures as may be prescribed by the director of budget
and fiscal services.
(Sec. 5-6.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 4, § 6-4.3)
§ 6-4.4 Disposition of unclaimed moneys.
   All moneys deposited into the treasury trust fund, not used for the purposes
for which such moneys were received, and remaining unclaimed for a period of at
least five years after the purposes for which such moneys were originally
received have ceased to exist, shall be transferred into the general fund of
the city as general realization.
(Sec. 5-6.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 4, § 6-4.4)
ARTICLE 5: GENERAL TRUST FUND
Sections
   
6-5.1   Creation
   
6-5.2   Purpose
   
6-5.3   Administration
   
6-5.4   Disposition of unclaimed moneys
§ 6-5.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special trust fund to be known as the
“general trust fund.”
(Sec. 5-7.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 5, § 6-5.1)
§ 6-5.2 Purpose.
   All moneys received by the various agencies of the city for specific
purposes, as trustee, escrow agent, donee, beneficiary, custodian or security
holder, for which no special trust fund exists, shall be deposited into the
general trust fund and maintained in separate accounts according to, and used
for, the purposes for which such moneys are received; provided that gifts and
donations shall be first accepted by the council pursuant to Charter § 13-113.
(Sec. 5-7.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 5, § 6-5.2)
§ 6-5.3 Administration.
   The administrative head of each city agency shall be responsible for the
administration of the respective agency account or accounts in the general
trust fund under such procedures as may be prescribed by the director of budget
and fiscal services.
(Sec. 5-7.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 5, § 6-5.3)
§ 6-5.4 Disposition of unclaimed moneys.
   All moneys deposited into the general trust fund, not used for the purposes
for which such moneys were received, and remaining unclaimed for a period of at
least five years after the purposes for which such moneys were originally
received have ceased to exist, shall be transferred into the general fund of
the city as general realization.
(Sec. 5-7.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 5, § 6-5.4)
ARTICLE 6: IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT BOND AND INTEREST REDEMPTION FUND
Sections
   
6-6.1   Creation
   
6-6.2   Administration
§ 6-6.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the
“improvement district bond and interest redemption fund.” The director of
budget and fiscal services shall transfer from the improvement district
assessment fund into the improvement district bond and interest redemption fund
such moneys as are required for the payment of principal of and interest on the
bonds as are issued under
Chapter 14, Articles 8 through
15, when the same becomes due and payable.
(Sec. 5-8.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 6, § 6-6.1)
§ 6-6.2 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall be responsible for the
administration of the improvement district bond and interest redemption fund
under such procedures as may be prescribed by the director.
(Sec. 5-8.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 6, § 6-6.2)
ARTICLE 7: HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT REVOLVING FUND
Sections
   
6-7.1   Creation
   
6-7.2   Purpose
   
6-7.3   Administration
   
6-7.4   Disposition of unexpended balance
§ 6-7.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a working capital fund to be known as the
“housing and community development revolving fund.”
(Sec. 5-9.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 7, § 6-7.1)
§ 6-7.2 Purpose.
   The purpose of the housing and community development revolving fund is to
facilitate the expenditure of joint costs allocable to the separate programs
undertaken by the department of community services.
(Sec. 5-9.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 7, § 6-7.2)
§ 6-7.3 Administration.
   The administrative head of the department of community services shall be
responsible for the administration of the housing and community development
revolving fund under such procedures as may be prescribed by the director of
budget and fiscal services.
(Sec. 5-9.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 7, § 6-7.3)
§ 6-7.4 Disposition of unexpended balance.
   All moneys remaining unexpended in the housing and community development
revolving fund after the purposes for which such moneys were originally
deposited have ceased to exist, shall be transferred to the funds from which
the working capital was originally provided.
(Sec. 5-9.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 7, § 6-7.4)
ARTICLE 8: GENERAL OBLIGATION BOND AND INTEREST REDEMPTION FUND
Sections
   
6-8.1   Creation
   
6-8.2   Purpose
§ 6-8.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “general
obligation bond and interest redemption fund.”
(Sec. 5-10.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 8, § 6-8.1)
§ 6-8.2 Purpose.
   All moneys as are provided for the payment of principal of and interest on
general obligation bonds of the city shall be deposited into the general
obligation bond and interest redemption fund, and shall be used only for the
payment of such principal and interest when the same become due and payable.
(Sec. 5-10.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 8, § 6-8.2)
ARTICLE 9: RESERVED
ARTICLE 10: SERVICE FEES FOR DISPOSITION OF REAL PROPERTY
Sections
   
6-10.1   Property sold at public auction
   
6-10.2   Property disposed of by negotiated sale or exchange
§ 6-10.1 Property sold at public auction.
   Whenever any real property, or any interest therein, owned by the city is
sold at public auction, the purchaser thereof shall pay, in addition to the
purchase price, fees for services rendered by the city in connection with such
sale according to the following schedule:
 
Services                                 Fee
Advertising                              Actual cost
Appraisal                                Actual cost but not less than $25
Preparation or processing of document of $20
conveyance
Preparation or processing of map land    $25
description
Survey                                   Actual cost
 
(Sec. 5-14.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 10, § 6-10.1) (Am.
Ord. 25-37)
Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to § 6-10.1 in Ord. 25-37 take effect on January 1, 2026,
and are not yet incorporated herein.
§ 6-10.2 Property disposed of by negotiated sale or exchange.
   Whenever any real property, or any interest therein, owned by the city is
disposed of by negotiated sale or exchange, no service fee for such sale or
exchange shall be charged by the city; provided that where the proceeds from
such negotiated sale or exchange do not inure to the exclusive use of the city,
the purchaser thereof shall be charged with service fees, in accordance with
the schedule provided in §
6-10.1.
(Sec. 5-14.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 10, § 6-10.2)
ARTICLE 11: FEE SCHEDULE FOR PUBLIC RECORDS
Sections
   
6-11.1   Charges for extracts, certified copies, and searches of public records
   
6-11.2   Charges for publications
   
6-11.3   Applicability
   
6-11.4   Exemption from payment of fees and charges
   
6-11.5   Director of budget and fiscal services to administer
§ 6-11.1 Charges for extracts, certified copies, and searches of public
records.
   Except as otherwise provided in this article, a copy or extract of any
public document or record that is open to inspection by the public must be
furnished to any person applying for the same by the public officer having
custody or control thereof pursuant to the following schedule of fees:
Service Fee
Service                                                                                 Fee
(a)    Duplicated copy of any record (by duplicating machines including but not limited
to microfilm printer, Thermofax, Verifax, Xerox, etc.)
      For the first page of each document or record                               $0.50
      Each additional page or copy thereof                                        $0.25
(b)    Abstract of information from public record
      Each page                                                                   $0.50
      Each additional copy                                                        $0.25
(c)   Typewritten copy of any record
      Per 100 words or fraction thereof                                           $1
(d)    Copy of map, plan, diagram
      Black and white reproductions
         Up to 22 in. x 36 in. size; per sheet                                 $5
         Larger than 22 in. x 36 in. size; prevailing commercial rate, with min$5um
charge per sheet
      Color reproductions
         Up to 8-½ in. by 14 in.; per sheet                                   $1
         Up to 11 in. x 17 in.; per sheet                                      $2
         Larger than 11 in. x 17 in.; prevailing commercial rate, with minimum $25rge
per sheet
      Black and white or color custom prints
         For each 10 minutes or fraction thereof of searching, creation, and pr$5ting
of document; per sheet
                                                                                        Prevailing
(e)    Photograph or photograph enlargement                                          commercial
                                                                                        rate
(f)    City clerk’s certificate of voter registration                              $5
                                                                                        $750 per
(g)   Countywide voter data or any portion thereof (as may be available)             data
                                                                                        export
   Voter data subscription (6 data exports)                                          $4,000
(h)    Certified copy of medical examiner’s report and autopsy report              $5
(i)    Medical information extracted from city records for insurance companies and   $5
other firms
(j)    Certified statement attesting to veracity of information obtained from public
records
      Per 100 words of statement or fraction thereof                              $1
(k)    Certification by public officer or employee as to correctness (or in attestation
that document is a true copy) of any document, including maps, plans, and diagrams
      Per document                                                                $5
(l)    Use of motion picture film for the purpose of producing a copy, subject to the
terms, conditions, and covenants contained in an agreement between the city and the
party seeking to use the film for the purpose stated herein
      Per minute of film                                                          $2
(m)   Searches of real property tax records
      For each 15 minutes or fraction thereof of searching and typing             $4.75
 
(Sec. 5-15.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 11, § 6-11.1) (Am.
Ord. 99-29, 03-12, 18-3, 25-37)
Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to § 6-11.1 in Ord. 25-37 take effect on January 1, 2026,
and are not yet incorporated herein.
§ 6-11.2 Charges for publications.
(a)   Charges for publications shall be based on cost, including reproduction
costs, mailing, and other handling charges attributable to making the
publication available to the public.
(b)   The term “publications” refers to copies of documents that are reproduced
on a volume basis for general distribution and shall include but not be limited
to such items as: ordinances; engineering and construction standards;
directories; manuals and handbooks.
(Sec. 5-15.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 11, § 6-11.2)
§ 6-11.3 Applicability.
   The fees established in this article shall have no application to the
furnishing of copies or extracts of public documents or records for which fees
have been established by statutory provisions where such statutory provisions
have not been superseded.
(Sec. 5-15.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 11, § 6-11.3)
§ 6-11.4 Exemption from payment of fees and charges.
(a)   The following agencies and organizations may be exempted from the payment
of fees established in this article, as well as charges to cover mailing and
other handling costs by the public officer having custody or control of the
records involved:
(1)   Government agencies requiring the records or publications for official
purposes;
(2)   Nonprofit organizations directly concerned with the matter involved in
the records or publications; provided that the exemption from the payment of
fees or charges, or both, is limited to one copy or one set of such records or
publications;
(3)   Newspapers; provided that the exemption from the payment of fees or
charges, or both, is limited to one copy or one set of such records or
publications; and
(4)   Organizations that have arranged a reciprocal agreement with a city
agency for the mutual exchange of records and publications
(b)   The director of budget and fiscal services may waive fees or charges, or
both, for the following:
(1)   Educational materials necessary for carrying out an agency program;
(2)   Distribution of records and publications when the distribution is of
benefit and interest to the city; or
(3)   Records or publications required by a student engaged in studying city
operations as part of the student’s school assignment; provided that exemption
from the payment of fees or charges, or both, is limited to one copy or one set
of such records or publications.
(Sec. 5-15.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 11, § 6-11.4) (Am.
Ord. 18-3)
§ 6-11.5 Director of budget and fiscal services to administer.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall administer this article.
The director may determine:
(1)   The specific organizations and agencies that will be exempt from the
payment of fees for public records and charges for publications; and
(2)   The specific records or publications, or both, for which no fees or
charges will be required.
(Sec. 5-15.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 11, § 6-11.5) (Am.
Ord. 18-3)
ARTICLE 12: OVERTIME INSPECTION FEES
Sections
   
6-12.1   Definitions
   
6-12.2   Charges
§ 6-12.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Applicant. Any person requesting inspectional services from the city.
Cost. The amount to be charged by the city for overtime inspections at a rate
to be recomputed annually by the director of budget and fiscal services based
on current salaries and applicable fringe benefits for inspectors.
Inspection. Includes all inspections provided for by law.
(Sec. 10-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 19, § 41-19.1)
§ 6-12.2 Charges.
(a)   When an applicant requests that an inspection be made during any hour
after the normal working hours of an inspector in any workday or on a Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday, the applicant shall bear the cost of such inspection,
and shall pay the cost to the city, before the final approval of any project so
inspected.
(b)   The moneys so realized shall be general realizations and the same shall
be deposited into the general fund.
(Sec. 10-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 20, § 41-20.1)
ARTICLE 13: FEDERAL GRANTS FUND
Sections
   
6-13.1   Creation
   
6-13.2   Purpose
§ 6-13.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “federal
grants fund.”
(Sec. 5-17.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 13, § 6-13.1)
§ 6-13.2 Purpose.
   All moneys received from the United States of America as grants for specific
projects, in addition to supporting moneys from other sources, where such
moneys are not accounted for in any other fund, shall be deposited into the
federal grants fund. Any related budgetary appropriations of city moneys shall
be transferred into the federal grants fund. All moneys deposited or
transferred into the federal grants fund shall be maintained in separate
accounts identified with, and expended for, the purposes for which such moneys
are received or appropriated.
(Sec. 5-17.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 13, § 6-13.2)
ARTICLE 14: SPECIAL PROJECTS FUND
Sections
   
6-14.1   Creation
   
6-14.2   Purpose
§ 6-14.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “special
projects fund.”
(Sec. 5-18.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 14, § 6-14.1)
§ 6-14.2 Purpose.
   All moneys received under special contracts entered into by and between the
city and the State, such as for maintenance of State highways, and all moneys
received from various other sources for operating and capital improvement
expenses for which no financing has been provided in other funds, such as
contributions from property owners exclusive of improvement district assessment
collections, shall be deposited into the special projects fund and expended for
the purposes authorized.
(Sec. 5-18.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 14, § 6-14.2)
ARTICLE 15: FURNISHING OF ELECTRONIC DATA PROCESSING SERVICES
Sections
   
6-15.1   Definition
   
6-15.2   Policy and conditions governing availability of public data
   
6-15.3   Charges for furnishing electronic data processing services
   
6-15.4   Exemption from payment of charges
   
6-15.5   Administration
   
6-15.6   Violation—Penalty
§ 6-15.1 Definition.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Public Data. Information stored by the department of information technology
that may be released to the public pursuant to Charter § 13-105, and
accessibility of which is in accordance with rules adopted by the managing
director to implement
Chapter 1, Article 24.
   An invasion of “the right of privacy of individuals” shall be deemed to
result from, but shall not be limited to, the granting of access to:
(1)   Criminal history records and investigatory files compiled for law
enforcement purposes;
(2)   Applications for licenses or permits required by law;
(3)   Personnel and employment records, employment examinations, and personal
references of applicants for employment. However, an examinee shall have the
right to review the examinee’s own completed examination;
(4)   Medical records;
(5)   Credit histories; and
(6)   Information of a personal nature when disclosure would result in economic
or personal hardship to the subject party that outweighs the public’s
fundamental right of access to information concerning the conduct of city
agencies.
(Sec. 5-19.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 15, § 6-15.1)
§ 6-15.2 Policy and conditions governing availability of public data.
   The following policy shall govern the availability of public data.
(a)   Public data may be obtained by governmental agencies and the general
public from the department of information technology in the medium (such as
compact disk) as determined by the department of information technology.
(b)   The following conditions shall apply to the release, sale, or rent of
public data:
(1)   The applicant must obtain written permission from the head of the agency
that controls the data, which permission shall be withheld in circumstances
where release of the data would result in the invasion of the right of privacy
of individuals;
(2)   The agency that controls the data may place restrictions on the use of
that data in any circumstances where it deems such restrictions are necessary
to protect the right of privacy of individuals;
(3)   All federal, State, and county statutes and rules regarding
accessibility, privacy, and security shall apply;
(4)   The director of information technology may decline the request if special
programming or operating procedures must be developed to meet the needs of the
applicant;
(5)   The responsible officer of the agency shall review the request with the
department of information technology; and
(6)   The request shall be processed by the department of information
technology on a “not to interfere” basis with respect to other jobs being
processed for governmental agencies.
(c)   This article shall not apply to data under the control of the Honolulu
police department or the prosecutor’s office of the City and County of Honolulu
or other agencies making up the criminal justice system.
(Sec. 5-19.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.); Am. Ord. 98-62) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 15,
§ 6-15.2)
§ 6-15.3 Charges for furnishing electronic data processing services.
   Charges for data processing services shall be computed on the basis of the
cost of equipment, time, labor, and materials used in connection with
processing the request for data. The director of information technology shall
adopt rules prescribing the method of computing the charges.
(Sec. 5-19.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 15, § 6-15.3)
§ 6-15.4 Exemption from payment of charges.
   Government agencies requiring data for public purposes may be exempt from
all or a portion of the cost of services provided by the department of
information technology.
(Sec. 5-19.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 15, § 6-15.4)
§ 6-15.5 Administration.
   This article shall be administered by the director of budget and fiscal
services and the director shall be authorized to determine when government
agencies may be exempt from payment of charges.
(Sec. 5-19.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 15, § 6-15.5)
§ 6-15.6 Violation—Penalty.
   It is unlawful for any person to use data in violation of restrictions
placed upon its use in accordance with §
6-15.2(b)(2), and violation of these provisions shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed $1,000, or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both.
(Sec. 5-19.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 15, § 6-15.6) (Am.
Ord. 98-62)
ARTICLE 16: GENERAL IMPROVEMENT BOND FUND
Sections
   
6-16.1   Creation
   
6-16.2   Deposit
   
6-16.3   Source of payment
§ 6-16.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “general
improvement bond fund.”
(Sec. 5-20.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 16, § 6-16.1)
§ 6-16.2 Deposit.
   There shall be deposited into the general improvement bond fund the proceeds
of the sale of general obligation bonds of the city and county issued to pay
all or part of those appropriations for public improvements made in the capital
budget ordinance of the city and county and specified therein to be expended
from the general improvement bond fund.
(Sec. 5-20.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 16, § 6-16.2)
§ 6-16.3 Source of payment.
   There shall be paid from the general improvement bond fund the costs of
public improvements appropriated in the capital budget ordinance and specified
therein to be expended from the general improvement bond fund.
(Sec. 5-20.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 16, § 6-16.3)
ARTICLE 17: HIGHWAY IMPROVEMENT BOND FUND
Sections
   
6-17.1   Creation
   
6-17.2   Deposit
   
6-17.3   Source of payment
§ 6-17.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “highway
improvement bond fund.”
(Sec. 5-21.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 17, § 6-17.1)
§ 6-17.2 Deposit.
   There shall be deposited into the highway improvement bond fund the proceeds
of the sale of general obligation bonds of the city and county issued to pay
all or part of those appropriations for public improvements made in the capital
budget ordinance of the city and county and specified therein to be expended
from the highway improvement bond fund.
(Sec. 5-21.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 17, § 6-17.2)
§ 6-17.3 Source of payment.
   There shall be paid from the highway improvement bond fund the costs of
public improvements appropriated in the capital budget ordinance and specified
therein to be expended from the highway improvement bond fund.
(Sec. 5-21.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 17, § 6-17.3)
ARTICLE 18: TRANSPORTATION FUND
Sections
   
6-18.1   Creation
   
6-18.2   Purpose
§ 6-18.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the
“transportation fund.”
(Sec. 5-23.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 18, § 6-18.1) (Am.
Ord. 20-19)
§ 6-18.2 Purpose.
   The transportation fund is for the following purposes:
(1)   For city bus, handi-van, and rail system purposes, including:
(A)   The management, operation, and maintenance of the city bus, handi- van,
and rail system; and
(B)   The pro rata share of the expenses of the department of transportation
services attributable to the administration of the city bus, handi-van, and
rail system;
(2)   As a depository for all revenues generated by or received from the city
bus, handi-van, rail system, and parking fees derived from the joint traffic
management center parking garage.
(3)   To provide for expenses of operation, maintenance, improvement, and
betterment of the joint traffic management center parking garage facilities.
(Sec. 5-23.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 18, § 6-18.2) (Am.
Ords. 91-27, 97-02, 12-36, 20-19)
ARTICLE 19: FEDERAL REVENUE SHARING FUND
Sections
   
6-19.1   Creation
   
6-19.2   Purpose
   
6-19.3   Administration
§ 6-19.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “federal
revenue sharing fund.”
(Sec. 5-24.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 19, § 6-19.1)
§ 6-19.2 Purpose.
(a)   There shall be deposited into the federal revenue sharing fund all moneys
received from the United States of America under the State and Local Fiscal
Assistance Act of 1972. All moneys deposited into the federal revenue sharing
fund shall be expended for “priority expenditure” purposes authorized by the
Act based on appropriations in the operating budget and capital budget
ordinances. The appropriations shall be explicit as to the purpose for which
intended, and shall be accompanied by a statement of such conditions and
restrictions as may apply to ensure full compliance with the Act.
(b)   Priority expenditure purposes outlined in the Act mean only:
(1)   Ordinary and necessary maintenance and operating expenses for:
(A)   Public safety (including law enforcement, fire protection, and building
code enforcement);
(B)   Environmental protection (including sewage disposal, sanitation, and
pollution abatement);
(C)   Public transportation (including transit systems and streets and roads);
(D)   Health;
(E)   Recreation;
(F)   Libraries;
(G)   Social services for the poor and aged; and
(H)   Financial administration; and
(2)   Ordinary and necessary capital expenditures authorized by law.
(Sec. 5-24.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 19, § 6-19.2)
§ 6-19.3 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services and the chief budget officer
shall be responsible for the administration of the federal revenue sharing
fund. Expenditures from the federal revenue sharing fund shall be in accordance
with prescribed laws and procedures applicable to expenditures of city
revenues.
(Sec. 5-24.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 19, § 6-19.3)
ARTICLE 20: HIGHWAY BEAUTIFICATION AND DISPOSAL OF
ABANDONED VEHICLES REVOLVING FUND
Sections
   
6-20.1   Creation
   
6-20.2   Purpose
   
6-20.3   Expenditures
   
6-20.4   Administration
Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to Chapter 6, Article 20 in Ord. 25-37 take effect on
January 1, 2026, and are not yet incorporated herein.
§ 6-20.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “highway
beautification and disposal of abandoned vehicles revolving fund.”
(Sec. 5-25.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 20, § 6-20.1) (Am.
Ord. 25-37)
§ 6-20.2 Purpose.
   There shall be deposited into the highway beautification and disposal of
abandoned vehicles revolving fund all receipts from the fee permitted under HRS
§ 286-51. The fee assessed and collected shall be $1 per vehicle for U-drive
motor vehicles, and for motor vehicles other than U-drive motor vehicles:
 
Per vehicle Effective date
$6          September 1, 2009
$7          July 1, 2010
 
   All moneys deposited into the highway beautification and disposal of
abandoned vehicles revolving fund shall be expended in accordance with HRS §
286-51 for:
(a)   Beautification and other related activities of primary highways under the
ownership, control, and jurisdiction of the city; and
(b)   Disposition and other related activities of abandoned vehicles as
prescribed in HRS Chapter 290.
(Sec. 5-25.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 20, §
6-20.2) (Am. Ords. 02-30, 03-13, 09-16, 25-37)
§ 6-20.3 Expenditures.
   All expenditures from the highway beautification and disposal of abandoned
vehicles revolving fund shall be for purposes authorized herein, based on
appropriations in the operating budget or capital budget ordinances, or both.
(Sec. 5-25.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 20, § 6-20.3) (Am.
Ord. 25-37)
§ 6-20.4 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services and the chief budget officer
shall be responsible for the administration of the highway beautification and
disposal of abandoned vehicles revolving fund. Expenditures from the highway
beautification and disposal of abandoned vehicles revolving fund shall be in
accordance with prescribed laws and procedures applicable to expenditures of
city revenues.
(Sec. 5-25.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 20, § 6-20.4) (Am.
Ord. 25-37)
ARTICLE 21: BIKEWAY FUND
Sections
   
6-21.1   Creation
   
6-21.2   Purpose
   
6-21.3   Expenditures
   
6-21.4   Administration
§ 6-21.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “bikeway
fund.”
(Sec. 5-26.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 21, § 6-21.1)
§ 6-21.2 Purpose.
   There shall be deposited into the bikeway fund all receipts from the
biennial registration fee of $8 levied and collected under HRS § 249-14, as
amended. All moneys deposited into the bikeway fund shall be expended for:
(1)   Acquisition, design, construction, improvement, repair, and maintenance
of bikeways, including the installation and repair of storm drains and bridges;
(2)   Installation, maintenance, and repair of bikeway lights and power,
including replacement of old bikeway lights;
(3)   Purposes and functions connected with traffic control and preservation of
safety upon bikeways; and
(4)   Payment of interest on and redemption of bonds issued to finance bikeway
construction and improvements.
(Sec. 5-26.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 21, § 6-21.2) (Am.
Ords. 92-67, 25-37)
Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to § 6-21.2 in Ord. 25-37 take effect on January 1, 2026,
and are not yet incorporated herein.
§ 6-21.3 Expenditures.
   All expenditures from the bikeway fund shall be for purposes authorized
herein, based on appropriations in the operating budget or capital budget
ordinances, or both.
(Sec. 5-26.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 21, § 6-21.3)
§ 6-21.4 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall be responsible for the
administration of the bikeway fund. Expenditures from the bikeway fund shall be
in accordance with prescribed laws and procedures applicable to expenditures of
city revenues.
(Sec. 5-26.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 21, § 6-21.4)
ARTICLE 22: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FUND
Sections
   
6-22.1   Creation
   
6-22.2   Purpose
   
6-22.3   Administration
§ 6-22.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the
“community development fund.”
(Sec. 5-27.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 22, § 6-22.1)
§ 6-22.2 Purpose.
   There shall be deposited into the community development fund all moneys
received from the United States of America under the Housing and Community
Development Act of 1974. All moneys deposited into the community development
fund shall be expended for the primary objective of the community development
program as authorized by the Act based on appropriations in the operating
budget and capital budget ordinances. The primary objective is the development
of viable urban communities, including decent housing and a suitable living
environment and expanding economic opportunities, principally for persons of
low and moderate income.
(a)   This primary objective is for the support of community development
activities that are directed toward the following specific objectives:
(1)   The elimination of slums and blight and the prevention of blighting
influences and the deterioration of property and neighborhood and community
facilities of importance to the welfare of the community, principally for
persons of low and moderate income;
(2)   The elimination of conditions that are detrimental to health, safety, and
public welfare, through code enforcement, demolition, interim rehabilitation
assistance, and related activities;
(3)   The conservation and expansion of the nation’s housing stock to provide a
decent home and a suitable living environment for all persons, but principally
for those of low and moderate income;
(4)   The expansion and improvement of the quantity and quality of community
services, principally for persons of low and moderate income, which are
essential for sound community development and for the development of viable
urban communities;
(5)   A more rational use of land and other natural resources and the better
arrangement of residential, commercial, industrial, recreational, and other
needed activity centers;
(6)   The reduction of the isolation of income groups within communities and
geographical areas and the promotion of an increase in the diversity and
vitality of neighborhoods through the spatial deconcentration of housing
opportunities for persons of lower income and the revitalization of
deteriorating or deteriorated neighborhoods to attract persons of higher
income; and
(7)   The restoration and preservation of properties of special value for
historic, architectural, or esthetic reasons.
(b)   It is also the purpose of the Act to further develop a national urban
growth policy by consolidating a number of complex and overlapping financial
assistance programs to communities of varying sizes and needs into a consistent
federal aid system that:
(1)   Provides assistance on an annual basis, with maximum certainty and
minimum delay, upon which communities can rely in their planning;
(2)   Encourages community development activities that are consistent with
comprehensive local and area-wide development planning;
(3)   Furthers achievement of the national housing goal of a decent home and a
suitable living environment for every American family; and
(4)   Fosters the undertaking of housing and community development activities
in a coordinated and mutually supportive manner.
(Sec. 5-27.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 22, § 6-22.2)
§ 6-22.3 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall be responsible for the
administration of the community development fund. Expenditures from the
community development fund shall be in accordance with prescribed laws and
procedures applicable to expenditures of city revenues.
(Sec. 5-27.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 22, § 6-22.3)
ARTICLE 23: HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
SECTION 8 CONTRACT FUND
Sections
   
6-23.1   Creation
   
6-23.2   Purpose
   
6-23.3   Administration
§ 6-23.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “housing
and community development Section 8 contract fund.”
(Sec. 5-29.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 23, § 6-23.1)
§ 6-23.2 Purpose.
   There shall be deposited into the housing and community development Section
8 contract fund all moneys received from the United States of America under the
Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 for the purposes set forth under
Title II of the Act, and expended for such purposes.
(Sec. 5-29.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 23, § 6-23.2)
§ 6-23.3 Administration.
   The director of community services shall be responsible for the
administration of the housing and community development Section 8 contract fund
in accordance with disbursement procedures prescribed by the director of budget
and fiscal services.
(Sec. 5-29.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 23, § 6-23.3)
ARTICLE 24: HONOLULU ZOO FUND
Sections
   
6-24.1   Creation
   
6-24.2   Purpose
   
6-24.3   Administration
§ 6-24.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “Honolulu
Zoo fund.”
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 24, § 6-24.1) (Added by Ord. 16-12)
§ 6-24.2 Purpose.
(a)   There will be deposited into the Honolulu Zoo fund:
(1)   All revenues generated for the city by the Honolulu Zoo, the Honolulu Zoo
food concessions, and the Honolulu Zoo parking lot;
(2)   All entrance fees, rents, user fees, and miscellaneous revenues generated
from operations of the Honolulu Zoo;
(3)   All proceeds from the sale of surplus animals from the Honolulu Zoo;
(4)   Gifts made to the Honolulu Zoo;
(5)   Any funds remaining in the zoo animal purchase fund, which will continue
to be used for the purchase of animals;
(6)   All moneys appropriated to the fund by the council in the annual
executive operating budget ordinance and any amendments thereto; and
(7)   Any interest earned on moneys deposited into the Honolulu Zoo fund.
(b)   The purpose of the Honolulu Zoo fund is to provide the following:
(1)   Funds for the administration, operation, repair, maintenance, and
improvement of the Honolulu Zoo;
(2)   The salaries of persons employed to work at the Honolulu Zoo and related
expenses;
(3)   Acquisition of zoo animals for the city, including shipping, insurance,
travel, and other costs related to the purchase of animals for the Honolulu
Zoo; and
(4)   To pay for debt service owed for capital improvements at the Honolulu
Zoo.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 24, § 6-24.2) (Added by Ord. 16-12)
§ 6-24.3 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall administer the Honolulu Zoo
fund in accordance with prescribed laws and procedures applicable to
expenditures of city funds.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 24, § 6-24.3) (Added by Ord. 16-12)
ARTICLE 25: PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS FUND
Sections
   
6-25.1   Creation
   
6-25.2   Purpose
   
6-25.3   Administration
§ 6-25.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “parks
and playgrounds fund.”
(Sec. 5-32.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 25, § 6-25.1)
§ 6-25.2 Purpose.
   All moneys received by the city pursuant to §
22-7.6, shall be deposited into the parks and playgrounds fund to be expended
for the purposes prescribed in §
22-7.6.
(Sec. 5-32.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 25, § 6-25.2)
§ 6-25.3 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall be responsible for the
administration of the parks and playgrounds fund in accordance with prescribed
laws and procedures applicable to expenditures of city funds.
(Sec. 5-32.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 25, § 6-25.3)
ARTICLE 26: HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
REHABILITATION LOAN FUND
Sections
   
6-26.1   Definitions
   
6-26.2   Title
   
6-26.3   Purpose
   
6-26.4   Limitations concerning rehabilitation loans
   
6-26.5   Rules
§ 6-26.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Concentrated Code Enforcement Project Area. A deteriorated or deteriorating
area as described by § 105(a)(3) of the Housing and Community Development Act
of 1974.
Department. The department of community services.
Eligible Applicant. One or more persons who own or lease a parcel of land.
General Property Improvement. The general renovation, improvement, alteration,
expansion, and enhancement of a property.
Local Code Requirements. Requirements of fire, health, safety, sanitation,
building, and other requirements as cited in various laws, ordinances, codes,
and regulations of the City and County of Honolulu.
Project Standards. Code requirements of a concentrated code enforcement project
and a rehabilitation project, and provisions of the urban renewal plan for the
urban renewal project.
Rehabilitation Project Area. An area designated by the administering
department, with the consent of the city council, for a voluntary property
rehabilitation program.
Rehabilitation. The necessary and required improvement of a property in
accordance with project standards or local code requirements.
Urban Renewal Project Area. A slum or blighted, deteriorated or deteriorating
area as defined by HRS § 53-51.
(Sec. 5-33.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 26, § 6-26.1)
§ 6-26.2 Title.
   There is created and established a “housing and community development
rehabilitation loan fund,” which may be cited as “H&CD loan fund.”
(Sec. 5-33.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 26, § 6-26.2)
§ 6-26.3 Purpose.
(a)   The purposes of the housing and community development rehabilitation loan
fund are to:
(1)   Make loan money available primarily to low- and moderate-income
applicants who are owners or lessees of parcels of land within urban renewal,
concentrated code enforcement or rehabilitation project areas or are owners or
lessees of a parcel of land in the City and County of Honolulu that have been
cited for local code violations by departments of the City and County of
Honolulu, or are owners or lessees of parcels of land who have need of
rehabilitation or general property improvement as determined by the department.
Applicants eligible for financing under this loan program must be unable to
secure funds under the Rehabilitation Loan Program, § 312 of the Housing Act of
1964, as amended, or from other sources under comparable terms and conditions,
to finance rehabilitation of their properties; and
(2)   Fund any project that is eligible to receive and expend community
development block grant moneys.
(b)   For the purpose set forth in subsection (a)(1), there may be authorized
sufficient sums appropriated each fiscal year that may constitute a revolving
account to be used by the department to carry out this loan program. All moneys
in such revolving account may be available for servicing loans made pursuant to
this article.
(Sec. 5-33.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 26, § 6-26.3) (Am.
Ord. 04-22)
§ 6-26.4 Limitations concerning rehabilitation loans.
   The following limitations shall only apply to loans made pursuant to §
6-26.3(a)(1).
(a)   Loans shall be made in the name of the City and County of Honolulu to an
eligible applicant who is an owner or lessee of a parcel of land containing one
or more structures which is situated in an approved urban renewal, concentrated
code enforcement, or rehabilitation project area or are owners or lessees of a
parcel of land that have been cited for local code violations from departments
of the city, or has need of rehabilitation or general property improvements.
(b)   The amount of each loan, together with other existing liens, shall not
exceed 90 percent of the appraised value of the fee property or leasehold
property after rehabilitation.
(c)   If there are rental units situated on properties under this loan program,
priority shall be given by the property owner or lessee to low-income and
moderate-income families.
(d)   All loans shall be adequately secured as determined by the department.
(e)   All loans shall bear interest on the outstanding balance thereof at an
annual interest rate to be determined by the department; provided that the
department may forego interest for loan leveraging purposes, or if such
interest poses a hardship on a low-income applicant.
(f)   Monthly payments shall be made on all loans. The department may defer the
payments for such periods as deemed appropriate and necessary upon its
determination that the applicant is unable to meet these payments because of
limited income, unemployment, or for any other valid reason.
(g)   The term of each loan shall not exceed three-fourths of the remaining
economic life of the structure after rehabilitation or the remaining period of
a leasehold property, whichever is the lesser.
(h)   The department may require that the loan be paid in full should the
owner-occupant or lessee-occupant borrower cease to be an occupant of the
property or if title or lease to the property is transferred before the
maturity date, unless the succeeding titleholder or leaseholder meets the
eligibility requirements established by the department for the loan.
(i)   If there are rental units on the subject parcel of land, the loan shall
be paid in full if it is found that the property owner is in violation of the
loan agreements as set by the department.
(j)   The department may prescribe such charges, fees, and other costs as may
be related to each loan.
(k)   All loans shall be periodically reviewed to assure compliance with the
above limitations.
(Sec. 5-33.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 26, § 6-26.4) (Am.
Ord. 04-22)
§ 6-26.5 Rules.
   The department shall, under its powers, adopt necessary and appropriate
rules to implement the purpose of the housing and community development
rehabilitation loan fund and be responsible for the administration thereof.
(Sec. 5-33.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 26, § 6-26.5)
ARTICLE 27: STATE SPECIAL USE PERMIT
Section
   
6-27.1   Fees for State special use permits
§ 6-27.1 Fees for State special use permits.
   The following fees shall be charged for a State special use permit:
(a)   An application fee of $700, plus $300 per acre or major fraction thereof,
up to a maximum of $15,000, shall be charged for a State special use permit. In
the event of a joint application (conditional use permit and State special use
permit), only one fee shall apply; and
(b)   When an environmental assessment or impact statement is required to be
prepared as a prerequisite to a State special use permit, and is submitted to
the department of planning and permitting for processing as the accepting
agency, there shall be a processing fee of $600 for an environmental assessment
and $1,200 for an environmental impact statement.
(Sec. 5-34.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 27, § 6-27.1) (Am.
Ords. 03-12, 14-4)
ARTICLE 28: THE WAIPIO PENINSULA SOCCER PARK FUND
Sections
   
6-28.1   Creation
   
6-28.2   Purpose
   
6-28.3   Administration
§ 6-28.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a fund to be known as the “Waipio Peninsula
Soccer Park fund.”
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 28, § 6-28.1) (Added by Ord. 15-30)
§ 6-28.2 Purpose.
   All revenues generated from the Waipio Peninsula Soccer Park shall be
deposited into the Waipio Peninsula Soccer Park fund. All moneys deposited into
the Waipio Peninsula Soccer Park fund must be expended, as appropriated, for
the improvement, maintenance, and repair of the city’s Waipio Peninsula Soccer
Park. All appropriations from the Waipio Peninsula Soccer Park fund must be
used to supplement, and not supplant, other city fund appropriations for the
Waipio Peninsula Soccer Park.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 28, § 6-28.2) (Added by Ord. 15-30)
§ 6-28.3 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall administer the Waipio
Peninsula Soccer Park fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 28, § 6-28.3) (Added by Ord. 15-30)
ARTICLE 29: STANDARDS FOR THE APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS TO
PRIVATE ORGANIZATIONS
Sections
   
6-29.1   Legislative intent
   
6-29.2   Appropriation of funds
   
6-29.3   Organizations applying/granted funds
   
6-29.4   Reports
§ 6-29.1 Legislative intent.
   The purpose of this article is to establish standards for the appropriation
of funds to private organizations providing programs and services that the City
and County of Honolulu has determined to be in the public interest.
(Sec. 5-36.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 29, § 6-29.1)
§ 6-29.2 Appropriation of funds.
   All grants of public funds made by the City and County of Honolulu to
private organizations are to be made in accordance with the standard that the
private programs and services so funded shall result in a direct benefit to the
public and accomplish public purposes. No grant, subsidy, or purchase of
services contract to a private organization shall be made or allotted, unless
the private organization meets the following criteria:
(a)   The private organization is a not-for-profit organization or association
chartered or otherwise authorized to do business in the State for charitable
purposes;
(b)   The purposes for which the private not-for-profit corporation or
association is organized provides direct benefits to the people of the City and
County of Honolulu; and
(c)   The purposes for which the not-for-profit corporation or association is
organized includes one of the following categories:
(1)   Social services for the poor, the aged, and the youth of the City and
County of Honolulu;
(2)   Health services including services for those with physical or emotional/
mental disabilities, or both;
(3)   Any one or more of the following: educational, manpower, or training
services; and
(4)   Services to meet a definitive cultural, social, or economic need within
the City and County of Honolulu not being met by any other private
organization.
(Sec. 5-36.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 29, § 6-29.2)
§ 6-29.3 Organizations applying/granted funds.
   No grant, subsidy, or purchase of services contract to a private
organization shall be made or allotted by the City and County of Honolulu,
unless a private organization so funded agrees to the following conditions:
(1)   To comply with all applicable federal and State laws prohibiting
discrimination against any person on the grounds of race, color, national
origin, religion, creed, sex, handicap, or age, in employment and any condition
of employment with the recipient or in participation in the benefits of any
program or activity funded in whole or in part by the State;
(2)   To comply with all applicable licensing requirements of the county,
State, and federal governments and with all applicable accreditation and other
standards of quality generally accepted in the field of the recipient’s
activities;
(3)   To have in its employ or under contract such persons as are
professionally qualified to engage in the activity funded in whole or in part
by the State;
(4)   To comply with such other requirements as the director of budget and
fiscal services may prescribe to ensure adherence by the provider or recipient
with county, federal, and State laws and to ensure quality in the service or
activity rendered by the recipient; and
(5)   To allow the expending or related county agency, or a committee of the
council, or the council full access to records, reports, files, and other
related documents in order that they may monitor and evaluate the management
and fiscal practices of the recipient organization to assure proper and
effective expenditure of city and county funds.
(Sec. 5-36.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 29, § 6-29.3)
§ 6-29.4 Reports.
   All organizations granted funds must keep these funds financially separate
in their book of accounts and submit quarterly program and financial reports on
the use of these funds, due on or before the 15th of the month following the
close of the quarter; and a year-end report on the same within 90 days
following the close of the fiscal year in which the money is appropriated. In
lieu of a year-end report, the City and County of Honolulu may elect to require
a final report be submitted within 90 days following the completion of the
program or services for which the grant was awarded. The reports shall contain,
but are not limited to:
(1)   Program status summary;
(2)   Program data summary;
(3)   Summary of participant characteristics;
(4)   Financial status report of the city and county funds used;
(5)   Financial status report of the remaining balance of city and county
funds, if any; and
(6)   A narrative report.
   In lieu of quarterly and year-end reports for grants in the amount of
$10,000 or less, a final report shall be submitted within 90 days following the
close of the fiscal year in which the money is appropriated or the completion
of the program or services, whichever is later.
(Sec. 5-36.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 29, § 6-29.4) (Am.
Ord. 07-12)
ARTICLE 30: LIQUOR COMMISSION FUND
Sections
   
6-30.1   Creation
   
6-30.2   Purpose
   
6-30.3   Administration
§ 6-30.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “liquor
commission fund.”
(Sec. 5-37.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 30, § 6-30.1)
§ 6-30.2 Purpose.
   All fees collected and received by, as well as all other moneys received on
behalf of the liquor commission, shall be deposited into the liquor commission
fund and used for the operational and administrative costs of the liquor
commission.
(Sec. 5-37.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 30, § 6-30.2)
§ 6-30.3 Administration.
   The moneys in the liquor commission fund shall be administered in accordance
with the procedures prescribed by the director of budget and fiscal services
and as provided by law.
(Sec. 5-37.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 30, § 6-30.3)
ARTICLE 31: THE PATSY T. MINK CENTRAL OAHU REGIONAL PARK FUND
Sections
   
6-31.1   Creation
   
6-31.2   Purpose
   
6-31.3   Administration
§ 6-31.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “Patsy T.
Mink Central Oahu Regional Park fund.”
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 31, § 6-31.1) (Added by Ord. 15-8)
§ 6-31.2 Purpose.
   All revenues generated from the Patsy T. Mink Central Oahu Regional Park
shall be deposited into the Patsy T. Mink Central Oahu Regional Park fund. All
moneys deposited into the Patsy T. Mink Central Oahu Regional Park fund must be
expended, as appropriated, for the improvement, maintenance, and repair of the
city’s Patsy T. Mink Central Oahu Regional Park. All appropriations from the
Patsy T. Mink Central Oahu Regional Park fund must be used to supplement, and
not supplant, other city fund appropriations for the Patsy T. Mink Central Oahu
Regional Park.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 31, § 6-31.2) (Added by Ord. 15-8)
§ 6-31.3 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall administer the Patsy T.
Mink Central Oahu Regional Park fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 31, § 6-31.3) (Added by Ord. 15-8)
ARTICLE 32: ESTABLISHING MAXIMUM INTEREST RATE FOR URBAN RENEWAL
PROJECT NOTES
Section
   
6-32.1   Maximum interest rate
§ 6-32.1 Maximum interest rate.
   Any ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding, project notes to aid in
financing urban renewal projects of the city to be authorized for issuance and
sale under HRS Chapter 53 shall bear interest at a coupon or stated rate or
rates not exceeding 10 percent a year.
(Sec. 5-39.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 32, § 6-32.1)
ARTICLE 33: ESTABLISHING MAXIMUM INTEREST FOR GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS
Sections
   
6-33.1   Maximum interest rate
   
6-33.2   Council approval required
§ 6-33.1 Maximum interest rate.
   Except as may be otherwise provided in an ordinance authorizing the issuance
of general obligation bonds, all general obligation bonds of the City and
County of Honolulu shall bear interest at a rate or rates not exceeding 13
percent per year.
(Sec. 5-40.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 33, § 6-33.1)
§ 6-33.2 Council approval required.
   Where general obligation bonds of the City and County of Honolulu have been
authorized for issuance and sale by the council of the City and County of
Honolulu in accordance with HRS Chapter 47, the director of budget and fiscal
services shall not offer for sale or sell the whole or any part of any issue of
the bonds so authorized without first obtaining the determination of the
council, by resolution, of the form, date, amount, denomination, and maturity
of the bonds to be offered for sale and sold by the director of budget and
fiscal services.
(Sec. 5-40.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 33, §
6-33.2)
ARTICLE 34: HOUSING LOAN AND MORTGAGE PROGRAMS
Sections
   
6-34.1   Definitions
   
6-34.2   Adoption of rules
   
6-34.3   Eligible borrowers
   
6-34.4   Eligible loans
   
6-34.5   Additional program procedures and requirements
   
6-34.6   Establishment of rental housing loan program
   
6-34.7   Adoption of rules of rental housing loan program
§ 6-34.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Bonds. General obligation bonds of the city issued pursuant to HRS Chapter 47
and § 46-15.2, or revenue bonds of the city issued pursuant to HRS Chapter 49
and § 46-15.2 to carry out the loan programs authorized thereunder.
Director. The director of community services.
Eligible Borrower. Any person or family meeting the requirements established by
rules adopted by the director for a mortgagor under a housing loan program, and
further meeting the requirements of HRS § 46-15.2.
Eligible Loan. A loan to an eligible borrower made under a housing loan program
meeting the requirements established by rules adopted by the director for a
loan made under a housing loan program, and further meeting the requirements of
HRS § 46-15.2.
Housing Loan Program. A housing loan and mortgage program authorized under HRS
§ 46-15.2, established by the city.
Mortgage Lender. Any bank, trust company, savings bank, national banking
association, savings and loan association, building and loan association,
mortgage banker, credit union, insurance company, or other financial
institution meeting the requirements of a mortgage lender under a housing loan
program established in rules adopted by the director and further meeting the
requirements of HRS § 46-15.2.
(Sec. 31-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 34, § 6-34.1)
§ 6-34.2 Adoption of rules.
   The director shall adopt rules for the implementation, administration, and
enforcement of any housing loan program to be undertaken in compliance with HRS
§ 46-15.2. In accordance with HRS Chapter 91 and Charter § 4-105.4, such rules
shall have the force and effect of law. The director shall file in the office
of the city clerk not less than three copies of such rules.
(Sec. 31-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 34, § 6-34.2)
§ 6-34.3 Eligible borrowers.
   Rules adopted pursuant to §
6-34.2 shall establish the qualifications of an eligible borrower, and may
consider, but not be limited to, the following:
(1)   The proportion of income spent for shelter;
(2)   The size of the family;
(3)   The cost and condition of housing available to the total housing market;
and
(4)   The ability of the person to compete successfully in the normal housing
market and to pay the amounts on which private enterprise is providing loans
for safe, decent, and sanitary housing in the State.
(Sec. 31-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 34, § 6-34.3)
§ 6-34.4 Eligible loans.
   Rules adopted pursuant to §
6-34.2 shall establish the qualification of an eligible loan, and may
establish, but not be limited to, requirements as to the location, age,
conditions, and other characteristics of the property. Such rules may further
establish the terms, maturities, interest rates, collateral, and other
requirements for eligible loans.
(Sec. 31-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 34, § 6-34.4)
§ 6-34.5 Additional program procedures and requirements.
   Rules adopted pursuant to §
6-34.2 shall establish such procedures and requirements as are deemed necessary
to implement a housing loan program, including but not limited to procedures
and requirements governing:
(1)   The qualifications of mortgage lenders;
(2)   The making of advance commitments to purchase and the purchasing of
eligible loans to be made by mortgage lenders;
(3)   Loan applications made through mortgage lenders to eligible borrowers;
(4)   The allocation of loans to mortgage lenders;
(5)   The making of advance commitments and allocation of funds to purchase
eligible loans from mortgage lenders; and
(6)   The participation by mortgage lenders as originators and processors of
eligible loans on behalf of the city.
(Sec. 31-2.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 34, § 6-34.5)
§ 6-34.6 Establishment of rental housing loan program.
   This section establishes a loan program for the construction of multi-family
rental units by using tax exempt revenue bonds.
(Sec. 31-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 34, §
6-34.6)
§ 6-34.7 Adoption of rules of rental housing loan program.
   The director of community services is authorized and directed, under and
pursuant to and upon compliance with HRS Chapters 356D, 91 and 92, as amended,
and the Charter, to adopt from time to time rules for the multi-family rental
housing program for the city. The rules must further the purposes of the multi-
family rental housing program as set forth in HRS Chapter 356D, as amended, and
be consistent with the purposes of this section. The rules will have the force
and effect of law. The director shall file in the office of the city clerk no
fewer than three copies of the rules.
(Sec. 31-3.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 34, §
6-34.7)
ARTICLE 35: RESERVED
 
ARTICLE 36: CAPITAL PROJECTS FUND
Sections
   
6-36.1   Creation
   
6-36.2   Purpose
§ 6-36.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “capital
projects fund.”
(Sec. 5-44.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 36, §
6-36.1)
§ 6-36.2 Purpose.
   Moneys received by the city, from sources other than the federal government,
in the form of grants, entitlements, shared revenues, or payments in lieu of
taxes to fund capital projects and city moneys appropriated for capital
projects may be deposited or transferred into the capital projects fund. All
moneys deposited or transferred into the capital projects fund shall be
maintained in separate accounts identified with, and expended for, the purposes
for which such moneys are received or appropriated. Appropriated moneys
transferred from another fund into the capital projects fund shall lapse into
that other fund if not encumbered or expended in a timely manner pursuant to
Charter Article IX, as amended.
(Sec. 5-44.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 36, §
6-36.2)
ARTICLE 37: FEDERAL GRANTS CAPITAL PROJECTS FUND
Sections
   
6-37.1   Creation
   
6-37.2   Purpose
§ 6-37.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “federal
grants capital projects fund.”
(Sec. 5-45.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 37, §
6-37.1)
§ 6-37.2 Purpose.
   All moneys received from the federal government, in the form of grants,
entitlements, or payments in lieu of taxes to fund capital projects and federal
revenue sharing funds appropriated for capital projects may be deposited or
transferred into the federal grants capital projects fund. All moneys deposited
or transferred into the federal grants capital projects fund shall be
maintained in separate accounts identified with, and expended for, the purposes
for which such moneys are received or appropriated. Appropriated moneys
transferred from another fund into the federal grants capital projects fund
shall lapse into that other fund if not encumbered or expended in a timely
manner pursuant to Charter Article IX, as amended.
(Sec. 5-45.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 37, §
6-37.2)
ARTICLE 38: RESERVED
ARTICLE 39: LANDSCAPING AND BEAUTIFICATION
Sections
   
6-39.1   Purpose
   
6-39.2   Site improvement and beautification
   
6-39.3   Funding
§ 6-39.1 Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide for landscaping and beautification
of open space areas surrounding city buildings to enhance their visual image.
(Sec. 5-41.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 39, §
6-39.1)
§ 6-39.2 Site improvement and beautification.
   In connection with any city building when first constructed or acquired, the
improvement of the site and beautification of the land shall be considered by
the agency expending funds for such construction or acquisition.
(Sec. 5-41.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 39, §
6-39.2)
§ 6-39.3 Funding.
   An amount not less than 1 percent of the construction or acquisition
appropriation shall be set aside for landscaping and beautification purposes.
Notwithstanding the foregoing limitation on the amount to be set aside for
landscaping and beautification purposes, an amount in excess of 1 percent may
be set aside with the concurrence of the council.
(Sec. 5-41.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 39, §
6-39.3)
ARTICLE 40: APPLICATION FEES FOR GENERAL PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT PLAN AMENDMENTS
Sections
   
6-40.1   Purpose
   
6-40.2   Fees
§ 6-40.1 Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to establish fees for general plan and
development plan amendment applications, pursuant to Charter § 3-112.
(Sec. 5-47.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 40, §
6-40.1) (Am. Ord. 96-58)
§ 6-40.2 Fees.
(a)   General plan amendment applications shall be accompanied by a fee of
$1,500, and development plan amendment applications shall be accompanied by a
fee of $1,500 per amendment.
(b)   When an environmental assessment or impact statement must be prepared as
a prerequisite to a general or development plan amendment, or both, where the
department of planning and permitting is the accepting agency, there shall be a
processing fee of $600 for an environmental assessment, and $1,200 for an
environmental impact statement.
(c)   The application fee is not refundable, except for applications the
director of planning and permitting chooses not to process, in which case such
fee shall be refunded upon request of the applicant.
(Sec. 5-47.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 40, §
6-40.2) (Am. Ord. 03-12, 14-4)
ARTICLE 41: FEE SCHEDULE FOR LAND USE ORDINANCE*—APPLICATIONS
   AND VARIANCES
Section
   
6-41.1   Fee schedule
*Editor’s note:
   The land use ordinance is codified as
Chapter 21 of this code.
§ 6-41.1 Fee schedule.
(a)   The fees set forth in the following schedule for applications under
Chapter 21 and for variances therefrom must be paid upon application:
Type of Application Fee
Type of Application                                                                 Fee
                                                                                    $700, plus
                                                                                    $300 per acre
(1)   Zone change                                                                or major
                                                                                    fraction, up
                                                                                    to a maximum
                                                                                    of $15,000
                                                                                    $1,200, plus
                                                                                    $300 per acre
(2)   Cluster housing                                                            or major
                                                                                    fraction, up
                                                                                    to a maximum
                                                                                    of $15,000
                                                                                    $1,200, plus
                                                                                    $300 per acre
(3)   Conditional use permit (major), and conditional use permit (minor) for a   or major
meeting facility, adult or child daycare, or K-12 school                            fraction, up
                                                                                    to a maximum
                                                                                    of $15,000
                                                                                    $1,200, plus
                                                                                    $300 per acre
(4)   Major project in special districts and downtown building heights in excess or major
350 feet                                                                            fraction, up
                                                                                    to a maximum
                                                                                    of $15,000
                                                                                    $1,200, plus
                                                                                    $300 per acre
(5)   Plan review use                                                            or major
                                                                                    fraction, up
                                                                                    to a maximum
                                                                                    of $15,000
                                                                                    $1,200, plus
                                                                                    $300 per acre
(6)   Planned development—housing                                              or major
                                                                                    fraction, up
                                                                                    to a maximum
                                                                                    of $15,000
                                                                                    $1,200, plus
                                                                                    $300 per acre
(7)   Special districts: establishment of, or amendment to                       or major
                                                                                    fraction, up
                                                                                    to a maximum
                                                                                    of $15,000
(8)   Conditional use permit (minor), other than for a meeting facility, adult or$600
child daycare, or K-12 school
                                                                                    $600, plus
                                                                                    $150 per acre
(9)   Existing use                                                               or major
                                                                                    fraction, up
                                                                                    to a maximum
                                                                                    of $15,000
(10)   Exempt project in special districts                                       No permit fee
                                                                                    required
(11)   Minor project in special districts                                         
   (A)   Tree removal                                                         $100 per tree
   (B)   Other than tree removal                                              $600
(12)   Waiver                                                                    $600
(13)   Zoning adjustment                                                          
   (A)   Sign master plan                                                     $1,200
   (B)   Other than for sign master plan                                      $600
(14)   Signs—estimated value of work                                            
   (A)   $0.01 to $500                                                        $18
   (B)   $500.01 to $1,000                                                    $35
   (C)   $1,000.01 and above                                                  $70
(15)   Zoning variance                                                           $2,400
(16)   Nonconforming use certificate renewal                                     $500
(17)   Minor modifications                                                        
   (A)   To approved cluster housing permit; conditional use permit (major);
conditional use permit (minor) for a meeting facility, adult or child daycare, or
K-12 school; plan review use; planned development-housing permit, planned           $600
development-apartment, and planned development-resort; major projects in special
districts, and downtown building heights in excess of 350 feet; and zoning
adjustment for a sign master plan
   (B)   To conditional use permit (minor) other than for a meeting facility, adult
or child daycare, or K-12 school; existing use; exclusive agriculture site
approval; minor projects in special districts other than tree removal; agricultural $300
site development plan; waiver; and zoning adjustment for other than for a sign
master plan
   (C)   To temporary use approval                                            $50
(18)   Agricultural site development plan                                        $600
(19)   Planned development—apartment and planned development—resort          $15,000
                                                                                    $150 per
                                                                                    request or
                                                                                    for each tax
                                                                                    map key when
                                                                                    multiple
                                                                                    parcels are
(20)   Written zoning clearance or confirmation, and flood hazard district       involved; or
interpretation                                                                      $300 per tax
                                                                                    map key for
                                                                                    requests
                                                                                    involving
                                                                                    confirmation
                                                                                    of
                                                                                    nonconforming
                                                                                    status
(21)   Temporary use approval
   (A)   For a sales office                                                   $100
   (B)   For other than a sales office                                        $200
(22)   Exclusive agriculture site approval                                       $600
(23)   Flood variance                                                            $600
(24)   Zoning district boundary adjustment                                       $500
(25)   Appeals to zoning board of appeals                                        $400
(26)   Environmental document processing, when the department of planning and
permitting is the accepting agency
   (A)   Environmental assessment                                             $600
   (B)   Environmental impact statement                                       $1,200
(27)   Reconsideration                                                           $2,400
(28)   Declaratory Ruling                                                        $2,400
(29)   Bed and breakfast home or transient vacation unit
   (A)   Initial registration                                                 $1,000
   (B)   Renewal registration                                                 $500
   (C)   Advertisement registration                                           $50
 
(b)   Application fees are not refundable, notwithstanding provisions in the
Revised Ordinances of Honolulu to the contrary, except when the director of
planning and permitting determines that a land use ordinance application or
variance is not required to proceed with the development proposed.
(c)   When the council initiates, by resolution, a zone change application on
behalf of a private landowner, the owner shall be required to pay the
applicable zone change application fee.
(d)   When an application under
Chapter 21 or for a variance therefrom is sought after the applicant’s being
cited for taking action without having obtained necessary approvals, the
application fee set forth in subsection (a) shall be doubled.
(e)   The payment of the fee required by this section shall not relieve the
applicant from compliance with
Chapter 21 or from imposed penalties.
(f)   When an application identified in subsection (a) is submitted for
processing, there shall be a nonrefundable application review fee to determine
whether the application is complete or incomplete, as follows:
(1)   Applications with a minimum fee of $1,200 or more shall have an
application review fee of $400;
(2)   Applications with a fee of $600 to less than $1,200 shall have an
application review fee of $200; and
(3)   Applications with a fee of less than $600 shall have an application
review fee equivalent to one-half the application fee; provided that a request
for a sign permit, a nonconforming use certificate renewal, a written zoning
clearance or confirmation, a flood hazard district interpretation, or an appeal
to the zoning board of appeals or other contested case hearing fee, shall not
be subject to the application review fee required by this subsection. When an
application under this section has been accepted by the department for
processing, the application review fee for the submitted application shall be
counted as partial payment towards the total application fee for that
submittal.
(g)   The application fees required by this section shall be waived for city
projects.
(Sec. 5-48.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 41, §
6-41.1) (Am. Ords. 94-36, 99-31, 03-12, 13-16, 14-4, 20-18, 22-7, 24-14, 25-2)
ARTICLE 42: DEFERRED COMPENSATION FUND
Sections
   
6-42.1   Creation
   
6-42.2   Purpose
   
6-42.3   Administration
§ 6-42.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “deferred
compensation fund.”
(Sec. 5-49.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 42, §
6-42.1)
§ 6-42.2 Purpose.
   All amounts of compensation deferred under the Internal Revenue Code § 457
public employee deferred compensation plan of the City and County of Honolulu
as well as property and rights purchased with such amounts and all income
attributable to such amounts, property and rights shall be recorded in the
deferred compensation fund and shall be held in trust outside the city treasury
in accordance with § 457 of the Internal Revenue Code for the exclusive benefit
of the plan’s participants and its beneficiaries.
(Sec. 5-49.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 42, §
6-42.2) (Am. Ord. 08-17)
§ 6-42.3 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall be responsible for the
administration of the deferred compensation fund.
(Sec. 5-49.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 42, §
6-42.3)
ARTICLE 43: CHARGES BY MUNICIPAL REFERENCE AND RECORDS CENTER
FOR COMPUTER ONLINE SERVICE
Sections
   
6-43.1   Fee for computer services
   
6-43.2   Exemption from payment of charges
§ 6-43.1 Fee for computer services.
   Charges for computer online services of private vendor providing
commercially available data bases and information services shall be computed on
the basis of the cost of equipment, time, labor, and materials used in
connection with processing the request for data. The municipal reference and
records center shall adopt rules prescribing the method of computing the
charges.
(Sec. 5-50.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 43, §
6-43.1)
§ 6-43.2 Exemption from payment of charges.
   Government agencies requiring data for public purposes may be exempt from
all or a portion of the cost of services provided by the municipal reference
and records center.
(Sec. 5-50.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 43, §
6-43.2)
ARTICLE 44: FEES AND CHARGES FOR SERVICES OF THE HONOLULU
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Sections
   
6-44.1   Definitions
   
6-44.2   Administration
   
6-44.3   Fees for special duty requests
   
6-44.4   Waiver
   
6-44.5   Rules
   
6-44.6   Fee authorized for special activities
§ 6-44.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Special Activity. An activity, including an entertainment or athletic event,
for which a fee is charged to any person attending or participating in the
activity. This section shall not affect the obligations of the City and County
of Honolulu under any existing settlement agreement that applies to parades
held for the purpose of participants expressing views or engaging in other
activities protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution.
Special Duty. The performance of a service for a person, organization, or
governmental entity, other than the Honolulu police department, by an officer
of the Honolulu police department acting in a police capacity, in return for
which the officer receives a direct or indirect payment or compensation of some
kind.
(Sec. 5-52.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 44, §
6-44.1) (Am. Ord. 05-025)
§ 6-44.2 Administration.
   The chief of police shall be responsible for the administration of the
processing of requests for the services of special duty police officers of the
Honolulu police department.
(Sec. 5-52.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 44, §
6-44.2)
§ 6-44.3 Fees for special duty requests.
(a)   Any person or entity requesting the services of a special duty police
officer shall be assessed an administrative fee of $14 for each request for a
police officer, plus $2 for each additional officer requested. For every
request, there shall also be a workers’ compensation fee of up to $5 per day
for each officer. The workers’ compensation fees shall be deposited into the
general trust fund and maintained in a separate account for the purpose of
paying workers’ compensation expenses for officers injured while on special
duty assignments.
These fees shall be assessed by the Honolulu police department and shall be in
addition to any charge assessed for the services of the special duty police
officer. These fees shall not be assessed to the extent that a request is not
fulfilled.
(b)   Once the workers’ compensation fee separate account reaches a range
between $500,000 and $1,000,000, the chief of police shall reduce the workers’
compensation fee to maintain the account within this range.
(c)   Within 30 days after the first day of each fiscal year, the department of
budget and fiscal services shall file a report with the city clerk. The report
shall include the following information for the prior fiscal year:
(1)   The fee charged;
(2)   Total workers’ compensation fees collected;
(3)   The fund balance in the workers’ compensation fee separate account at the
end of the prior fiscal year; and
(4)   Details of expenditures from the account, including administrative costs,
fringe benefits, workers’ compensation benefits, and training costs.
(Sec. 5-52.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 44, §
6-44.3) (Am. Ords. 01-57, 09-21, 25-37)
Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to subsection (a) in Ord. 25-37 take effect on January 1,
2026, and are not yet incorporated herein.
§ 6-44.4 Waiver.
(a)   The chief of police shall waive the administrative fee established in §
6-44.3 when the special duty services are for an event or activity mandated by
law or otherwise conducted by the federal, State, or city government.
(b)   The chief of police shall not waive the administrative or workers’
compensation fee when special duty services are provided to a private person or
entity performing a government function or renting or leasing a government
facility for a nongovernmental event.
(c)   The chief of police shall waive the workers’ compensation fee when the
special duty services are for an event or activity conducted by the city
government.
(d)   The chief of police shall not waive the workers’ compensation fee when
the special duty services are for an event or activity conducted by the federal
or State government.
(Sec. 5-52.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 44, §
6-44.4) (Am. Ord. 01-57)
§ 6-44.5 Rules.
(a)   The chief of police may adopt rules, in accordance with HRS Chapter 91,
governing the processing of requests for special duty officers.
(b)   The chief of police shall adopt rules, in accordance with HRS Chapter 91,
to establish the fee schedule and fees for additional police services provided
at special activities as authorized by §
6-44.6.
(Sec. 5-52.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 44, §
6-44.5) (Am. Ord. 05-025)
§ 6-44.6 Fee authorized for special activities.
   The police department is authorized to establish a fee schedule and charge a
fee to any person, sponsor, promoter, organizer, or organization conducting a
special activity for which the services of uniformed police officers, in
addition to special duty officers, are required. Fees collected pursuant to
this subsection shall be deposited in a special account of the general fund and
shall be used for expenses related to police services.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 44, § 6-44.6) (Added by Ord. 05-025)
ARTICLE 45: RENTAL ASSISTANCE FUND
Sections
   
6-45.1   Establishment
   
6-45.2   Funding
   
6-45.3   Amount of assistance
   
6-45.4   Eligibility for assistance
   
6-45.5   Expenditures
   
6-45.6   Administration
§ 6-45.1 Establishment.
   There is established a fund to be known as the “rental assistance fund.”
(Sec. 5-51.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 45, §
6-45.1)
§ 6-45.2 Funding.
(a)   There shall be deposited into the rental assistance fund all net receipts
from the Hale Pauahi parking structure. This fund shall pay for expenses
related to the operation and maintenance of the Hale Pauahi parking structure
that are not within the scope of the parking concession, for any assessments
attributable to the parking unit of the Hale Pauahi Association of Owners, and
for monthly rental assistance payments to a landlord on behalf of an eligible
applicant, as defined herein.
(b)   Unless designated by resolution for deposit into the reserve for fiscal
stability fund, there may be deposited into the rental assistance fund net
proceeds from the leasing or sale of any property interest in a city affordable
housing project.
(c)   There shall be deposited into the rental assistance fund such additional
moneys as may be appropriated for that purpose.
(Sec. 5-51.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 45, §
6-45.2) (Am. Ord. 93-47, 13-17)
§ 6-45.3 Amount of assistance.
   Monthly rental assistance payments shall be as prescribed in the rules.
(Sec. 5-51.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 45, §
6-45.3)
§ 6-45.4 Eligibility for assistance.
(a)   An eligible applicant is defined as any single person or family who:
(1)   May be displaced from a city-assisted housing project sold or leased by
the city;
(2)   Has been displaced by governmental action, fire, or natural disaster;
(3)   Has been determined to be homeless as defined in the rules; or
(4)   Has been selected for placement in a city-assisted housing project; and
whose total income, by number in the household does not exceed 80 percent of
the median income for the city as determined by HUD.
(b)   Applicants receiving assistance under the federal Section 8 existing
housing program, the State rent supplement program, or living in government-
subsidized housing projects are ineligible for assistance.
(c)   Assistance shall be given in the following order of priority:
(1)   Applicants displaced as a result of governmental action and applicants
who are current tenants in a city affordable housing project when it is sold by
the city or leased by the city to a new lessor and who, without rental
assistance, may be displaced by rent increases implemented by the buyer or new
lessor;
(2)   Applicants displaced as a result of fire or natural disaster;
(3)   Applicants determined to be “homeless” as defined in the rules; and
(4)   Applicants selected for placement in city-assisted housing projects.
(Sec. 5-51.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 45, §
6-45.4) (Am. Ord. 13-17)
§ 6-45.5 Expenditures.
   All expenditures from the rental assistance fund shall be for rental
assistance payments to or on behalf of eligible applicants, for administration
of the rental assistance program and for such other purposes as may be
authorized in appropriations from the rental assistance fund made in the
operating budget ordinance. During any fiscal year, no more than 5 percent of
the moneys appropriated from the rental assistance fund may be used for
administrative expenses.
(Sec. 5-51.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 45, §
6-45.5) (Am. Ord. 13-17)
§ 6-45.6 Administration.
   The department of community services shall be responsible for the
administration of the rental assistance fund and, pursuant to HRS Chapter 91,
shall adopt uniform rules for the administration of the rental assistance fund,
including but not limited to establishing criteria and procedures for
determining requirements for eligibility of tenants and amounts of rental
assistance.
(Sec. 5-51.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 45, §
6-45.6)
ARTICLE 46: HOUSING DEVELOPMENT SPECIAL FUND
Sections
   
6-46.1   Creation
   
6-46.2   Purpose
   
6-46.3   Receipts and expenditures
   
6-46.4   Administration
§ 6-46.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “housing
development special fund.”
   There is established in the housing development special fund a separate
account to be designated as the “housing development account” and a separate
account to be designated as the “affordable housing development account.”
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 46, § 6-46.1) (Added by Ord. 88-80; Am. Ord. 16-36)
§ 6-46.2 Purpose.
   Moneys in the housing development special fund shall be used for the
development of housing for sale or for rental in the city.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 46, § 6-46.2) (Added by Ord. 88-80; Am. Ords. 05-008,
16-36)
§ 6-46.3 Receipts and expenditures.
(a)   The proceeds of general obligation bonds and bond anticipation notes
authorized and issued for the purpose of developing housing for sale or for
rental in the city, including, without limitation, paying the cost of
construction of housing for sale or for rental in the city and the acquisition
of land therefor, must be deposited in the housing development special fund and
credited to the housing development account therein. Moneys on credit to the
housing development account must be expended solely for the purpose of
developing housing for sale or for rental in the city, including all expenses
incurred in connection with and related to the issuance of general obligation
bonds or bond anticipation notes issued for such purpose; provided that the
proceeds of general obligation bonds and bond anticipation notes must be
applied solely to the particular project or projects for which such bonds and
notes are authorized.
(b)   Moneys from the sale or rental of housing developed from moneys on
deposit in the housing development special fund and credited to the housing
development account therein, including housing developed from the proceeds of
general obligation bonds and bond anticipation notes of the city authorized and
issued for such purpose, must be deposited in the housing development special
fund as and when received.
(c)   Moneys in the housing development special fund, other than moneys on
credit to the housing development account therein, may be expended in such
amounts as appropriated in the annual executive operating and capital budget
ordinances and amendments thereto for the following purposes:
(1)   For rebate to the United States of America to the extent and as required
by federal law;
(2)   For additional credits to the housing development account for the
development of additional housing for sale or for rental in the city;
(3)   For the retirement of general obligation bonds or bond anticipation notes
issued for the purpose of, and the proceeds of which have been applied to, the
development of housing for sale or for rental in the city;
(4)   For transfers to the general fund of the city as reimbursement of the
principal of and interest on general obligation bonds or bond anticipation
notes issued for, and the proceeds of which have been applied to, the
development of housing for sale or rental in the city; and
(5)   For payment of all expenses incurred in connection with and related to
the issuance of general obligation bonds or bond anticipation notes issued for
the development of housing for sale or rental in the city.
(d)   Pending the expenditure of moneys on deposit in the housing development
special fund or on credit to the housing development account therein, the
director of budget and fiscal services shall, to the extent reasonable and
practicable, invest and reinvest such moneys in accordance with law. Income
from or earnings on the investment and reinvestment of such moneys must be
deposited in the housing development special fund and must be expended as are
all other moneys on deposit therein.
(e)   In lieu fees or any other moneys received to satisfy city affordable
housing requirements must be deposited in the housing development special fund
and must be credited to the affordable housing development account. Moneys on
credit in the affordable housing development account must be expended to
increase the stock of affordable housing in the city by city or State agencies
or by private persons or community housing development organizations under the
sponsorship of or in partnership with city or State agencies. For the purposes
of this section, “affordable housing” means housing for households earning
between 30 and 80 percent of the area median income in the city as determined
by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
(f)   Except for land acquired using moneys from the affordable housing
development account, land acquired using moneys from the housing development
special fund may be exchanged with another government entity for other land of
equivalent value if the land disposed of by exchange is used for the
development of housing for sale or rental in the city; provided first that such
exchange must be approved by council resolution, and second, that if the land
acquired by the city through such exchange is subsequently leased or sold by
the city, the proceeds of the lease or sale must be deposited in the housing
development special fund to the credit of the housing development account. Land
acquired by such exchange need not be used for the development of housing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 46, § 6-46.3) (Added by Ord. 88-80; Am. Ord. 89-61, 05-
008, 16-36)
§ 6-46.4 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services is responsible for the
administration of the housing development special fund. The director of budget
and fiscal services may adopt such rules as may be deemed necessary for the
administration of the housing development special fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 46, § 6-46.4) (Added by Ord. 88-80)
ARTICLE 47: WASTEWATER SYSTEM FACILITY CHARGE
Section
   
6-47.1   Use of wastewater system facility charges
§ 6-47.1 Use of wastewater system facility charges.
(a)   All moneys received as wastewater system facility charges are intended to
recover an equitable share of the value of the capacity in the backup
facilities that were or will be constructed to serve that new applicant for
sewer service or an existing sewer user and shall be deposited into the sewer
fund created by §
43-8.1. All moneys shall be accounted for and expended for the expansion of and
addition to the capacity of wastewater facilities. Unencumbered or lapsed
wastewater facility charge moneys shall remain in the sewer fund earmarked for
the stated wastewater facility charge purpose and shall not become available
for other sewer fund uses.
(b)   For the purposes of this section, “wastewater system facility charges”
and “backup facilities” have the same meaning as defined in §
43-1.2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 47, § 6-47.1) (Added by Ord. 90-80; Am. Ords. 98-21,
14-24)
ARTICLE 48: SOLID WASTE IMPROVEMENT BOND FUND
Sections
   
6-48.1   Creation
   
6-48.2   Deposit
   
6-48.3   Source of payment
§ 6-48.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “solid
waste improvement bond fund.”
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 48, § 6-48.1) (Added by Ord. 01-30)
§ 6-48.2 Deposit.
   There shall be deposited into the solid waste improvement bond fund the
proceeds of the sale of general obligation bonds of the city and county issued
to pay all or part of those appropriations for the public improvements made in
the capital budget ordinance of the city and county and specified therein to be
expended from the solid waste improvement bond fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 48, § 6-48.2) (Added by Ord. 01-30)
§ 6-48.3 Source of payment.
   There shall be paid from the solid waste improvement bond fund the costs of
public improvements at solid waste collection and disposal facilities to
include any one or more of the following: recycling, glass, or other related
capital improvements appropriated in the capital budget ordinance and specified
therein to be expended from the solid waste improvement bond fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 48, § 6-48.3) (Added by Ord. 01-30)
ARTICLE 49: SOLID WASTE SPECIAL FUND
Sections
   
6-49.1   Creation of Solid Waste Special Fund
   
6-49.2   Deposits into fund
   
6-49.3   Expenditures
   
6-49.4   Administration
§ 6-49.1 Creation of solid waste special fund.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “solid
waste special fund.” There is established in the solid waste special fund
separate accounts to be designated as the “glass incentive account,” the
“Honolulu solid waste disposal facility account,” the “recycling account,” the
“general operating account,” and such additional accounts as may be established
by the director of budget and fiscal services.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 49, § 6-49.1) (Added by Ord. 99-22)
§ 6-49.2 Deposits into fund.
   There will be deposited into the solid waste special fund all revenues,
fees, income, and any other moneys derived from the operation of the refuse
division, as well as all other moneys received on behalf of the refuse
division, including without limitation:
(1)   All moneys collected pursuant to §
42-4.2(e) and any interest earned on such moneys, which will be credited to the
“recycling account”;
(2)   All moneys as may accrue to the glass recycling program, including all
moneys received from the State department of health, for the operation of the
city's glass recycling program, and any interest earned on such moneys, which
will be credited to the “glass incentive account”; and
(3)   All moneys derived from the operation of the Solid Waste Disposal and
Energy and Materials Recovery Project established by Ordinance 85-90, as
amended, including without limitation all fees for disposal of waste at the
Project and income derived from the sale of energy produced from the Project
and materials recovered from waste processed at the Project, and any interest
earned on such moneys, which will be credited to the “Honolulu solid waste
disposal facility account.”
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 49, § 6-49.2) (Added by Ord. 99-22; Am. Ord. 21-18)
§ 6-49.3 Expenditures.
(a)   Moneys on credit to the glass incentive account shall be expended solely
for the purposes of administering the glass recycling program and paying
incentives to glass recyclers. All other moneys on deposit in the Solid Waste
Special Fund shall be expended for the purposes specified in Section 11 of
Ordinance 85-90, as amended, and any other operations and activities of the
refuse division.
(b)   Any and all payments required for the refuse division (other than those
required by the glass incentive account) shall be made from the Honolulu solid
waste disposal facility account, the recycling account, or the general
operating account.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 49, § 6-49.3) (Added by Ord. 99-22; Am. Ord. 21-18)
§ 6-49.4 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall be responsible for the
administration of the fund established in this article. Expenditures from the
fund shall be in accordance with prescribed laws and procedures applicable to
expenditures of city revenues.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 49, § 6-49.4) (Added by Ord. 99-22)
ARTICLE 50: RESERVED
ARTICLE 51: HANAUMA BAY NATURE PRESERVE FUND
Sections
   
6-51.1   Creation of fund
   
6-51.2   Purpose and deposits
   
6-51.3   Expenditures
   
6-51.4   Administration
§ 6-51.1 Creation of fund.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “Hanauma
Bay Nature Preserve fund.”
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 51, § 6-51.1) (Added by Ord. 96-19)
§ 6-51.2 Purpose and deposits.
   There will be deposited into the Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve fund all
receipts from the fees imposed under §
10-2.8 and all concession revenues from the Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve
concessions, plus any interest earned on deposits in the Hanauma Bay Nature
Preserve fund. All moneys deposited into the Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve fund
will be used for the following purposes in the order of priority as indicated:
(1)   First, for the operation, maintenance, and improvement of the Hanauma Bay
Nature Preserve;
(2)   Second, for educational and orientation programs for visitors to the
preserve; and
(3)   Third, for a carrying capacity study of the preserve and for other
studies relating to the environmental condition of the preserve.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 51, § 6-51.2) (Added by Ord. 96-19; Am. Ords. 00-25,
03-21, 15-5)
§ 6-51.3 Expenditures.
   All expenditures from the Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve fund shall be for
purposes authorized in this article, based on appropriations in the operating
or capital budget ordinances, or amendments thereto.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 51, § 6-51.3) (Added by Ord. 96-19)
§ 6-51.4 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall be responsible for the
administration of the Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve fund in accordance with
prescribed laws and procedures applicable to expenditures of city funds.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 51, § 6-51.4) (Added by Ord. 96-19; Am. Ord. 03-21)
ARTICLE 52: GRANTS IN AID FUND
Sections
   
6-52.1   Creation
   
6-52.2   Purpose
   
6-52.3   Deposit
   
6-52.4   Additional expenditure requirements
   
6-52.5   Administration
   
6-52.6   Annual report
§ 6-52.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “grants
in aid fund.”
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 52, § 6-52.1) (Added by Ord. 13-7)
§ 6-52.2 Purpose.
   The purpose of the grants in aid fund is to receive and expend moneys to be
used by the city to award grants in aid to charitable nonprofit organizations
that provide services to economically or socially disadvantaged populations, or
both, or provide services for public benefit in the areas of the arts, culture,
economic development, or the environment pursuant to Charter § 9-205.
   For the purpose of this section, “charitable nonprofit organization” means
an organization that can establish that it:
      (1)   Is exempt (or would be qualified for an exemption) from federal
income tax pursuant to § 501 of the United States Internal Revenue Code; and
      (2)   Is organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable,
scientific, or educational purposes on a nonprofit basis in which no part of
the net earnings of the organization inures to the benefit of any private
individuals.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 52, § 6-52.2) (Added by Ord. 13-7)
§ 6-52.3 Deposit.
   There shall be deposited into the grants in aid fund a minimum of 0.5
percent of the estimated general fund revenues, plus any interest earned on
deposits in the grants in aid fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 52, § 6-52.3) (Added by Ord. 13-7)
§ 6-52.4 Additional expenditure requirements.
(a)   There is established a grants in aid advisory commission that shall
review applications for grants in aid moneys and advise the city on projects to
be funded with grant moneys from the grants in aid fund. The recommendations
made by the grants in aid advisory commission regarding recommended
expenditures from the grants in aid fund shall be consistent with the
priorities established by the council by resolution.
(b)   Applications for projects to be funded with grants in aid moneys,
including projects submitted by the city administration and by councilmembers
to benefit their respective council districts, shall be submitted to the
commission by January 20 of each year. The council shall only consider for the
funding those projects for which applications have been submitted to the
commission by the January 20 deadline.
(c)   The commission shall annually submit a report setting forth its
recommendations to the council by March 4.
(d)   The council shall select the projects to be funded with grants in aid
moneys through the annual budget process and the selection of the projects must
comply with the requirements set forth in the charter.
(e)   All moneys for projects to be funded with grants in aid moneys shall be
awarded and encumbered within 45 days of the beginning of the fiscal year. All
notices to proceed shall not be unreasonably withheld and in all instances
shall be issued no later than 30 days from the date of encumbrance. All
requests for payments from grantees shall be processed, reconciled, and paid
within 30 calendar days from its receipt. The administering agency may only
withhold payment for disputed charges but only for the disputed amount. The
administering agency shall notify the grantee and reconcile any disputes within
60 days from the date whereupon the applicable request for payment was
received.
(f)   In the event of a disagreement between the department of community
services, department of budget and fiscal services, or any other city agency
involved in the administration of the program as to a disputed charge, the
decision of the director of community services shall prevail.
(g)   At any given time, no more than 5 percent of the moneys in the grants in
aid fund shall be used for administrative expenses.
(h)   Any balance remaining in the grants in aid fund at the end of any fiscal
year shall not lapse, but shall remain in the grants in aid fund, accumulating
from year to year. The moneys in the grants in aid fund shall not be used for
any purposes except those listed in this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 52, § 6-52.4) (Added by Ord. 13-7; Am. Ord. 13-40)
§ 6-52.5 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall administer the grants in
aid fund and the director of community services shall administer the projects
funded by grants awarded from the grants in aid fund. Procedures for the
administration of the grants in aid fund and the expenditure of funds awarded
from the grants in aid fund may be established by the director of community
services by rule.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 52, § 6-52.5) (Added by Ord. 13-7)
§ 6-52.6 Annual report.
   The director of community services shall provide the council with an annual
report within one month of the end of the fiscal year setting forth for each
project funded with grants in aid moneys:
(1)   The amount budgeted for each project;
(2)   The amount encumbered by the city for each project;
(3)   The amount expended by the city for each project; and
(4)   Whether each project is in compliance with the terms of the grant award
and, in the event of a project’s failure to comply with the terms, the measures
the city is taking to either assure the project’s compliance or to recover the
grant award moneys.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 52, § 6-52.6) (Added by Ord. 13-7)
ARTICLE 53: SPECIAL EVENTS FUND
Sections
   
6-53.1   Creation
   
6-53.2   Purpose
   
6-53.3   Administration
§ 6-53.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a single purpose special fund to be known
as the “special events fund.”
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 53, § 6-53.1) (Added by Ord. 96-45; Am. Ord. 98-31)
§ 6-53.2 Purpose.
(a)   There shall be deposited into the special events fund:
(1)   All revenues generated by the department of enterprise services,
including rents, concession fees, user fees, and miscellaneous revenues
generated from operations at the Neal S. Blaisdell Center and the Tom Moffatt
Waikiki Shell;
(2)   All proceeds from the charges for services provided for box office
operations, ushering, and events activities;
(3)   A 25 cents per ticket sale charge that shall be added to the price of
each computerized ticket sold for an event held at the Neal S. Blaisdell Center
and Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell; and
(4)   All moneys appropriated to the special events fund by the council in the
annual executive operating budget ordinance and any amendments thereto.
(b)   The purpose of the special events fund is to provide the following:
(1)   The operating funds for the department of enterprise services, including
funds for the operations and development of the Neal S. Blaisdell Center and
the Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell;
(2)   The salaries of persons providing part-time assistance in box office,
ushering, and events operations to the department of enterprise services,
involving the Neal S. Blaisdell Center and the Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell, and
related expenses; and
(3)   Loans of up to $10,000 per nonprofit organization to cover marketing
costs and charges required to be paid in advance of an event conducted by a
nonprofit organization for the use of the Neal S. Blaisdell Center and the Tom
Moffatt Waikiki Shell; provided that there shall be a $100,000 limit on the
total outstanding amount of loans to nonprofit organizations.
(c)   For purposes of this section, “nonprofit organization” has the same
meaning as defined in §
38-6.2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 53, § 6-53.2) (Added by Ord. 96-45; Am. Ords. 97-43,
99-23, 16-12)
§ 6-53.3 Administration.
(a)   The director of budget and fiscal services is responsible for the
administration of the special events fund in accordance with prescribed laws
and procedures applicable to expenditures of city funds.
(b)   At any time during a fiscal year, the director of budget and fiscal
services may, with the approval of the council by resolution, transfer from the
special events fund to the general fund all or any portion of moneys determined
to be in excess of the fiscal year’s requirements for the special events fund.
(c)   The loans to nonprofit organizations shall be made according to the
following terms:
(1)   Loans shall be noninterest bearing, due on the event settlement date, and
have a maximum term of one year;
(2)   All loans shall be paid in full from the first revenues collected from
the event with respect to which the loan was made;
(3)   Any loan that is not paid when due will be considered delinquent and
subject to interest as specified in §
1-3.3;
(4)   Organizations that have not repaid a loan in full when due shall not be
eligible for a subsequent loan until the previous loan has been paid in full
and until four years have elapsed from the loan delinquency date; and
(5)   The department of budget and fiscal services shall adopt rules as may be
necessary and appropriate to implement the loan program.
(d)   All moneys deposited in the special events fund that are in excess of the
amounts appropriated from the special events fund are to be considered single
purpose moneys and appropriated for the purposes specified herein; provided
that the expenditure of such moneys is authorized by council resolution.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 53, § 6-53.3) (Added by Ord. 96-45; Am. Ords. 97-45,
98-31)
ARTICLE 54: SEWER REVENUE BOND IMPROVEMENT FUND
Sections
   
6-54.1   Creation
   
6-54.2   Deposits
   
6-54.3   Expenditures
   
6-54.4   Administration
§ 6-54.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “sewer
revenue bond improvement fund.”
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 54, § 6-54.1) (Added by Ord. 97-40)
§ 6-54.2 Deposits.
   There shall be deposited into the sewer revenue bond improvement fund the
proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds of the city issued to pay for the
expenditures specified in §
6-54.3.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 54, § 6-54.2) (Added by Ord. 97-40)
§ 6-54.3 Expenditures.
   Moneys deposited into the sewer revenue bond improvement fund shall be
expended for the costs of improvements to, repairs to, and maintenance of the
wastewater treatment system as appropriated in the capital budget ordinances of
the city, and any amendments thereto, and specified therein to be expended from
the sewer revenue bond improvement fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 54, § 6-54.3) (Added by Ord. 97-40)
§ 6-54.4 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services and the chief budget officer
shall be responsible for the administration of the sewer revenue bond
improvement fund. Expenditures from the sewer revenue bond improvement fund
shall be in accordance with prescribed laws and procedures applicable to
expenditures of city revenues.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 54, § 6-54.4) (Added by Ord. 97-40)
ARTICLE 55: TRANSIT CONSTRUCTION MITIGATION FUND
Sections
   
6-55.1   Establishment
   
6-55.2   Purpose—Definitions
   
6-55.3   Deposits
   
6-55.4   Expenditures
   
6-55.5   Criteria
   
6-55.6   Administration—Rules
   
6-55.7   Outreach
§ 6-55.1 Establishment.
   There is created a special fund to be known as the “transit construction
mitigation fund.”
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 55, § 6-55.1) (Added by Ord. 15-37)
§ 6-55.2 Purpose—Definitions.
(a)   The purpose of the transit construction mitigation fund is to receive and
expend moneys to mitigate negative economic impacts from the construction of
the Rail Project.
(b)   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Business. Any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, business trust,
limited liability company, corporation, or other business entity.
City Block. The smallest area designated on an official map of the city that is
bounded on all sides by intersecting public streets.
Rail Project. The Honolulu High-Capacity Transit Corridor Project.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 55, § 6-55.2) (Added by Ord. 15-37; Am. Ord. 24-1)
§ 6-55.3 Deposits.
   Only moneys from the general fund or other federal, State, or private
sources that have been so specified for these purposes may be deposited into
the transit construction mitigation fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 55, § 6-55.3) (Added by Ord. 15-37)
§ 6-55.4 Expenditures.
   Expenditures from the transit construction mitigation fund may only be used
to mitigate negative economic impacts on businesses from the Rail Project and
to provide outreach to businesses under §
6-55.7, provided that:
(1)   Expenditures may not be used to mitigate beyond impacts from construction
of the Rail Project;
(2)   Expenditures per eligible business may not exceed $10,000 per fiscal
year;
(3)   Not more than 5 percent of the moneys deposited into the transit
construction mitigation fund may be used to administer this article by the
director of budget and fiscal services under §
6-55.6; and
(4)   Not more than 5 percent of the moneys deposited into the transit
construction mitigation fund may be used to conduct outreach activities by the
agency designated by the mayor under §
6-55.7.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 55, § 6-55.4) (Added by Ord. 15-37; Am. Ord. 24-1)
§ 6-55.5 Criteria.
(a)   To qualify for an expenditure under §
6-55.4, an applicant must, at a minimum:
(1)   Be a business that is majority-owned by city residents and that does
business with customers primarily at a physical location located within a city
block in which there is active construction on the Rail Project at the time of
application;
(2)   Generate $1,000,000 or less in annual revenue; and
(3)   Have opened for business at least 12 months prior to the start of any
Rail Project construction within the transit construction mitigation zone in
which the business is physically located, as determined by the director of
budget and fiscal services.
(b)   The director of budget and fiscal services may establish additional
selection criteria for applicants under this section, including determinations
on applicant viability.
(Added by Ord. 24-1) (Am. Ord. 25-35)
§ 6-55.6 Administration—Rules.
(a)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall administer the transit
construction mitigation fund.
(b)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall adopt rules pursuant to
HRS Chapter 91 to implement, enforce, and administer this article, including
rules regarding:
(1)   Application procedures;
(2)   Deadlines;
(3)   Expenditure amounts; and
(4)   Additional selection criteria
for grants and loans funded with transit construction mitigation fund moneys.
(c)   Expenditures from the transit construction mitigation fund must be in
accordance with prescribed laws and procedures applicable to the expenditure of
city revenues.
(Added by Ord. 24-1)
§ 6-55.7 Outreach.
   The mayor shall designate an agency to conduct outreach activities with
businesses that may be eligible to receive grants or loans under this article.
The outreach activities may include:
(1)   Providing public notice in a daily newspaper or an electronic medium,
such as the internet, or both;
(2)   Directly contacting potentially eligible applicants, including by
canvassing; and
(3)   Providing assistance to eligible applicants throughout the application
process.
(Added by Ord. 24-1)
ARTICLE 56: RESERVE FOR FISCAL STABILITY FUND
Sections
   
6-56.1   Creation of fund
   
6-56.2   Purpose
   
6-56.3   Deposits into the fund
   
6-56.4   Expenditures
   
6-56.5   Administration
§ 6-56.1 Creation of fund.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “reserve
for fiscal stability fund.”
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 56, § 6-56.1) (Added by Ord. 98-32; Am. Ord. 06-23)
§ 6-56.2 Purpose.
   The reserve for fiscal stability fund is designated for economic and revenue
downturns and emergency situations. Fund moneys may be appropriated by
ordinance only when one or more of the conditions identified in subdivisions
(1), (2), or (3) are met:
(1)   Economic triggers.
(A)   The unemployment rate for the City and County of Honolulu increases by
more than 2 percent within three fiscal quarters; or
(B)   The total value of net taxable real property declines by 2 percent or
more from the preceding fiscal year;
(2)   Revenue triggers.
(A)   City general fund and highway fund revenues decline by 2 percent or more
from the preceding fiscal year;
(B)   Transient accommodation tax revenues decline by 5 percent or more from
the preceding fiscal year; or
(C)   Nondiscretionary city expenditures increase by more than 5 percent of the
preceding fiscal year’s revenues; or
(3)   Emergencies.
(A)   The Governor of the State of Hawaii or the President of the United States
of America declares that a state of emergency exists within the City and County
of Honolulu as a result of a natural disaster or an occurrence, or imminent
threat thereof, which results or may likely result in substantial injury or
harm to the population in the City and County of Honolulu, or substantial
damage to or loss of property of residents of the City and County of Honolulu.
For the purposes of this subdivision, the phrase “occurrence, or imminent
threat thereof,” means a pandemic or other widespread health crisis for which
the Governor of the State of Hawaii has declared a state of emergency; or
(B)   Unfunded mandates are enacted by the State or federal government, imposed
after the enactment of the City and County of Honolulu’s fiscal year budget,
and require outlays before the start of the subsequent fiscal year.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 56, § 6-56.2) (Added by Ord. 98-32; Am. Ords. 99-41,
06-23, 20-5)
§ 6-56.3 Deposits into the fund.
   There shall be deposited into the reserve for fiscal stability fund:
(1)   Moneys deemed by the director of budget and fiscal services to be in
excess of funding required to sustain city services; such as moneys realized
when the previous fiscal year’s general fund or highway fund “unreserved fund
balance” as determined by the comprehensive annual financial report exceeds the
respective fund’s current fiscal year budget for “unreserved fund balance,”
adjusted for any moneys required under Charter § 9-105, subject to council
approval by resolution;
(2)   Moneys appropriated by the council to the reserve for fiscal stability
fund;
(3)   Moneys realized from the conveyance of city property that are designated
for deposit into the reserve for fiscal stability fund by the council
resolution authorizing the conveyance; and
(4)   Any interest earned on the deposits of the reserve for fiscal stability
fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 56, § 6-56.3) (Added by Ord. 98-32; Am. Ords. 06-23,
07-27)
§ 6-56.4 Expenditures.
(a)   All expenditures from the reserve for fiscal stability fund shall be
solely for the purpose of addressing the conditions set forth in §
6-56.2.
(b)   Notwithstanding the approval requirement in §
6-56.2, in the event moneys need to be expended pursuant to an emergency as
described in §
6-56.2(3)(A), and if the Governor’s declaration or proclamation of emergency
waives the provisions of HRS § 46-45 for any reason, such moneys are deemed
appropriated and may be expended without council approval. Within 30 days of
the expenditure of any moneys made pursuant to this subsection, the director of
budget and fiscal services shall provide a report to the council detailing the
expenditure.
(c)   No moneys from the reserve for fiscal stability fund may be expended for
any costs relating to the Honolulu High-Capacity Transit Corridor Project
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 56, § 6-56.4) (Added by Ord. 98-32; Am. Ords. 06-23,
20-5)
§ 6-56.5 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall be responsible for the
administration of the reserve for fiscal stability fund in accordance with the
prescribed laws and procedures applicable to expenditures of city funds.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 56, § 6-56.5) (Added by Ord. 98-32; Am. Ord. 06-23)
ARTICLE 57: GOLF FUND
Sections
   
6-57.1   Creation
   
6-57.2   Purpose
   
6-57.3   Administration
§ 6-57.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “golf
fund.”
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 57, § 6-57.1) (Added by Ord. 99-23)
§ 6-57.2 Purpose.
   There shall be deposited into the golf fund all revenues generated by the
department of enterprise services from operations related to municipal golf
courses and all moneys appropriated to the golf fund by the council in the
annual executive operating budget ordinance and any amendments thereto. All
moneys deposited into the golf fund shall be expended for the operating funds
for the department of enterprise services for operations related to municipal
golf courses and for related debt service payments.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 57, § 6-57.2) (Added by Ord. 99-23)
§ 6-57.3 Administration.
(a)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall be responsible for the
administration of the golf fund in accordance with prescribed laws and
procedures applicable to expenditures of city funds.
(b)   All moneys deposited in the golf fund that are in excess of the amounts
appropriated from the golf fund are to be considered single-purpose moneys and
appropriated for the purposes specified in §
6-57.2; provided that the expenditure of such moneys is authorized by council
resolution.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 57, § 6-57.3) (Added by Ord. 99-23)
ARTICLE 58: CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE COUNTY
Sections
   
6-58.1   Purpose
   
6-58.2   Definitions
   
6-58.3   Contributions to the county
   
6-58.4   Schedule, time for payment, and increase of contribution
   
6-58.5   Notice to director, documentation
§ 6-58.1 Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to establish a schedule for an annual
contribution to the city from certain federal lessees where such leased federal
property does not use the city’s refuse and road maintenance services, and
routine police, fire, and ambulance services, where “routine police, fire, and
ambulance services” do not include services provided by the city on such
federal property:
(1)   Pursuant to agreements between the federal government and the city or the
State, including without limitation, mutual aid agreements; or
(2)   In accordance with policies or procedures developed by the city to
coordinate the provision of such services as between the federal government and
the city.
The payment of this annual contribution is for the use, benefit, and enjoyment
of the other city services of the leased federal property and the individual
residents of the military housing project, which are not subject to an easy
cost analysis for establishment of a fee assessment for the city services. Such
other city services include such activities as the planning, land acquisition,
development, and maintenance of public parks, subsidized bus service,
landscaping and beautification projects countywide, the availability of police,
fire, and ambulance services throughout the county, planning, land acquisition,
development, and maintenance of public roadways throughout the county, and the
many cultural and athletic city-co-sponsored events in the county.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 58, § 6-58.1) (Added by Ord. 04-38)
§ 6-58.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BAH. The United States military basic allowance for housing.
Department. The department of budget and fiscal services.
Director. The director of budget and fiscal services.
Federal Lease. The lease of federal property to a private person who under such
lease is contractually obligated to develop, rehabilitate, maintain, and
operate a military housing project under the authority of the National Defense
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1996, P.L. 104-106, Title XXVIII, Subtitle A
- Military Housing Privatization Initiative (codified at 10 USC §§ 2871 through
2885), as amended, including all improvements thereon.
Federal Lessee. The private person to whom federal property is leased pursuant
to a federal lease.
Federal Property. Real property owned by the United States.
United States Military Services. Includes the Air Force, Army, Navy, Marine
Corps, and Coast Guard.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 58, § 6-58.2) (Added by Ord. 04-38)
§ 6-58.3 Contributions to the county.
   A federal lessee of federal property that does not use the city’s refuse and
road maintenance services, and routine police, fire, and ambulance services,
where “routine police, fire, and ambulance services” do not include services
provided by the city on such federal property:
(1)   Pursuant to agreements between the federal government and the city or the
State, including without limitation, mutual aid agreements; or
(2)   In accordance with policies or procedures developed by the city to
coordinate the provision of such services as between the federal government and
the city, may, pursuant to an agreement under §
6-58.5, elect for the duration of the federal lessee’s federal lease, to remit
annual contributions to the city in accordance with §
6-58.4, to contribute toward the use, benefit, and enjoyment of the leased
federal property and the individual residents of the military housing project
of other city services than refuse and road maintenance services, and routine
police, fire, and ambulance services.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 58, § 6-58.3) (Added by Ord. 04-38)
§ 6-58.4 Schedule, time for payment, and increase of contribution.
(a)   The initial annual contribution shall be established by the number of
housing units the federal lessee is to construct, rehabilitate, operate,
manage, and maintain in accordance with the federal lease upon execution of the
federal lease.
Housing Units, Number Not to Exceed Contribution
Housing Units, Number Not to Exceed Contribution
300                                 $15,000
500                                 $25,000
1,000                               $50,000
1,500                               $75,000
2,000                               $104,000
2,500                               $133,000
3,000                               $162,000
3,500                               $192,000
4,000                               $221,000
4,500                               $250,000
5,000                               $280,000
5,500                               $308,000
6,000                               $337,000
6,500                               $367,000
7,000                               $396,000
7,500 and over                      $425,000
 
(b)   The annual contribution to the city shall be payable in semiannual
installments as set forth in the agreement under §
6-58.5, except that the first payment shall be due within 60 days of the
execution of the federal lease, prorated from the date of the execution of the
federal lease to the remaining days of the calendar year.
(c)   The annual contribution shall be adjusted each January 1, beginning with
the first January 1, which is at least six months after execution of the
federal lease, by multiplying the amount of the annual contribution for the
immediately preceding calendar year by the percentage change between the
weighted average BAH for the applicable military service effective as of
January 1 of the subject year, and the weighted average BAH effective as of
January 1 of the immediately preceding calendar year, provided that the annual
contribution shall not be adjusted below the initial annual contribution
established in subsection (a) above. For the purpose of this subsection, the
“weighted average BAH” means the average of all of the BAH by rank
classification as of the applicable date, weighted by the number of housing
units designated for rent in each respective BAH rank classification as of the
applicable date, provided that the rank classification and number of housing
units for the earlier of such two years shall be assumed to be the same as that
for the later year.
(d)   In the event there is an increase of more than 5 percent in the number of
housing units operated by a federal lessee whether under an existing federal
lease or a new federal lease over the number of housing units in a prior year,
the annual contribution at that time shall be increased by a proportional
amount reflecting the proportional increase in the number of housing units.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 58, § 6-58.4) (Added by Ord. 04-38)
§ 6-58.5 Notice to director, documentation.
(a)   A federal lessee who elects to remit the contribution to the city under
this article shall provide written notice to the director, supported by
documentation to establish the initial annual contribution and the eligibility
under this article.
(b)   The director is authorized to request additional documentation, records,
and other information from the federal lessee to establish the initial annual
contribution and eligibility, and to verify the amount of the annual
contribution and the continued eligibility of the federal lessee under this
article.
(c)   The director shall verify whether the federal lessee is eligible under
this article within 30 days of submission by the federal lessee pursuant to
subsections (a) and (b). Upon verification of the eligibility of the federal
lessee under this article, the director shall execute an agreement with the
federal lessee for the contribution to the city consistent with the terms of
this article on the date of execution of the federal lease and which shall
contain such other terms necessary or appropriate for the implementation of
this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 58, § 6-58.5) (Added by Ord. 04-38)
ARTICLE 59: LAND CONSERVATION FUND
Sections
   
6-59.1   Establishment—Purpose—Administration
   
6-59.2   Deposits
   
6-59.3   Expenditures
§ 6-59.1 Establishment—Purpose—Administration.
   There is established a special fund to be known as the “land conservation
fund.” The purpose of the land conservation fund is to facilitate the purchase
or otherwise acquire lands or property entitlements for natural resource land
conservation purposes in the city. Such a fund would assist the city in its
preservation efforts by:
(1)   Enabling the city to act quickly when purchasing private lands or
interests therein; and
(2)   Allowing the city to leverage any private and governmental funding
sources for such land acquisitions by having matching funds available.
The director of budget and fiscal services shall administer the fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 59, § 6-59.1) (Added by Ord. 05-003)
§ 6-59.2 Deposits.
   There shall be deposited into the land conservation fund all gifts and
voluntary contributions to the city for the purposes of the land conservation
fund, all appropriations made to the land conservation fund, and all revenues
designated by ordinance or resolution for deposit into the land conservation
fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 59, § 6-59.2) (Added by Ord. 05-003)
§ 6-59.3 Expenditures.
   Moneys on credit to the land conservation fund shall be expended solely for
the purposes of the land conservation fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 59, § 6-59.3) (Added by Ord. 05-003)
ARTICLE 60: TRANSPORTATION SURCHARGE—USE OF FUNDS*
Sections
   
6-60.1   Establishment of surcharge—Conditions
   
6-60.2   Use of funds
   
6-60.3   Repeal of surcharge
§ 6-60.1 Establishment of surcharge—Conditions.
   Pursuant to § 2 of Act 1, Session Laws of Hawaii, First Special Session of
2017, codified as HRS § 46-16.8, there is established a 0.5 percent general
excise and use tax surcharge to be used for purposes of funding the capital
costs of public transportation within the City and County of Honolulu as
specified herein. The excise and use tax surcharge will be levied beginning
January 1, 2007.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 60, § 6-60.1) (Added by Ord. 05-027; Am. Ords. 07-001,
16-1, 17-11, 17-48)
§ 6-60.2 Use of funds.
(a)   As required by HRS § 248-2.6(d), moneys received from the State derived
from the imposition of the surcharge established under this article will be a
general fund realization. Moneys received from the surcharge may be expended
for capital costs of a locally preferred alternative for a mass transit
project.
(b)   No moneys received from the surcharge may be used for the following
purposes:
(1)   To build or repair public roads or highways or bicycle paths, or to
support public transportation systems already in existence before July 12,
2005;
(2)   Operating costs or maintenance costs of the mass transit project or any
purpose not consistent with subsection (a); or
(3)   Administrative or operating costs, marketing, or maintenance costs,
including personnel costs, of the Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
or the department of transportation services.
(c)   The annual report of the board of directors of the Honolulu Authority for
Rapid Transportation required by the Charter must include:
(1)   Any and all costs associated with:
(A)   Contingency and other reserves as recommended by the Federal Transit
Administration and as detailed in the Updated Final Financial Plan for the Full
Funding Grant Agreement;
(B)   ADA accessibility improvements to the minimum operable segment of the
locally preferred alternative for the mass transit project;
(C)   Planning and design costs for route expansion within the limits of the
locally preferred alternative adopted by Ordinance 07-001; and
(D)   Infrastructure improvements to rail station areas to support affordable
housing, as permitted by State and federal law;
(2)   An updated cash balance summary that contains all revenues and
expenditures. The summary will include cash balances for each revenue source
and each category of project cost showing the cash balance at the start of the
accounting period and the cash balance at the end of the period;
(3)   A capital improvement program status report in substantially the same
form as that submitted by the director of budget and fiscal services for the
city’s executive capital improvement program; and
(4)   All amounts invoiced by and paid to general contractors for the fiscal
year just ended. The amounts must be organized by general contractor,
separately reflect amounts billed by the general contractor for work done by
its subcontractors, and include the following information:
(A)   The names of general contractors and their respective subcontractors;
(B)   The type of services provided by each general contractor and
subcontractor;
(C)   A detailed description and justification for the work done by each
general contractor and subcontractor; and
(D)   The amount invoiced by and paid to each general contractor, and the
amount invoiced by each subcontractor to the general contractor for the
described work.
(d)   For purposes of this article, “capital costs” means nonrecurring costs
required to construct a transit facility or system, including debt service,
costs of land acquisition and development, acquiring of rights-of-way,
planning, design, and construction, including equipping and furnishing the
facility or system. “Capital costs” also include nonrecurring personal services
and other overhead costs that are not intended to continue after completion of
construction of the minimum operable segment of the locally preferred
alternative for a mass transit project.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 60, § 6-60.2) (Added by Ord. 05-027; Am. Ords. 16-1,
17-11, 17-48)
§ 6-60.3 Repeal of surcharge.
   Pursuant to § 6 of Act 1, Session Laws of Hawaii, First Special Session of
2017, this article will be repealed on December 31, 2030.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 60, § 6-60.3) (Added by Ord. 05-027; Am. Ords. 16-1,
17-11, 17-48)
ARTICLE 61: TRANSIT FUND
Sections
   
6-61.1   Establishment
   
6-61.2   Purpose
   
6-61.3   Deposits
   
6-61.4   Expenditures
   
6-61.5   Administration
§ 6-61.1 Establishment.
   There is created a special fund to be known as the “transit fund.”
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 61, § 6-61.1) (Added by Ord. 06-37)
§ 6-61.2 Purpose.
   The purpose of the transit fund is to:
(1)   Receive transfers of all moneys collected from the county surcharge on
State general excise and use tax by the general fund;
(2)   Receive transient accommodation taxes collected by the State, deposited
into the State mass transit special fund, and distributed to the city in
accordance with HRS §§ 237D-2 and 248-2.7;
(3)   Receive transient accommodation taxes collected by the city pursuant to
Chapter 8A and deposited in the fund pursuant to §
8A-1.1(2); and
(4)   Provide budgetary control and accountability of moneys received pursuant
to §
6-60.1, §
8A-1.1(2), and HRS §§ 237D-2 and 248-2.7.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 61, § 6-61.2) (Added by Ord. 06-37; Am. Ord. 21-33)
§ 6-61.3 Deposits.
(a)   There shall be deposited into the transit fund:
(1)   All county surcharge on State general excise and use tax moneys collected
pursuant to §
6-60.1 and deposited into the general fund;
(2)   Any interest earned on the deposits of the transit fund and all other
receipts dedicated for the mass transit project;
(3)   All transient accommodation taxes collected by the State and distributed
to the city in accordance with HRS §§ 237D-2 and 248-2.7; and
(4)   The portion of revenues from the city's collection of the transient
accommodations tax specified in §
8A-1.1(2).
(b)   No revenues required to be deposited into the transportation fund under
Article 18 shall be deposited into this fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 61, § 6-61.3) (Added by Ord. 06-37; Am. Ord. 20-19; Am.
Ord. 21-33)
§ 6-61.4 Expenditures.
   All expenditures from the transit fund shall be used for:
(1)   Operating or capital costs of a locally preferred alternative for a mass
transit project;
(2)   Expenses in complying with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
with respect to subsection (a) above; and
(3)   Reimbursement of the general fund or the highway fund by the transit fund
for any prior operating or capital expenditures incurred by the general fund or
highway fund relating to the development of a locally preferred alternative for
a mass transit project. All reimbursements by the transit fund shall be
included in the executive operating budget.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 61, § 6-61.4) (Added by Ord. 06-37; Am. Ord. 11-24)
§ 6-61.5 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall administer the transit
fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 61, § 6-61.5) (Added by Ord. 06-37)
ARTICLE 62: CLEAN WATER AND NATURAL LANDS FUND
Sections
   
6-62.1   Creation
   
6-62.2   Purpose
   
6-62.3   Deposit
   
6-62.4   Report required
   
6-62.5   Additional requirements
   
6-62.6   Administration
§ 6-62.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “clean
water and natural lands fund.”
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 62, § 6-62.1) (Added by Ord. 07-18)
§ 6-62.2 Purpose.
   The purpose of the clean water and natural lands fund is to provide for the
purchase of or to otherwise acquire real estate or any interest therein for
land conservation in the city for the following purposes:
(1)   Protection of watershed lands to preserve water quality and water supply;
(2)   Preservation of forests, beaches, coastal areas, and agricultural lands;
(3)   Public outdoor recreation and education, including access to beaches and
mountains;
(4)   Preservation of historic or culturally important land areas and sites;
(5)   Protection of significant habitats or ecosystems, including buffer zones;
(6)   Conservation of land to reduce erosion, floods, landslides, and runoff;
and
(7)   Acquisition of public access to public land and open space.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 62, § 6-62.2) (Added by Ord. 07-18)
§ 6-62.3 Deposit.
   There shall be deposited into the clean water and natural lands fund an
amount equal to one-half of the appropriation by the council of a minimum of 1
percent of the estimated real property tax revenues, plus any interest earned
on deposits in the clean water and natural lands fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 62, § 6-62.3) (Added by Ord. 07-18)
§ 6-62.4 Report required.
   Within 15 calendar days after the mayor submits the budget documents
specified in Charter § 9-102.1 to the council, the mayor shall also submit a
report on the clean water and natural lands fund that shall include but not be
limited to:
(1)   The calculation of the minimum amount required by the charter to be
appropriated from the estimated real property tax revenues and deposited into
the clean water and natural lands fund and the amount to be deposited into the
clean water and natural lands fund as provided in the proposed budget for the
ensuing fiscal year, which shall at least equal the minimum amount;
(2)   An explanation of the operating and capital program for the ensuing six
fiscal years for the use of the clean water and natural lands fund. The
explanation may be in the form of a functional plan spanning at least the
ensuing six fiscal years for the clean water and natural lands fund, adopted by
the council, and any annual updates thereto, also adopted by the council. If
applicable, the explanation shall demonstrate that the operating and capital
program complies with the appropriation priorities the council has established
for the clean water and natural lands fund. Identification of applicable
information contained in the administration’s budget submittal may satisfy this
requirement;
(3)   The amount included in the mayor’s proposed executive operating and
capital budgets for the ensuing fiscal year from the clean water and natural
lands fund, separately identifying the amount to be appropriated for
administrative expenses and demonstrating that the appropriation complies with
the charter’s maximum amount, and an explanation of how the budgeted amount
complies with the charter requirement that the amount does not substitute for,
but is in addition to the appropriations historically made for the purposes set
forth in the Charter; and
(4)   A list of proposed amendments to the public infrastructure maps required
by the proposed appropriations from the clean water and natural lands fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 62, § 6-62.4) (Added by Ord. 07-18)
§ 6-62.5 Additional requirements.
(a)   All expenditures from the clean water and natural lands fund shall be
made consistent with the priorities established by a commission created by
council resolution or, in the absence of a commission, with the priorities
established by the council by resolution.
(b)   Moneys in the clean water and natural lands fund may be used for the
payment of principal, interest, and premium, if any, due with respect to bonds
issued after enactment of this ordinance and pursuant to Charter §§ 3-116 or 3-
117, in whole or in part, for the purposes enumerated above and for the payment
of costs associated with the purchase, redemption, or refunding of such bonds.
(c)   At any given time, no more than 5 percent of the moneys in the clean
water and natural lands fund shall be used for administrative expenses.
(d)   Any balance remaining in the clean water and natural lands fund at the
end of any fiscal year shall not lapse, but shall remain in the clean water and
natural lands fund, accumulating from year to year. The moneys in the clean
water and natural lands fund shall not be used for any purposes except those
listed in this article.
(e)   The appropriations to the clean water and natural lands fund shall not
substitute for, but shall be in addition to, those appropriations historically
made for the purposes stated in this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 62, § 6-62.5) (Added by Ord. 07-18)
§ 6-62.6 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall administer the clean water
and natural lands fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 62, § 6-62.6) (Added by Ord. 07-18)
ARTICLE 63: AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUND
Sections
   
6-63.1   Creation
   
6-63.2   Purpose
   
6-63.3   Deposit
   
6-63.4   Report required
   
6-63.5   Additional requirements
   
6-63.6   Administration
§ 6-63.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the
“affordable housing fund.”
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 63, § 6-63.1) (Added by Ord. 07-19)
§ 6-63.2 Purpose.
   The purpose of the affordable housing fund is to provide and maintain
affordable rental housing for persons earning 60 percent or less of the median
household income in the city for any one or more the following purposes:
provision and expansion of affordable rental housing and suitable living
environments in projects, which may include mixed-use, mixed-income projects,
having residential units that are principally for persons of low and moderate
income through land acquisition for, development of, construction of, or
capital improvements or rehabilitation to such housing, provided that the
funded housing remains affordable for at least 60 years.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 63, § 6-63.2) (Added by Ord. 07-19; Am. Ord. 20-9)
§ 6-63.3 Deposit.
   There shall be appropriated by the council and deposited into the affordable
housing fund an amount equal to one-half of 1 percent of the estimated real
property tax revenues, plus any interest earned on deposits in this fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 63, § 6-63.3) (Added by Ord. 07-19; Am. Ord. 20-9)
§ 6-63.4 Report required.
   Within 15 calendar days after the mayor submits the budget documents
specified in Charter § 9-102.1 to the council, the mayor shall also submit a
report on the affordable housing fund that shall include but not be limited to:
(1)   The calculation of the minimum amount required by the charter to be
appropriated from the estimated real property tax revenues and deposited into
the affordable housing fund and the amount to be deposited into the affordable
housing fund as provided in the proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year,
which shall at least equal the minimum amount;
(2)   An explanation of the operating and capital program for the ensuing six
fiscal years for the use of the affordable housing fund. The explanation may be
in the form of a functional plan spanning at least the ensuing six fiscal years
for the affordable housing fund, adopted by the council, and any annual updates
thereto, also adopted by the council. If applicable, the explanation shall
demonstrate that the operating and capital program complies with the
appropriation priorities the council has established for the affordable housing
fund. Identification of applicable information contained in the
administration’s budget submittal may satisfy this requirement;
(3)   The amount included in the mayor’s proposed executive operating and
capital budgets for the ensuing fiscal year from the affordable housing fund,
separately identifying the amount to be appropriated for administrative
expenses and demonstrating that the appropriation complies with the Charter’s
maximum amount, and an explanation of how the budgeted amount complies with the
Charter requirement that the amount does not substitute for but is in addition
to the appropriations historically made for the purposes set forth in the
Charter; and
(4)   A list of proposed amendments to the public infrastructure maps required
by the proposed appropriations from the affordable housing fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 63, § 6-63.4) (Added by Ord. 07-19)
§ 6-63.5 Additional requirements.
(a)   All expenditures from the affordable housing fund shall be made
consistent with the priorities established by a commission created by council
resolution or, in the absence of a commission, with the priorities established
by the council by resolution.
(b)   Moneys in the affordable housing fund may also be used for the payment of
principal, interest, and premium, if any, due with respect to bonds issued
after enactment of this ordinance and pursuant to Charter §§ 3-116 or 3-117, in
whole or in part, for the purpose enumerated above and for the payment of costs
associated with the purchase, redemption or refunding of such bonds.
(c)   At any given time, no more than 5 percent of the moneys in the affordable
housing fund shall be used for administrative expenses.
(d)   Any balance remaining in the affordable housing fund at the end of any
fiscal year shall not lapse, but shall remain in the affordable housing fund,
accumulating from year to year. The moneys in the affordable housing fund shall
not be used for any purposes except those listed in this article.
(e)   The appropriations to the affordable housing fund shall not substitute
for, but shall be in addition to, those appropriations historically made for
the purposes stated in this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 63, § 6-63.5) (Added by Ord. 07-19)
§ 6-63.6 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall administer the affordable
housing fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 63, § 6-63.6) (Added by Ord. 07-19)
ARTICLE 64: RESERVED
ARTICLE 65: TRANSIT IMPROVEMENT BOND FUND
Sections
   
6-65.1   Creation
   
6-65.2   Deposit
   
6-65.3   Expenditure
   
6-65.4   Administration
§ 6-65.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “transit
improvement bond fund.”
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 65, § 6-65.1) (Added by Ord. 09-14)
§ 6-65.2 Deposit.
   There shall be deposited into the transit improvement bond fund the proceeds
of the sale of general obligation bonds of the city issued to pay all or part
of those appropriations for public improvements made in the capital budget
ordinance of the city and specified therein to be expended from the transit
improvement bond fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 65, § 6-65.2) (Added by Ord. 09-14)
§ 6-65.3 Expenditure.
   There shall be paid from the transit improvement bond fund the costs of
public improvements appropriated in the capital budget ordinance and specified
therein to be expended from the transit improvement bond fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 65, § 6-65.3) (Added by Ord. 09-14)
§ 6-65.4 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall be responsible for the
administration of the transit improvement bond fund. Expenditures from the
transit improvement bond fund shall be in accordance with prescribed laws and
procedures applicable to expenditures of city revenues.
(1990 Code, Ch. 6, Art. 65, § 6-65.4) (Added by Ord. 09-14)
ARTICLE 66: WAIVER OF CERTAIN CITY FEES FOR CENTENARIAN RESIDENTS
Sections
   
6-66.1   Definitions
   
6-66.2   Centenarian medallion
   
6-66.3   Eligibility of centenarian residents for a waiver of certain city fees
   
6-66.4   Administration
   
6-66.5   Violation
§ 6-66.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Centenarian Medallion. A marking on a city payment card, issued pursuant to
the requirements set forth in §
6-66.3, that entitles qualifying centenarians to obtain the waiver of certain
city fees.
   Centenarian Resident. A resident of the city who is aged 100 years or older.
   Certain City Fees. Fees for:
(1)   The city bus system;
(2)   The city rail system;
(3)   The city special transit service;
(4)   Admission to the Honolulu Zoo and the Foster Botanical Garden;
(5)   Admission to city park facilities; and
(6)   Municipal golf courses and golf cart rentals.
   City Payment Card. Has the same meaning as defined in §
15B-1.1.
(Added by Ord. 21-26)
§ 6-66.2 Centenarian medallion.
   Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, centenarian residents of the city
with a valid centenarian medallion shall receive a waiver of certain city fees.
The director of transportation services is responsible for the issuance of the
centenarian medallion. The centenarian medallion may be renewed annually.
(Added by Ord. 21-26)
§ 6-66.3 Eligibility of centenarian residents for a waiver of certain city
fees.
(a)   To qualify for a centenarian medallion, a centenarian resident must:
   (1)   Be 100 years of age or older;
   (2)   Provide proof of age with a government issued photographic
identification; and
   (3)   Provide proof of residency in the city.
(b)   The director of transportation services shall verify the eligibility of
applications for the centenarian medallion.
(Added by Ord. 21-26)
§ 6-66.4 Administration.
   The director of transportation services shall be responsible for the
following:
   (1)   Administration of the waivers of certain city fees for centenarian
residents;
   (2)   Registration and annual centenarian medallion issuance;
   (3)   Record keeping, including usage, renewal, and terminations; and
   (4)   Publicity and promotion of the centenarian medallion.
(Added by Ord. 21-26)
§ 6-66.5 Violation.
   It is unlawful for any person, other than the centenarian resident issued
the centenarian medallion, to use the centenarian medallion to obtain a waiver
of certain city fees. Any person who violates this article is guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for not
more than 30 days, or both, for each violation.
(Added by Ord. 21-26)
ARTICLE 67: TAXABLE GENERAL IMPROVEMENT BOND FUND
Sections
   
6-67.1   Creation
   
6-67.2   Deposit
   
6-67.3   Source of payment
§ 6-67.1 Creation.
   There is hereby created and established a special fund to be known as the
“taxable general improvement bond fund.”
(Added by Ord. 25-7)
§ 6-67.2 Deposit.
   There shall be deposited into the taxable general improvement bond fund the
proceeds of the sale of taxable general obligation bonds of the city issued to
pay all or part of those appropriations for improvements made in the executive
capital budget ordinance and specified therein to be expended from the taxable
general improvement bond fund.
(Added by Ord. 25-7)
§ 6-67.3 Source of payment.
   There shall be paid from the taxable general improvement bond fund the costs
of improvements appropriated in the executive capital budget ordinance and
specified therein to be expended from the taxable general improvement bond
fund.
(Added by Ord. 25-7)
ARTICLE 68: CLIMATE RESILIENCY FUND
Sections
   
6-68.1   Creation
   
6-68.2   Purpose
   
6-68.3   Deposit
   
6-68.4   Report required
   
6-68.5   Additional requirements
   
6-68.6   Administration
§ 6-68.1 Creation.
   There is hereby created and established a special fund to be known as the
“climate resiliency fund.”
(Added by Ord. 25-23)
§ 6-68.2 Purpose.
   The purpose of the climate resiliency fund is to:
(1)   Finance preventive, ameliorative, and educational measures relating to
experienced and anticipated effects of climate change;
(2)   Enhance the resiliency of the city to climate change impacts, including
investments in green infrastructure, indigenous knowledge-informed solutions,
invasive species prevention and control, renewable energy, and coastal
protection measures;
(3)   Mitigate experienced and potential flood impacts of climate change by
financing the construction, repair, and maintenance of city-owned or city-
controlled waterways, wetlands, streams, drainageways, channels, and water
systems;
(4)   Educate city residents about experienced and anticipated impacts of
climate change and the importance of resilience, to foster a community-wide
understanding of and response to this global challenge; provided that no more
than 5 percent of the moneys deposited into the climate resiliency fund in the
previous year may be used for education-related activities; and
(5)   Safeguard the city’s residents, economy, and natural environment against
climate change impacts for future generations.
(Added by Ord. 25-23)
§ 6-68.3 Deposit.
   There must be deposited into the climate resiliency fund an amount equal to
one-third of the appropriation by the council of 1.5 percent of the estimated
real property tax revenues as required by Charter § 9-204.1, plus any interest
earned on deposits in this fund.
(Added by Ord. 25-23)
§ 6-68.4 Report required.
   Within 15 calendar days after the mayor submits the budget documents
specified in Charter § 9-102.1 to the council, the mayor shall also submit a
report on the climate resiliency fund, which must include but need not be
limited to:
(1)   The calculation of the minimum amount required by Charter § 9-204.1 to be
appropriated from the estimated real property tax revenues and deposited into
the climate resiliency fund, and the amount to be deposited into the climate
resiliency fund as provided in the proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year,
which must at least equal the minimum amount;
(2)   An explanation of the operating and capital program for the ensuing six
fiscal years for the use of the climate resiliency fund. The explanation may be
in the form of a functional plan spanning at least the ensuing six fiscal years
for the climate resiliency fund, adopted by the council, and any annual updates
thereto, also adopted by the council. If applicable, the explanation must
demonstrate that the operating and capital program complies with the
appropriation priorities the council has established for the climate resiliency
fund. Identification of applicable information contained in the
administration’s budget submittal may satisfy this requirement;
(3)   The amount included in the mayor’s proposed executive operating and
capital budgets for the ensuing fiscal year from the climate resiliency fund,
separately identifying the amount to be appropriated for administrative
expenses and demonstrating that the appropriation complies with the Charter’s
maximum amount, and an explanation of how the budgeted amount complies with the
Charter requirement that the amount does not substitute for, but is in addition
to, the appropriations historically made for the purposes set forth in the
Charter; and
(4)   A list of proposed amendments to the public infrastructure maps required
by the proposed appropriations from the climate resiliency fund.
(Added by Ord. 25-23)
§ 6-68.5 Additional requirements.
(a)   All expenditures from the climate resiliency fund must be consistent with
Charter § 9-204.4.
(b)   Moneys in the climate resiliency fund may be used:
(1)   To finance a grant program for preventive and ameliorative measures
relating to the experienced and anticipated effects of climate change,
including but not limited to rising sea levels, heavier rainfall, flooding,
extreme weather events, disruption of ecosystems, and potential impacts on
human health due to changing climate patterns. Preventive and ameliorative
measures include cesspool conversions and the installation of new lateral sewer
connections for unsewered properties that were not previously serviced by a
public sewer main. Grants from this program may not exceed $50,000 and may only
be awarded to households with a total household income under $100,000;
(2)   To contract with non-profit entities to support and advance climate
resilience activities that leverage State, federal, or private funds. Such
programs include but are not limited to extreme weather protection upgrades,
cesspool conversions relating to experienced and anticipated effects of climate
change, addressing an over-dependence on imports for food and energy, and
providing climate-related energy and water retrofits for households earning 80
percent and below of the area median income in the city as determined by the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development; and
(3)   For the payment of principal, interest, and premium, if any, due with
respect to bonds issued after enactment of this article and pursuant to Charter
§§ 3-116 or 3-117, in whole or in part, for the purpose enumerated above and
for the payment of costs associated with the purchase, redemption, or refunding
of such bonds.
(c)   At any given time, no more than 5 percent of the moneys in the climate
resiliency fund may be used for administrative expenses. During any fiscal
year, up to 50 percent of the moneys appropriated from the climate resiliency
fund may be allocated for grants and loans implementing climate resilience
community projects with partners and households external to the city.
(d)   Any balance remaining in the climate resiliency fund at the end of any
fiscal year will not lapse and must remain in the climate resiliency fund,
accumulating from year to year. The moneys in the climate resiliency fund may
not be used for any purposes except those listed in this article.
(e)   The appropriations to the climate resiliency fund may not substitute for,
but must be in addition to, those appropriations historically made for the
purposes stated in this article.
(Added by Ord. 25-23)
§ 6-68.6 Administration.
   The executive for climate change, sustainability and resiliency may adopt
rules.
(Added by Ord. 25-23)
CHAPTER 7: RESERVED
 
CHAPTER 8: REAL PROPERTY TAX
Articles
   
1.   Administration
   
2.   Notice of Assessments—Assessment Lists
   
3.   Tax Bills, Payments, and Penalties
   
4.   Remissions
   
5.   Liens—Foreclosures
   
6.   Rate—Levy
   
7.   Valuations
   
8.   Wasteland Development
   
9.   Nontaxable Property—Assessment
   
10.   Exemptions
   
11.   Determination of Rates
   
12.   Appeals
   
13.   County Tax Credit
   
14.   Tax Credit for the Installation of an Automatic Sprinkler System
   
15.   Severability
   
16.   Tax Credit for Septic Tank to Replace Household Cesspool
ARTICLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
Sections
   
8-1.1   Legislative intent
   
8-1.2   Definitions
   
8-1.3   Duties and responsibilities of the director
   
8-1.4   Oaths
   
8-1.5   Hearings and subpoenas
   
8-1.6   Timely mailing treated as timely filing and paying
   
8-1.7   Tax collection—General duties, powers of director
   
8-1.8   District court judges—Misdemeanors and actions for tax collections
   
8-1.9   Director—Collection, records of delinquent taxes, uncollectible
delinquent taxes
   
8-1.10   Legal representative
   
8-1.11   Abstracts of registered conveyances, copies of corporation exhibits
furnished to director
   
8-1.12   Notices—How given
   
8-1.13   Federal or other tax officials permitted to inspect returns—Reciprocal
provisions
   
8-1.14   Records—Public and confidential
   
8-1.15   Tax records as evidence
   
8-1.16   Due date on Saturday, Sunday, or holiday
   
8-1.17   Changes in assessment lists
   
8-1.18   Adjustments and refunds
   
8-1.19   Partial payment of taxes
   
8-1.20   Abetting misdemeanor
   
8-1.21   Neglect of duty—Misdemeanor
   
8-1.22   Penalty for misdemeanors
§ 8-1.1 Legislative intent.
   The purpose of this chapter is to implement the authority granted to the
city to assess, impose, and collect real property taxes based on Article VIII,
Section 3 of the Constitution of the State of Hawaii.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.1) (Added by Ord. 80-72)
§ 8-1.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Director. The director of budget and fiscal services or the director’s
authorized subordinate.
Property or Real Property. Includes all land and appurtenances thereof and the
buildings, structures, fences, and improvements erected on or affixed to the
same, and any fixture that is erected on or affixed to such land, buildings,
structures, fences, and improvements, including all machinery and other
mechanical or other allied equipment and the foundations thereof, whose use
thereof is necessary to the utility of such land, buildings, structures,
fences, and improvements, or whose removal therefrom cannot be accomplished
without substantial damage to such land, buildings, structures, fences, and
improvements, excluding, however, any growing crops and any device that
converts solar radiation to electricity or heat.
(Sec. 8-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.2) (Am.
Ords. 96-58, 07-47, 15-23)
§ 8-1.3 Duties and responsibilities of the director.
   The director shall have the following duties and powers, in addition to any
others prescribed or granted by this chapter:
(1)   Assessment. To assess, pursuant to law, all real property situated within
the geographic boundary of the city for taxation of real property and to make
any other assessment by law required to be made by the director;
(2)   Collections. To be responsible for the collection of all taxes imposed by
this chapter and for such other duties as are provided by law;
(3)   Construction of revenue laws. To construe the provisions of this chapter,
the administration of which is within the scope of the director’s duties,
whenever requested by any officer or employee of the city, or by any taxpayer;
(4)   Enforcement of penalties. To see that penalties are enforced when
prescribed by this chapter (the administration of which is within the scope of
the director’s duties) for disobedience or evasion of its provisions, and to
see that complaints are made against persons violating this chapter; in the
execution of these powers and duties, the director may call upon the
corporation counsel or prosecuting attorney, whose duties it shall be to assist
in the institution and conduct of all proceedings or prosecutions for penalties
and forfeitures, liabilities, and punishments, for violation of this chapter in
respect to the assessment and taxation of real property;
(5)   Forms. To prescribe forms to be used in or in connection with this
chapter, including forms to be used in the making of returns by taxpayers or in
any other proceedings connected with this chapter and to change the same from
time to time as deemed necessary;
(6)   Maps.
(A)   The director shall provide for the city, maps drawn to appropriate scale,
showing all parcels, blocks, lots, or other divisions of land based upon
ownership, and their areas or dimensions, numbered or otherwise designated in a
systematic manner for convenience of identification, valuation, and assessment.
The maps, as far as possible, shall show the names of owners of each division
of land, and shall be revised from time to time as ownership changes and as
further divisions of parcels occur. The director shall also maintain, as and
when such information is available, maps showing present use, zoning and
physical use capabilities of land located within the city for the guidance of
assessors and the information of various tax review tribunals and the general
public; and
(B)   The director shall charge fees for the use and other disposition of
tracings of these maps, including copies or prints made therefrom, by private
persons or firms as provided for by ordinance;
(7)   Inspection, examination of records and property. The director shall have
the authority to inspect and examine the records and property of all public
officers without charge, and to examine the books and papers of account of any
person for the purpose of enabling the director to obtain all information that
could in any manner aid the director in discharging the director’s duties under
this chapter;
(8)   Inspection, examination of real property. To inspect and examine the real
property of any person for the purpose of enabling the director to attain all
information that could in any manner aid the director in discharging the
director’s duties under this chapter;
(9)   Recommendations for legislation. To recommend to the mayor such
amendments, changes, or modifications of this chapter or any applicable State
statutes as may seem proper or necessary to remedy injustice or irregularity,
or to facilitate the assessment of property under this chapter;
(10)   Report to mayor. To report to the mayor annually, and at such other
times and in such manner as the mayor may require, concerning the acts and
doings and the administration of the director’s department, and such other
matters or information concerning real property taxation as may be deemed of
general interest; the mayor shall transmit copies of such reports to the
council within 30 days of receipt;
(11)   Rules. To adopt such rules as the director may deem proper, and to
effectuate the purposes for which the director’s department is constituted, and
to regulate matters of procedure by or before the director pursuant to HRS
Chapter 91;
(12)   Compromises. With the approval of the corporation counsel, to compromise
any claim arising under this chapter not exceeding $500 and if a claim exceeds
$500, the director shall obtain the approval of the city council, the
administration of which is within the scope of the director’s duties; and in
any such case, there shall be placed on file and in the director’s department’s
office a statement of:
(A)   The amount of tax assessed, or proposed to be;
(B)   The amount of penalties and interest imposed or proposed to be assessed;
(C)   The amount of penalties and interest imposed or that could have been
imposed by law with respect to paragraph (A) as computed by the director;
(D)   The total amount of liability as determined by the terms of the
compromise, and the actual payments made thereon with the dates thereof; and
(E)   The reasons for the compromise;
(13)   Retroactivity of rulings. To prescribe the extent, if any, to which any
ruling, regulations, or construction of this chapter shall be applied without
retroactive effect;
(14)   Remission of delinquency penalties and interest. Except in cases of
fraud or wilful violation of this chapter or wilful refusal to make a return
setting forth the information required by this chapter (but inclusion in a
return of a claim of nonliability for the tax shall not be deemed a refusal to
make a return), the director may remit any amount of penalties or interest
added, under this chapter, to any tax that is delinquent for not more than 90
days, in a case of excusable failure to file a return or pay a tax within the
time required by this chapter, or in a case of uncollectibility of the whole
amount due; and in any such case there shall be placed on file in the
director’s office a statement showing the names of the person receiving such
remission, the principal amount of the tax, and the year or period involved;
(15)   Closing agreements. To enter into an agreement in writing with any
taxpayer or other person relating to the liability of such taxpayer or other
person, under this chapter, the administration of which is within the scope of
the director’s duties, in respect of any taxable period, or in respect of one
or more separate items affecting the liability for any taxable period; such
agreement, signed by or on behalf of the taxpayer or other person concerned,
and by or on behalf of the city, shall be final and conclusive, and except upon
a showing of fraud or malfeasance, or misrepresentation of a material fact:
(A)   The matters agreed upon shall not be reopened, and the agreement shall
not be modified, by any officer or employee of the city; and
(B)   In any suit, action, or proceeding, such agreement, or any determination,
assessment, collection, payment, refund, or credit made in accordance
therewith, shall not be annulled, modified, set aside, or disregarded; and
(16)   Other powers and duties. In addition to the powers and duties contained
in this section, the assessing, collecting, receiving, and enforcing payments
of the tax imposed under this section, and otherwise relating thereto, shall be
severally and respectively conferred, granted, practiced, and exercised for
levying, assessing, collecting, and receiving and enforcing payment of the
taxes imposed under the authority of this chapter.
(Sec. 8-1.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.3)
§ 8-1.4 Oaths.
   The director may administer all oaths or affirmations required to be taken
or be administered under this chapter.
(Sec. 8-1.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.4)
§ 8-1.5 Hearings and subpoenas.
   The director may conduct any inquiry, investigation, or hearing, relating to
any assessment, or the amount of any tax, or the collection of any delinquent
tax, including any inquiry or investigation into the financial resources of any
delinquent taxpayer or the collectibility of any delinquent tax. The director
may administer oaths and take testimony under oath relating to the matter of
inquiry or investigation, and subpoena witnesses and require the production of
books, papers, documents, and records pertinent to such inquiry. If any person
disobeys such process, or, having appeared in obedience thereto, refuses to
answer pertinent questions put to such person by the director or to produce any
books, papers, documents or records, pursuant thereto, the director may apply
to the first circuit court setting forth such disobedience to process or
refusal to answer, and such court or judge shall cite such person to appear
before such court or judge to answer such questions or to produce such books,
papers, documents, or records, and upon such person’s refusal to do so, commit
such person to jail until such person testifies but not for a longer period
than 60 days. Notwithstanding the serving of the term of commitment by any
person, the director may proceed in all respects as if the witness had not
previously been called upon to testify. Witnesses (other than the taxpayer or
the taxpayer’s officers, directors, agents, and employees) shall be allowed
their fees and mileage as in cases in the circuit courts to be paid on vouchers
of the city, from any moneys available for expenses of the director.
(Sec. 8-1.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.5)
§ 8-1.6 Timely mailing treated as timely filing and paying.
(a)   General rule.  Any report, claim, tax return, statement, or other
document required or authorized to be filed with or any payment made to the
city that is:
(1)   Transmitted through the United States mail, shall be deemed filed and
received by the city on the date shown by the post office cancellation mark
stamped upon the envelope or other appropriate wrapper containing it; and
(2)   Mailed but not received by the city or where received and the
cancellation mark is illegible, erroneous, or omitted, shall be deemed filed
and received on the date it was mailed if the sender establishes by competent
evidence that the report, claim, tax return, statement, remittance, or other
document was deposited in the United States mail on or before the date due for
filing; and in cases of the nonreceipt of a report, tax return, statement,
remittance, or other document required by law to be filed, the sender files
with the city a duplicate within 30 days after written notification is given to
the sender by the city of its nonreceipt of the report, tax return, statement,
remittance, or other document.
(b)   Registered mail, certified mail, certificate of mailing. If any report,
claim, tax return, statement, remittance, or other document is sent by United
States registered mail, certified mail, or certificate of mailing, a record
authenticated by the United States postal service of the registration,
certification, or certificate shall be considered competent evidence that the
report, claim, tax return, statement, remittance, or other document was
delivered to the director or department of budget and fiscal services, and the
date of registration, certification, or certificate shall be deemed the
postmarked date.
(Sec. 8-1.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.6)
§ 8-1.7 Tax collection—General duties, powers of director.
   The director shall collect all taxes under this chapter according to the
assessments and shall be liable and responsible for the full amount of the
taxes assessed, unless the director shall under oath account for the
noncollection of the same, or shall be released from accountability as provided
in §
8-1.9. The corporation counsel shall assist the director in the collection of
all taxes under this chapter.
(Sec. 8-1.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, §
8-1.7)
§ 8-1.8 District court judges—Misdemeanors and actions for tax collections.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the district court judges for
the first circuit court for the State of Hawaii, as authorized in HRS Title 14,
shall have jurisdiction to:
(1)   Try misdemeanors arising under this chapter and all complaints for the
violation of this chapter, and to impose any of the penalties therein
prescribed; and
(2)   Hear and determine all civil actions and proceedings for the collection
and enforcement of collection and payment of all taxes assessed under this
chapter and all actions or judgments obtained in tax actions and proceedings,
notwithstanding the amount claimed.
(Sec. 8-1.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.8)
§ 8-1.9 Director—Collection, records of delinquent taxes, uncollectible
delinquent taxes.
(a)   The director shall be responsible for the collection and general
administration of all delinquent taxes. The director shall duly and accurately
account for all delinquent taxes collected.
(b)   The director shall prepare and maintain a complete record, open to public
inspection, of the amounts of taxes assessed which have become delinquent with
the name of the delinquent taxpayer in each case, but it shall not be necessary
to periodically compute on the records the amount of penalties and interest
upon delinquent taxes.
(c)   The director may from time to time prepare lists of all taxes delinquent
that in the director’s judgment are uncollectible. Such taxes as the director
finds to be uncollectible shall be entered in a special record and be deleted
from the other books kept by the director, and the director shall thereupon be
released from any further accountability for their collection; provided that no
account shall be so deleted until it shall have been delinquent for at least
two years. Any items so deleted may be transferred back to the delinquent tax
roll if the director finds that the alleged facts as previously presented to
the director were not true, or that such items are in fact collectible.
(Sec. 8-1.8, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, §
8-1.9)
§ 8-1.10 Legal representative.
   The corporation counsel or the prosecuting attorney shall assign one of such
persons’ deputies as attorney and legal advisor and representative of the
director. The corporation counsel or the prosecuting attorney may proceed to
enforce payment of any delinquent taxes by any means provided by law. Any legal
proceedings may be instituted in the name of the director or the deputy
director.
(Sec. 8-1.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.10)
§ 8-1.11 Abstracts of registered conveyances, copies of corporation exhibits
furnished to director.
   The director may request abstracts of titles. For the purpose of assisting
the director in arriving at a correct valuation of the property within each
district, the registrar of conveyances, or any other agency so requested by the
department, shall furnish to the department, monthly, quarterly, or as
otherwise as required by the department, an abstract of the conveyances of, or
other documents affecting title to, or assessment of, real property in each
district, which have been entered for record at the bureau of conveyances or
the land court, executed, or filed, as the case may be, during the period
covered by such abstract. The State department of commerce and consumer affairs
shall each year furnish the department as requested, copies of the annual
corporation exhibits of any or all corporations owning real property in any
district or any information contained in such exhibits.
(Sec. 8-1.10, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.11)
§ 8-1.12 Notices—How given.
   Unless otherwise provided, every notice, the giving of which by the director
is required or authorized, shall be deemed to have been given on the date when
the notice was mailed properly addressed to the addressee at the addressee’s
last known address or place of business.
(Sec. 8-1.15, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.12)
§ 8-1.13 Federal or other tax officials permitted to inspect returns—Reciprocal
provisions.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of any law making it unlawful for any person,
officer, or employee of the city to make known information imparted by any tax
return or permit any tax return to be seen or examined by any person, it shall
be lawful to permit a duly accredited tax official of the United States or of
any state or territory or the Multistate Tax Commission to inspect any tax
return of any taxpayer, or to furnish to such official, commission, or the
authorized representative thereof an abstract of the return or supply such
person with information concerning any item contained in the return or
disclosed by the report of any investigation of the return or of the subject
matter of the return for tax purposes only. The Multistate Tax Commission may
make such information available to a duly accredited tax official of the United
States or to a duly accredited tax official of any state or territory, or the
authorized representative thereof, for tax purposes only.
(Sec. 8-1.16, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.13)
§ 8-1.14 Records—Public and confidential.
(a)   Except as provided in subsection (b), all maps and records compiled,
made, obtained, or received by the director or any of the director’s
subordinates, shall be public records, and where the death, removal, or
resignation of any such officers, shall immediately pass to the care and
custody of their respective successors. The information and all maps and
records connected with the assessment and collection of taxes under this
chapter shall, during business hours, be open to the inspection of the public.
(b)   Real property tax records stamped confidential and provided in a form
separable from public tax records by a taxpayer containing trade secrets or
confidential commercial or financial information of a taxpayer shall not be
open to inspection by the public including but not limited to:
(1)   Lease agreements not involving the use of government land;
(2)   Income statements; and
(3)   Income and general excise tax statements.
(c)   Nothing in subsection (b) shall be construed to preclude the city from
using the records enumerated in subsection (b) in any proceeding before a board
of review or a court in any appeal brought by a taxpayer.
(Sec. 8-1.17, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.14) (Am.
Ord. 01-06)
§ 8-1.15 Tax records as evidence.
   In respect of any tax imposed or assessed under this chapter, the
administration of which is within the scope of the director’s duties and except
as otherwise specifically provided in the law imposing the tax, the notices of
assessments, records of assessments, and lists or other records of payments and
amounts unpaid prepared by or under the authority of the director, or copies
thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the assessments of the property or
person assessed, the amount due and unpaid, and the delinquency in payment and
that all requirements of law in relation thereto have been complied with.
(Sec. 8-1.18, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.15)
§ 8-1.16 Due date on Saturday, Sunday, or holiday.
   When the due date for any notice, application, document, or remittance
required by this chapter falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the
notice, application, document, or remittance shall not be due until the next
succeeding day which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the due date for any appeal shall comply with
the jurisdictional requirements set forth in the law establishing the right to
appeal.
(Sec. 8-1.19, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.16) (Am.
Ord. 15-34)
§ 8-1.17 Changes in assessment lists.
   Except as specifically provided in this chapter, no changes in, additions to
or deductions from, the real property tax assessments on the assessment lists
prepared as provided in §
8-2.2 shall be made except to add thereto property or assessments which may
have been omitted therefrom, or to deduct therefrom adjustments on account of
duplicate assessments and clerical errors, such as transposition in figures,
typographical errors, and errors in calculation.
(Sec. 8-1.20, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.17)
§ 8-1.18 Adjustments and refunds.
(a)   This subsection shall apply to taxes assessed and collected under this
chapter.
(1)   In the event of adjustments on account of duplicate assessments and
clerical errors, such as transposition in figures, typographical errors, and
errors in calculations, the adjustments may be entered upon the records
although the full amount appearing on the records before such adjustment has
been paid.
(2)   There may be refunded in the manner provided in subsection (b) any amount
collected in excess of the amount appearing on the records as adjusted, or any
amount constituting a duplication of payment in whole or in part.
(3)   Whenever any real property is deemed by the director to be exempt from
taxation under §
8-10.17, if there has been paid before the effective date of the exemption any
real property taxes applicable to the period following the effective date of
the exemption, there shall be refunded to the nonprofit or limited distribution
mortgagor owning the property in the manner provided in subsection (b) all
amounts representing the real property taxes that have been paid on account of
the property and attributable to the period following the effective date of the
exemption.
(4)   No such adjustment shall be entered on the records except within five
years after the end of the tax year in which the amount to be adjusted was due
and payable, unless a written application for the adjustment has been filed
within such period.
(b)   This subsection shall apply to all real property taxes.
(1)   Payment of all refunds and adjustments shall be made out of the real
property tax refund account in the real property tax trust fund hereinafter
created. All refunds and adjustments shall be paid by voucher approved by the
director, setting forth the details of each transaction, provided that if the
person entitled to the refund or adjustment is the current owner of the
property, the refund or adjustment shall be first applied to satisfy any
interest, then penalties, then delinquent taxes, due for the property, and if
there are no delinquent taxes due then as a credit against future taxes due for
the property, unless the city is in receipt of a written request from the
current owner for payment by voucher.
(2)   There is created and established a fund known as the real property tax
trust fund to be used for the purpose of making refunds and adjustments of
taxes collected under this chapter. The director may, from time to time,
deposit taxes collected under this chapter to the credit of real property tax
refund account in the real property tax trust fund so that there may be
maintained at all times an amount from which refunds may be paid.
(Sec. 8-1.21, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.18) (Am.
Ords. 00-52, 05-030, 05-041)
§ 8-1.19 Partial payment of taxes.
   Whenever a taxpayer makes a partial payment of a particular assessment of
taxes, the amount received by the director shall first be credited to interest,
then to penalties, and then to principal.
(Sec. 8-1.22, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.19)
§ 8-1.20 Abetting misdemeanor.
   All persons wilfully aiding, abetting, or assisting in any manner any person
to commit any act constituted a misdemeanor by this chapter, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Sec. 8-1.24, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.20)
§ 8-1.21 Neglect of duty—Misdemeanor.
   Any officer or employee of the department of budget and fiscal services, any
person duly authorized by the director, or any police officer, on whom duties
are imposed under this chapter, who wilfully fails or refuses or neglects to
perform faithfully any duty or duties of such person required by this chapter,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Sec. 8-1.25, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.21)
§ 8-1.22 Penalty for misdemeanors.
   Any person convicted of any misdemeanor under this chapter, for which no
punishment is otherwise prescribed, shall be fined not more than $500 or (if a
natural person) imprisoned for not more than one year or both.
(Sec. 8-1.26, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.22)
ARTICLE 2: NOTICE OF ASSESSMENTS—ASSESSMENT LISTS
Sections
   
8-2.1   Notice of assessments—Addresses of persons entitled to notice
   
8-2.2   Assessment lists
   
8-2.3   Informalities or mistakes in names or notices not to invalidate
assessments
§ 8-2.1 Notice of assessments—Addresses of persons entitled to notice.
(a)   On or before December 15 preceding the tax year, the director shall give
notice of the assessment for the tax year against each known owner, by personal
delivery to the owner or by mailing to the owner on or before such date postage
prepaid and addressed to the owner at the owner’s last known place of residence
or address a written notice identifying the property involved by the tax key
and the general class established in accordance with §
8-7.1(c) and setting forth the valuation placed upon the real property,
determined pursuant to §
8-7.1(a), the exemption, if any, allowed or denied, as the case may be, and the
net taxable value of the real property. The general class of the property shall
be set forth in clear and descriptive language as used in §
8-7.1(c)(1) without abbreviation and without reference to a code of any kind on
the notice of assessment. In lieu of the notification methods set forth in this
subsection, the director shall, at the option of the owner, give notice of the
assessment by electronic transmission.
(b)   In addition to the foregoing, the director shall, in each year, give
notice of the assessments for the upcoming tax year by public notice (by
publication thereof at least three times on different days before December 31
of each year in a newspaper of general circulation, published in the English
language) of a time when (which shall be not less than a period of 10 days
before December 31 preceding the tax year) and of a place where the records of
taxable properties maintained for the district may be inspected by any person
for the purpose of enabling such person to ascertain what assessments have been
made against such person or such person’s property and to confer with the
director so that any errors may be corrected before the filing of the
assessment list.
(c)   On or before December 15 preceding the tax year, the director shall
notify by mail or by electronic transmission each known owner whose property
has been assigned a different general class from the general class assigned the
previous tax year, that the property has been reclassified for property tax
assessment purposes for the ensuing tax year. Such notification shall state the
property’s general class immediately before the change, the new general class,
and the effective date of the new general class.
(Sec. 8-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 2, § 8-2.1) (Am.
Ords. 92-20, 93-95, 96-15, 02-45, 05-003, 07-49, 07-50)
§ 8-2.2 Assessment lists.
   On or before January 31 preceding the tax year, the director shall have
prepared from the records of taxable properties a list, in duplicate, of all
assessments made, which list shall be signed and sworn to by the person
preparing it. The assessment list shall identify the property assessed by its
tax key and shall set forth the general class of the property established in
accordance with §
8-7.1(c), the valuation of the real property, the amount of exemption allowed
on the real property, and the net taxable value of the real property. The
assessment list shall be the lists in accordance with which taxes shall be
collected, subject only to change made by any court or other tribunal having
jurisdiction, where appeals from assessments have been duly taken and
prosecuted to final determination, and subject to §
8-1.17. There shall be noted upon such lists all appeals taken pursuant to §
8-12.1 and the amount involved in each case. The original of the assessment
lists shall be retained by the person preparing it, and one copy shall be held
by the city clerk.
(Sec. 8-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 2, § 8-2.2) (Am.
Ords. 92-20, 96-15, 97-55, 02-45)
§ 8-2.3 Informalities or mistakes in names or notices not to invalidate
assessments.
   No assessment or act relating to the assessment or collection of taxes under
this chapter shall be illegal or invalidate such assessment, levy, or
collection on account of mere informality, nor because the same was not
completed within the time required by law, nor, if the notice by publication
provided for by §
8-2.1 has been given, on account of a mistake in the name of the owner or
supposed owner of the property assessed, or failure to name the owner, or
failure to give the notice of assessment by personal delivery or mail or
electronic transmission provided for by §
8-2.1.
(Sec. 8-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 2, § 8-2.3) (Am.
Ord. 07-49)
ARTICLE 3: TAX BILLS, PAYMENTS, AND PENALTIES
Sections
   
8-3.1   Tax rolls—Tax bills
   
8-3.2   Taxes—Due when—Installment payments—Billing and delinquent dates
   
8-3.3   Penalty for delinquency
   
8-3.4   Assessment of unreturned or omitted property—Review—Penalty
   
8-3.5   Reassessments
§ 8-3.1 Tax rolls—Tax bills.
(a)   The director shall prepare tax rolls from the assessment lists provided
for by §
8-2.2, showing thereon, in each case, names and addresses of the assessed and
the amount of taxes that shall be not less than the minimum tax amount required
in §
8-11.1(g).
(b)   The director shall mail, postage prepaid, or deliver, each year on or
before the billing dates as provided for by §
8-3.2, to all known persons assessed for real property taxes for such year,
respectively, or to their agents, tax bills demanding payment of taxes due from
each such person respectively, but no person shall be excused from the payment
of any tax or delinquent penalties thereon by reason of failure on such
person’s part to receive, or failure on the part of the director so to mail or
deliver such bill. The bill, if mailed, shall be addressed to the person
concerned at such person’s last known address or place of residence. Whenever
any bill covers taxes for any real property owned, as joint tenants or as
tenants in common or otherwise, by more than one person, the bill may be sent
to any one co-owner and upon written request shall be sent to each known co-
owner but shall, in any event, demand the full amount of the taxes due upon
such real property.
(Sec. 8-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 3, § 8-3.1) (Am.
Ords. 92-124, 10-9)
§ 8-3.2 Taxes—Due when—Installment payments—Billing and delinquent dates.
   All real property taxes shall be due and payable after June 30 of each tax
year and the payment thereof shall be determined in the following manner:
(1)   All known persons assessed for real property taxes shall be billed not
later than the billing date designated in the schedule listed herein; subject
however, to the limitations heretofore provided in §
8-3.1. Each taxpayer shall pay the real property taxes due from such person for
the year in which the taxes are assessed, in two equal installments on or
before the dates designated in the following schedule:
 
Fiscal Year Schedule
(Billing Date) (1st Payment) (2nd Payment)
July 20        August 20     February 20
 
(2)   All such taxes due on the first payment date of such year from each
taxpayer, which remain unpaid after the date, shall thereupon become
delinquent, and the balance of such taxes due on the second payment date of
such year from each taxpayer, which remain unpaid after the date, shall
thereupon become delinquent.
(Sec. 8-3.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 3, § 8-3.2)
§ 8-3.3 Penalty for delinquency.
(a)   There shall be added to the amount of all delinquent taxes under §
8-3.2(2) a penalty of 2 percent for each month or fraction thereof beginning
with the first calendar day following the date designated for payment in §
8-3.2, provided that the maximum penalty levied shall not exceed 10 percent of
the taxes levied. The penalty shall accrue on the delinquent taxes only and not
on any accrued penalties. The penalty shall be and become a part of the tax and
be collected as a part thereof.
(b)   All delinquent taxes and penalties shall bear interest at the rate of 1
percent for each month or fraction thereof until paid, beginning with the first
calendar month following the calendar month designated for payment in §
8-3.2. Interest shall accrue on the delinquent taxes and penalties only and not
on any accrued interest. The interest shall be and become a part of the tax and
be collected as a part thereof.
(c)   No taxpayer shall be exempt from delinquent penalties by reason of having
made an appeal on such taxpayer’s assessment, but the tax paid, covered by an
appeal duly taken, shall be held in a trust account as provided in §
8-12.12.
(Sec. 8-3.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 3, §
8-3.3) (Am. Ords. 89-147, 07-36)
§ 8-3.4 Assessment of unreturned or omitted property—Review—Penalty.
(a)   If, when returns are required under this chapter, any person refuses or
neglects to make such returns, or declines to authenticate the accuracy
thereof, or omits any property from a return, the director shall make the
assessment according to the best information available and shall add to the
assessment or tax lists for the year or years during which it was not taxed,
the property unreturned or omitted. Likewise, if for any other reason any real
property has been omitted from the assessment lists for any year or years, the
director shall add to the lists the omitted property. Notice of the action
shall be given the owner, if known, within 10 days after the assessment or
addition, by mailing the same addressed to the owner at last known place of
residence. Any owner desiring a review of the assessment or the addition may
appeal to the board by filing with the director a written notice thereof in the
manner prescribed in §
8-12.9 at any time within 30 days after the date of mailing such notice, or may
appeal to the tax appeal court by filing written notice of appeal with, and
paying the necessary costs to, such court within the period and in the manner
prescribed in §
8-12.8.
(b)   A penalty of 10 percent shall be added by the director to the amount of
any assessment made by the director pursuant to this section, which penalty
shall be and become a part of the assessment so made; but no such penalty shall
be imposed where the failure to assess or tax the property was not due to the
refusal or neglect of the owner to return the property or authenticate the
accuracy of the owner’s return.
(c)   For the purpose of determining the date of delinquency of taxes pursuant
to assessments under this section, such taxes shall be deemed delinquent if not
paid within 30 days after the date of mailing of notice of assessment, or if
assessed for the current assessment year, within 30 days after the date of
mailing the notice or on or before the next installment payment date, if any,
for such taxes, whichever is later.
(Sec. 8-3.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 3, § 8-3.4)
§ 8-3.5 Reassessments.
   Any property assessed to a person or persons who did not have the record
title upon October 1 preceding the tax year in which the assessment was made,
may be, and in any case where the attempted assessment of property is void or
so defective as to create no real property tax lien on the property and the
taxes have not been fully collected, the property shall be assessed as omitted
property in the manner provided in §
8-3.4.
(Sec. 8-3.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 3, § 8-3.5) (Am. Ord.
96-15)
ARTICLE 4: REMISSIONS
Sections
   
8-4.1   Remission of taxes on acquisition by government
   
8-4.2   Remission of taxes in cases of natural disasters
   
8-4.3   Remission of penalties and interest due for National Guard and military
reserve personnel
§ 8-4.1 Remission of taxes on acquisition by government.
(a)   Whenever any real property is acquired for public purposes by the United
States, the State or the city, and whenever any government lease or other
tenancy shall terminate, the director is authorized to remit the taxes due
thereon for the balance of the taxation period or year from and after the date
of acquisition of the property, or the termination of the government lease or
other tenancy, as the case may be.
(b)   If the State or the city takes possession of real property which is the
subject of eminent domain proceedings commenced for the acquisition of the fee
simple estate in such land by the state or the city, taxes are authorized to be
remitted as provided in HRS §§ 101-35 to 101-39, subject to HRS § 101-39.
(c)   If the owner of real property grants to the State or the city a right of
entry with respect to such real property and the State or the city enters into
possession under the authority of the right of entry with intention to acquire
the fee simple estate therein and to devote the real property to public use,
the State or the city shall certify to the director the date upon which it took
possession, and upon receipt of the certificate, the director is authorized to
remit the real property tax on the parcel of land or portion of a parcel of
land so coming into the possession of the State or the city for the balance of
the taxation period which is after the date of possession.
(d)   If the United States takes possession of real property which is the
subject of eminent domain proceedings commenced for the acquisition of the fee
simple estate in such land, taxes are authorized to be remitted for the balance
of the taxation period or year after such taking, as provided in this
paragraph. The remission shall be allowed conditionally upon the presentation
to the director of a written notice and agreement, signed by the person, or one
or more of the persons, owning the land, stating the date of such taking of
possession by the United States, and agreeing that out of the first funds
received by such owner or owners from such condemnation there shall be paid
sufficient moneys to discharge the lien for any real property taxes existing
upon the land prorated up to and including the date of such taking possession
of the property; provided that the notice may be accompanied by payment of the
prorated amount of taxes in lieu of such agreement. HRS § 101-39 is made
applicable to such land and the owner or owners thereof and to the conditional
remission authorized by this subsection. It is further provided that in the
event the prorated taxes up to the time of such taking possession shall not be
paid by the owner or by one or more of the owners of the land within 10 days
after receipt by such owner or owners of the compensation for the condemnation,
or within such additional time as shall be allowed by the director, then the
conditional remission of taxes shall be void, and such owner or owners shall be
liable for all taxes, penalties, and interest which would have accrued had no
such conditional remission been allowed.
(Sec. 8-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 4, § 8-4.1)
§ 8-4.2 Remission of taxes in cases of natural disasters.
(a)   The director shall remit taxes due or paid for real property damaged or
destroyed as a result of natural disaster, where the mayor has declared a
natural disaster for purposes of real property tax relief, under this section.
Remissions shall be granted:
(1)   Of taxes on the damaged or destroyed real property for the tax year in
which the natural disaster occurred; and
(2)   To the extent and in the manner set forth in this section.
(b)   The director shall determine whether the real property was wholly
destroyed or was partially destroyed or damaged from the natural disaster. If
the real property was partially destroyed or damaged, the director shall
determine what percentage of the value of the whole property was destroyed or
otherwise lost by reason of the natural disaster.
(c)   If the real property was wholly destroyed, the amount remitted shall be
the lower of the following, but subject to subsection (e):
(1)   The total tax on the property for the tax year in which the natural
disaster occurred; or
(2)   $25,000.
(d)   If the real property was partially destroyed or damaged, the amount
remitted shall be the lower of the following, but subject to subsection (e):
(1)   The amount derived by multiplying the total tax on the property for the
tax year by the percentage of the value destroyed or otherwise lost, determined
as provided in subsection (b); or
(2)   $25,000.
(e)   The minimum tax of §
8-11.1(g) shall apply to real property, the tax on which is remitted under this
section. In no case shall the amount remitted for a parcel of real property
under this section cause the tax on that parcel to be less than the minimum.
(f)   Application for a remission of taxes pursuant to this section shall be
filed with the director on or before June 30 of the tax year involved, or
within 60 days after the declaration by the mayor of the natural disaster,
whichever is the later. Any amount of taxes authorized to be remitted by this
section, which has been paid, shall be refunded upon proper application
therefor out of appropriated general funds.
(g)   For purposes of this section, the term “natural disaster” means any
disaster caused by seismic or tidal wave, tsunami, hurricane, volcanic
eruption, typhoon, earthquake, or flood waters.
(Sec. 8-4.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 4, § 8-4.2) (Am.
Ords. 92-38, 97-56)
§ 8-4.3 Remission of penalties and interest due for National Guard and military
reserve personnel.
(a)   The director shall remit the amount of penalties or interest added under
this chapter to any tax, for which the following applies:
(1)   The property owner is a member of the National Guard or of a reserve
component of the armed forces of the United States serving on active duty
pursuant to deployment for a war or national emergency declared in accordance
with federal law;
(2)   The taxes owed become due and payable during the period the property
owner serves on active duty;
(3)   The property owner has provided proof of active duty status to the
director; and
(4)   The taxes due and owing on the owner’s property are paid no later than
180 days from the date the property owner’s active duty is terminated.
(b)   The director shall adopt rules having the force and effect of law for the
implementation, administration, and enforcement of this section.
(c)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Active Duty. Full-time duty in the uniformed services.
National Guard. The Army National Guard or the Air Force National Guard.
Reserve Component of the Armed Forces of the United States. The air force
reserve, army reserve, coast guard reserve, marine corps reserve, and naval
reserve.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 4, § 8-4.3) (Added by Ord. 04-44)
ARTICLE 5: LIENS—FORECLOSURES
Sections
   
8-5.1   Tax liens—Co-owners’ rights—Foreclosure, limitation
   
8-5.2   Tax liens—Foreclosure without suit, notice
   
8-5.3   Tax liens—Registered land
   
8-5.4   Tax liens—Notice—Form
   
8-5.5   Tax liens—Postponement of sale
   
8-5.6   Tax liens—Tax deed—Redemption
   
8-5.7   Tax liens—Costs
   
8-5.8   Tax deed as evidence
   
8-5.9   Disposition of surplus moneys
   
8-5.10   Tax debt due the county—Lien
   
8-5.11   Enforcement of payment by assumpsit action or by levy and distraint
upon all property and rights to property
§ 8-5.1 Tax liens—Co-owners’ rights—Foreclosure, limitation.
(a)   Every tax due upon real property, as defined by §
8-1.2, shall be a paramount lien upon the property assessed, which lien shall
attach as of July 1 in each tax year and shall continue for six years. If
proceedings for the enforcement or foreclosure of the lien are brought within
the applicable period hereinabove designated, the lien shall continue until the
termination of the proceedings or the completion of such sale.
(b)   Where cotenancy, if one cotenant pays, within the period of the
government lien, all of the real property taxes, interest, penalties, and other
additions to the tax, due and delinquent at the time of payment, the cotenant
shall have, pro tanto, a lien on the interest of any noncontributing cotenant
upon recording in the bureau of conveyances, within 90 days after the payment
so made by the cotenant, a sworn notice setting forth the amount claimed, a
brief description of the land affected by tax key or otherwise, sufficient to
identify it, the tax year or years, and the name of the cotenant upon whose
interest such lien is asserted. When a notice of such tax lien is recorded by a
cotenant, the registrar of conveyances shall cause the same to be indexed in
the general indexes of the bureau of conveyances. If the land affected is
registered in the land court, the notice shall also contain a reference to the
number of the certificate of title of such land and shall be filed and
registered in the office of the assistant registrar of the land court, and the
registrar of conveyances, in the registrar of conveyances’ capacity as
assistant registrar of the land court, shall make a notation of the filing
thereof on each land court certificate of title so specified.
(c)   The cotenant’s lien shall have the same priority as the lien or liens of
the government for the taxes paid by the cotenant, and may be enforced by an
action in the nature of a suit in equity. The lien shall continue for three
years after recording or registering, or until termination of the proceedings
for enforcement thereof if such proceedings are begun, and notice of the
pendency thereof is recorded or filed and registered as provided by law, within
the period.
(d)   The director or the director’s subordinate, where a government lien, and
the creditor cotenant, in a case of a cotenant’s lien, shall, at the expense of
the debtor, upon payment of the amount of the lien, execute and deliver to the
debtor a sworn satisfaction thereof, including a reference to the name of the
person assessed or cotenant affected as shown in the original notice, the date
of filing of the original notice, a description of the land involved, and the
number of the certificate of title of such land if registered in the land
court, which, when recorded in the bureau of conveyances or filed and
registered in the office of the assistant registrar of the land court, shall,
in the case of a cotenant’s lien which contains the reference to the book and
page of the original lien, be entered in the general indexes of the bureau of
conveyances, and if a notation of the original notice was made on any land
court certificate of title, the filing of such satisfaction shall also be noted
on the certificate.
(e)   This section as to cotenancy shall apply as well, in any case of
ownership by more than one assessable person.
(f)   Upon enforcement or foreclosure by the government in any manner, of any
such real property tax lien, all taxes of whatever nature and however accruing,
due at the time of the foreclosure sale from the taxpayer against whose
property such tax lien is so enforced or foreclosed, shall be satisfied as far
as possible out of the proceeds of the sale remaining after payment of:
(1)   The costs and expenses of the enforcement and foreclosure including a
title search, if any;
(2)   The amount of subsisting real property tax liens; and
(3)   The amount of any recorded liens against the property, in the order of
their priority.
(g)   The liens may be enforced by action of the director in the circuit court
of the first circuit, and the proceedings had before the circuit court shall be
conducted in the same manner and form as ordinary foreclosure proceedings as
provided for in HRS Chapter 667. If the owners or claimants of the property
against which a lien is sought to be foreclosed, are at the time out of the
city or cannot be served within the city, or if the owners are unknown, and the
fact shall be made to appear by affidavit to the satisfaction of the court, and
it shall in like manner appear prima facie that a cause of action exists
against such owners or claimants or against the property described in the
complaint, or that such owners or claimants are necessary or proper parties to
the action, the director may request the court that service be made in the
manner provided by HRS §§ 634-23 through 634-29.
(h)   In any such case, it shall not be necessary to obtain judgment and have
execution issued and returned unsatisfied, before proceeding to foreclose the
lien for taxes in the manner herein provided.
(Sec. 8-5.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 5, §
8-5.1)
§ 8-5.2 Tax liens—Foreclosure without suit, notice.
   All real property on which a lien for taxes exists may be sold by way of
foreclosure without suit by the director, and if any lien, or any part thereof,
has existed thereon for three years, shall be sold by the director at public
auction to the highest bidder, for cash, to satisfy the lien, together with all
interest, penalties, costs, and expenses due or incurred on account of the tax,
lien, and sale, the surplus, if any, to be rendered to the person thereto
entitled. The sale shall be held at any public place proper for sales on
execution, after notice published at least once a week for at least four
successive weeks immediately prior thereto in any newspaper with a general
circulation of at least 60,000 published in the State and any newspaper of
general circulation published and distributed in the county. If the address of
the owner is known or can be ascertained by due diligence, including an
abstract of title or title search, the director shall send to each owner notice
of the proposed sale by registered mail, with request for return receipt. If
the address of the owner is unknown, the director shall send a notice to the
owner at the owner’s last known address as shown on the records of the
department of budget and fiscal services. The notice shall be deposited in the
mail at least 45 days before the date set for the sale. The notice shall also
be posted for a like period in at least three conspicuous public places within
the city, and if the land is improved, one of the three postings shall be on
the land.
(Sec. 8-5.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.2)
§ 8-5.3 Tax liens—Registered land.
   If the land has been registered in the land court, the director shall also
send by registered mail a notice of the proposed sale to any person holding a
mortgage or other lien registered in the office of the assistant registrar of
the land court. The notice shall be sent to any such person at such person’s
last address as shown by the records in the office of the registrar, and shall
be deposited in the mail at least 45 days before the date set for the sale.
(Sec. 8-5.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.3)
§ 8-5.4 Tax liens—Notice—Form.
   The notice of sale shall contain the names of the persons assessed, the
names of the present owners (so far as shown by the records of the director and
the records, if any, in the office of the assistant registrar of the land
court), the character and amount of the tax, and the tax year or years, with
interest, penalties, costs, expenses, and charges accrued or to accrue to the
date appointed for the sale, a brief description of the property to be sold,
and the time and place of sale, and shall warn the persons assessed, and all
persons having or claiming to have any mortgage or other lien thereon or any
legal or equitable right, title, or other interest in the property, that unless
the tax, with all interest, penalties, costs, expenses, and charges accrued to
the date of payment, is paid before the time of sale appointed, the property
advertised for sale will be sold as advertised. The director may include in one
advertisement of notice of sale notice of foreclosure upon more than one parcel
of real property, whether or not owned by the same person and whether or not
the liens are for the same tax year or years.
(Sec. 8-5.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.4)
§ 8-5.5 Tax liens—Postponement of sale.
   If at the time appointed for the sale, the director shall deem it expedient
and for the interest of all persons concerned therein to postpone the sale of
any property or properties for want of purchasers, or for other sufficient
cause, the director may postpone it from time to time, until the sale shall be
completed, giving notice of every such adjournment by a public declaration
thereof at the time and place last appointed for the sale; provided that the
sale of any property may be abandoned when first appointed or any adjourned
date, if no proper bid is received sufficient to satisfy the lien, together
with all interest, penalties, costs, expenses, and charges.
(Sec. 8-5.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.5)
§ 8-5.6 Tax liens—Tax deed—Redemption.
   The director or the director’s subordinate shall, on payment of the purchase
price, make, execute, and deliver all proper conveyances necessary in the
premises and the delivery of the conveyances shall vest in the purchaser the
title to the property sold; provided that the deed to the premises shall be
recorded within 60 days after the sale; provided further, that the taxpayer may
redeem the property sold by payment to the purchaser at the sale, within one
year from the date thereof, or if the deed shall not have been recorded within
60 days after the sale, then within one year from the date of recording of the
deed, of the amount paid by the purchaser, together with all costs and expenses
that the purchaser was required to pay, including the fee for recording the
deed, and in addition thereto, interest on such amount at the rate of 12
percent a year, but in a case of redemption more than one year after the date
of sale by reason of extension of the redemption period on account of late
recording of the tax deed, interest shall not be added for the extended
redemption period.
(Sec. 8-5.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.6)
§ 8-5.7 Tax liens—Costs.
   The director by rules or regulations may prescribe a schedule of costs,
expenses, and charges and the manner in which they shall be apportioned between
the various properties offered for sale and the time at which each cost,
expense, or charge shall be deemed to accrue; and such costs, expenses, and
charges shall be added to and become a part of the lien on the property for the
last year involved in the sale or proposed sale, the tax for which is
delinquent. Such costs, expenses, and charges may include provision for the
making of and the securing of certificates of searches of any records to
furnish information to be used in or in connection with the notice of sale or
tax deed, or in any case where the director shall deem such advisable; provided
that the director shall not be required to make such searches or to cause them
to be made except as provided by §
8-5.3 with respect to mortgages or other liens registered in the office of the
assistant registrar of the land court.
(Sec. 8-5.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.7)
§ 8-5.8 Tax deed as evidence.
   The tax deed referred to in §
8-5.6 is prima facie evidence that:
(1)   The property described by the deed was duly assessed for taxes in the
years stated in the deed and to the persons therein named;
(2)   The property described by the deed was subject on the date of the sale to
a lien or liens for real property taxes, penalties, and interest in the amount
stated in the deed, for the tax years therein stated, and that the taxes,
penalties and interest were due and unpaid on the date of sale;
(3)   Costs, expenses, and charges due or incurred on account of the taxes,
liens and sale had accrued at the date of the sale in the amount stated in the
deed;
(4)   The person who executed the deed was the proper officer;
(5)   At a proper time and place the property was sold at public auction as
prescribed by law, and by the proper officer;
(6)   The sale was made upon full compliance with §§
8-5.2 to 8-5.7 and all laws relating thereto, and after giving notice as
required by law; and
(7)   The grantee named in the deed was the person entitled to receive the
conveyance.
(Sec. 8-5.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.8)
§ 8-5.9 Disposition of surplus moneys.
(a)   The director shall pay from the surplus all taxes, including interest and
penalties, of whatever nature and however accruing, as provided in §
8-5.1, and further the director may pay from the surplus the cost of a search
of any records where such search is deemed advisable by the director to
ascertain the person or persons entitled to the surplus; provided that nothing
herein contained shall be construed to require the director to make or cause
any such search to be made. If the director is in doubt as to the person or
persons entitled to the balance of the fund, the director may refuse to
distribute the surplus and any claimant may sue the director in the first
circuit court. The director may require the claimants to interplead, in which
event the director shall state the names of all claimants known to the
director, and shall cause them to be made parties to the action. If in the
director’s opinion there may be other claimants who are unknown, the director
may apply for an order or orders joining all persons unknown having or claiming
to have any legal or equitable right, title, or interest in the moneys or any
part thereof or any lien or other claim with respect thereto.
(b)   Any orders of the court or summons in the matter may be served as
provided by law or the rules of court, and all persons having any interest in
the moneys who are known, including the guardians of such of them as are under
legal age or under any other legal disability (and if any one or more of them
is under legal age or under other legal disability and without a guardian, the
court shall appoint a guardian ad litem to represent them therein) shall have
notice of the action by personal service upon them. All persons having any
interest in the moneys whose names are unknown or who if known do not reside
within the State or for any reason cannot be served with process within the
State shall have notice of the action as provided by HRS §§ 634-23 through 634-
29, except that any publication of summons shall be in at least one newspaper
of general circulation published in the State and having a general circulation
in the city, and the form of notice to be published shall provide a brief
description of the property that was sold.
(c)   All expenses incurred by the director shall be met out of the surplus
moneys realized from the sale.
(Sec. 8-5.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.9)
§ 8-5.10 Tax debt due the county—Lien.
(a)   The director may record in the bureau of conveyances, State department of
land and natural resources or in the case of a lien on a motor vehicle to file
with the director, a certificate setting forth the amount of taxes due and
unpaid, which have been assessed or as to which a notice of proposed assessment
has been issued. The certificate shall identify the taxpayer, the taxpayer’s
last known address, and the tax or taxes involved. The certificate shall
include such further information, if any, as may be required by HRS Chapter
501, to procure a lien on registered land. The recording or filing of the
certificate creates a lien in favor of the city upon all property and rights to
property, whether real or personal, belonging to any person liable for the tax.
The lien for the tax, including penalties and interest thereon, arises at the
time of filing by the director of the certificate of tax lien. From and after
the time the lien arises, it shall be a paramount lien upon the property and
rights to property against all parties. The certificate, if recorded or filed
with the director shall be entered of record as provided by law, and if
recorded or filed in the bureau of conveyances, State department of land and
natural resources, shall be recorded in the office of the registrar of
conveyances. Any cost incurred in the filing of the certificate shall be a part
of the lien for the tax therein set forth.
(b)   The lien imposed in subsection (a) shall not be valid as against:
(1)   A mortgagee or purchaser of real property, or the lien of a judgment
creditor upon real property, whose interest arose before the recording by the
director of the certificate provided for herein; and
(2)   A mortgagee or purchaser of a motor vehicle who becomes the legal owner
or owner at a time when the tax lien and encumbrance record provided for by HRS
§ 286-46 does not show the lien.
(c)   As to tangible personal property, possession of which is held by a person
liable for tax for the purpose of sale to the public in the ordinary course of
the person’s business, the lien imposed in subsection (a) is extinguished as to
any such property sold in the ordinary course of the business by or under the
direction of the person to any purchaser for valuable consideration. As to
securities, negotiable instruments and money, the lien imposed in subsection
(a) is extinguished as to such property upon passage of title to a person
without notice or knowledge of the existence of the lien, for an adequate and
full consideration in money or money’s worth.
(d)   The director may issue a certificate of discharge of any part of the
property subject to the lien imposed by this section, upon payment in partial
satisfaction of such lien, of an amount not less than the value as determined
by the director of the lien on the part to be so discharged, or if the director
determines that the lien on the part to be discharged has no value. Any such
discharge so issued shall be conclusive evidence of the discharge of the lien
as therein provided.
(e)   The lien imposed in this section may be foreclosed in a court proceeding
or by distraint under §
8-5.11.
(f)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Mortgagee and Purchaser. Do not mean or include any person to whom property or
an interest in property is conveyed:
(1)   As security for or in satisfaction of an antecedent or preexisting debt
of a debtor who is insolvent within the meaning of the Bankruptcy Reform Act of
1978, as amended; or
(2)   As trustee, assignee or agent for the benefit of one or more creditors,
other than mortgage bondholders.
Motor Vehicle. Any self-propelled vehicle to be operated on the public
highways.
Real Property. Includes a leasehold or other interest in real property and also
any personal property sold or mortgaged with real property if affixed to the
real property and described in the instrument of sale or mortgage.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.10) (Added by Ord. 90-19)
§ 8-5.11 Enforcement of payment by assumpsit action or by levy and distraint
upon all property and rights to property.
(a)   If any tax be unpaid when due, the director may proceed to enforce the
payment of the same, with all penalties, as follows:
(1)   By action in assumpsit, in the director’s own name, on behalf of the city
for the amount of taxes and costs, or if the tax is delinquent for the amount
of taxes, costs, penalties, and interest, in any district court of the first
circuit, State of Hawaii, irrespective of the amount claimed. Execution may
issue upon any judgment rendered in any such action that may be satisfied out
of any real or personal property of the defendant; and
(2)   By levy upon all property and rights to property (except such property as
is exempt under subsection (b)(5)) belonging to such taxpayer or on which there
is a lien, as the director may deem sufficient to satisfy the payment of taxes
due, penalties and interest if any, and the costs and expenses of the levy.
(b)   The following rules are applicable to the levy as provided in subsection
(a)(2).
(1)   Seizure and sale of property. The term “levy” as used in this section
includes the power of distraint and seizure by any means. A levy shall extend
only to property possessed and obligations existing at the time thereof. In any
case in which the director or director’s representative may levy upon property
or rights to property, they may seize and sell such property or rights to
property (whether real or personal, tangible or intangible).
(2)   Successive seizures. Whenever any property or right to property upon
which levy has been made is not sufficient to satisfy the claim of the city for
which levy is made, the director or director’s representative may, thereafter,
and as often as may be necessary, proceed to levy in like manner upon any other
property liable to levy of the person against whom such claim exists, until the
amount due from such person, together with all expenses, is fully paid.
(3)   Surrender of property subject to levy.
(A)   Requirement. Any person in possession of (or obligated with respect to)
property or rights to property subject to levy upon which a levy has been made
shall, upon demand of the director or director’s representative, surrender such
property or rights (or discharge such obligation) to the director or director’s
representative, except such part of the property or rights as is, at the time
of such demand, subject to an attachment or execution under any judicial
process.
(B)   Extent of personal liability. Any person who fails or refuses to
surrender property or rights of property, subject to levy, upon demand by the
director or director’s representative, shall thereby subject such person
individually and such person’s estate to liability to the city in a sum equal
to the value of the property or rights not so surrendered, but not exceeding
the amount of taxes for the collection of which such levy has been made,
together with costs and interest on such sum at the rate of 12 percent a year
from the date of such levy. Any amount (other than costs) recovered under this
paragraph shall be credited against the tax liability for the collection of
which such levy was made.
(C)   Penalty for violation. In addition to the personal liability imposed by
paragraph (B), if any person required to surrender property or rights to
property fails or refuses to surrender such property or rights to property
without reasonable cause, such person shall be liable for a penalty equal to 50
percent of the amount recoverable under paragraph (B). No part of such penalty
shall be credited against the tax liability for the collection of which such
levy was made.
(D)   Effect of honoring levy. Any person in possession of (or obligated with
respect to) property or rights to property subject to levy upon which a levy
has been made who, upon demand by the director or director’s representative,
surrenders such property or rights to property (or discharges such obligation)
to the director or to the director’s representative shall be discharged from
any obligation or liability to the delinquent taxpayer with respect to such
property or rights to property arising from such surrender or payment.
(E)   Person defined. The term “person,” as used in paragraph (A), includes an
officer or employee of a corporation or a member or employee of a partnership,
or a member or employee of any other type of organization, who as such officer,
employee, or member is under a duty to surrender the property or rights to
property, or to discharge the obligation.
(4)   Production of books. If a levy has been made or is about to be made on
any property, or right to property, any person having custody or control of
books or records, containing evidence or statements relating to the property or
right to property subject to levy, shall, upon demand of the director or
director’s representative, exhibit such books or records to the director or
such representative.
(5)   Property exempt from levy. Notwithstanding any other law of the city, no
property or rights to property shall be exempt from levy other than the
following:
(A)   Wearing apparel and school books. Such items of wearing apparel and such
school books as are necessary for the taxpayer or for members of the taxpayer’s
family;
(B)   Fuel, provisions, furniture, and personal effects. If the taxpayer is the
head of a family, so much of the fuel, provisions, furniture, and personal
effects in the taxpayer’s household and of the arms for personal use,
livestock, and poultry of the taxpayer, as does not exceed $500 in value;
(C)   Books and tools of a trade, business, or profession. So many of the books
and tools necessary for the trade, business or profession of the taxpayer as do
not exceed in the aggregate $250 in value;
(D)   Unemployment benefits. Any amount payable to an individual with respect
to such individual’s unemployment (including any portion thereof payable with
respect to dependents) under an unemployment compensation law of the United
States or the State; and
(E)   Undelivered mail. Mail, addressed to any person, that has not been
delivered to the addressee.
(6)   Sale of the seized property.
(A)   Notice of sale. The director shall take possession and keep the levied
property until the sale. After taking possession, the director shall sell the
taxpayer’s interest in the property at public auction after first giving 20
days’ public notice of the time and place of the sale by publication at least
once in the newspaper, published in the district, or by posting the notice in
at least three public places in the district where the sale is to be held.
(B)   Assistance in seizure and sale. The director may require the assistance
of any sheriff or authorized police officer of any county to aid in the seizure
and sale of the levied property. The director may further retain the services
of any person competent and qualified to aid in the sale of the levied
property. Any sheriff or the person so retained by the director shall be paid a
fair and reasonable fee but in no case shall the fee exceed 10 percent of the
gross proceeds of the sale. Any person other than a sheriff so retained by the
director to assist the director may be required to furnish bond in an amount to
be determined by the director. The fees and the cost of the bond shall
constitute a part of the costs and expenses of the levy.
(C)   Time and place of sale. The sale shall take place within 45 days after
seizure; provided that by public announcement at the sale, or at the time and
place previously set for the sale, it may be extended for not more than two
weeks. The sale shall, in any event, be completed within 60 days after seizure
of the property unless consent of the delinquent taxpayer is obtained for
further extension of the sale.
(D)   Manner and conditions of sale. Sufficient property shall be sold to pay
all taxes, penalties, interest, costs, and expenses. On payment of the price
bid for any property sold, the delivery thereof with a bill of sale from the
director shall vest the title of the property in the purchaser. No charge shall
be made for the bill of sale. All surplus received upon any sale after the
payment of the taxes, penalties, interest, costs, and expenses, shall be
returned to the owner of the property sold, and until claimed shall be
deposited with the department, subject to the order of owner. Any unsold
portion of the property seized may be left at the place of sale at the risk of
the owner.
(E)   Redemption of property. If the owner of the property seized desires to
retain or regain possession thereof, such owner may give a sufficient bond with
surety to produce the property at the time and place of sale, or pay all taxes,
penalties, interest, costs, and expenses.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.11) (Added by Ord. 90-19)
ARTICLE 6: RATE—LEVY
Sections
   
8-6.1   Tax base and rate
   
8-6.2   Tax year—Time of levy and assessment
   
8-6.3   Assessment of property—To whom in general
   
8-6.4   Imposition of real property taxes on reclassification
   
8-6.5   Assessment of property of corporations or copartnerships
   
8-6.6   Fiduciaries—Liability
   
8-6.7   Assessment of property of unknown owners
§ 8-6.1 Tax base and rate.
   Except as exempted by ordinance, or as otherwise provided for, all real
property shall be subject to a tax upon 100 percent of its fair market value
determined in the manner provided by ordinance, at such rate as shall be
determined in the manner provided in §
8-11.1. No taxpayer shall be deemed aggrieved by an assessment, nor shall an
assessment be lowered, except as the result of a decision on an appeal as
provided by law. For the purpose of this section, an exemption listed and
recognized under §
8-10.20 shall be deemed an exemption granted by ordinance.
(Sec. 8-6.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 6, § 8-6.1) (Am.
Ords. 92-38, 00-64, 00-65)
§ 8-6.2 Tax year—Time of levy and assessment.
   For real property tax purposes, “tax year” means the fiscal year beginning
July 1 of each calendar year and ending June 30 of the following calendar year.
Real property shall be assessed as of October 1 preceding each tax year and
taxes shall be levied thereon in the manner and when provided in this chapter.
(Sec. 8-6.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 6, §
8-6.2) (Am. Ord. 96-15)
§ 8-6.3 Assessment of property—To whom in general.
(a)   Real property shall be assessed in its entirety to the owner thereof,
provided that where improved residential land has been leased for a term of 15
years or more, the real property shall be assessed in its entirety to the
lessee or the lessee’s successor in interest holding the land for such term
under such lease and the lessee or successor in interest shall be deemed the
owner of the real property in its entirety for the purpose of this chapter;
provided that the lease and any extension, renewal, assignment, or agreement to
assign the lease:
(1)   Shall have been duly entered into and recorded in the bureau of
conveyances or filed in the office of the assistant registrar of the land court
before October 1 preceding the tax year for which the assessment is made; and
(2)   Shall provide that the lessee shall pay all taxes levied on the property
during the term of the lease.
(b)   For the purposes of this section, “improved residential land” means land
improved with a single-family dwelling on it.
(c)   For the purposes of this chapter, life tenants, personal representatives,
trustees, guardians, or other fiduciaries may be, and persons holding
government property under an agreement for the conveyance of the same to such
persons shall be considered as owners during the time any real property is held
or controlled by them as such. Lessees holding under any government lease shall
be considered as owners during the time any real property is held or controlled
by them as such, as more fully provided in §
8-10.14 and further, notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary in this
chapter, any tenant occupying government land, whether such occupancy has
continued for a period of one year or more, as more fully provided in §
8-10.14. Persons holding any real property under an agreement to purchase the
same, shall be considered as owners during the time the real property is held
or controlled by them as such; provided the agreement to purchase:
(1)   Shall have been recorded in the bureau of conveyances; and
(2)   Shall provide that the purchasers shall pay the real property taxes
levied on the property.
Persons holding any real property under a lease for a term to last during the
lifetime of the lessee, shall be considered as owners during the time the real
property is held or controlled by them as such; provided that the lease:
(1)   Shall have been duly entered into and recorded in the bureau of
conveyances or filed in the office of the assistant registrar of the land court
before October 1 preceding the tax year for which the assessment is made; and
(2)   Shall provide that the lessee shall pay all taxes levied on the property
during the term of the lease.
(Sec. 8-6.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 6, § 8-6.3) (Am.
Ord. 96-15)
§ 8-6.4 Imposition of real property taxes on reclassification.
(a)   A portion of real property taxes shall be imposed upon and paid by the
owner or owners thereof when:
(1)   The property of the owner has been leased for a term of 15 years or more;
(2)   The classification of the property has been changed to a classification
of a higher use during the life of the lease; and
(3)   The classification to a higher use has occurred without the lessee, who
occupies the property, petitioning for such higher classification.
(b)   Taxes that are imposed upon the owners of property under this section
shall be paid by the owner of such property without being transferred to the
lessee who occupies the property and such tax shall be the difference between
the assessed valuation of the property after the classification change times
the applicable tax rate less the assessed valuation of the property as it
existed before the classification change times the applicable tax rate.
(Sec. 8-6.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 6, § 8-6.4)
§ 8-6.5 Assessment of property of corporations or copartnerships.
   Property of a corporation or copartnership shall be assessed to it under its
corporate or firm name.
(Sec. 8-6.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 6, § 8-6.5)
§ 8-6.6 Fiduciaries—Liability.
   Every personal representative, trustee, guardian, or other fiduciary shall
be answerable as such for the performance of all such acts, matters, or things
as are required to be done by this chapter in respect to the assessment of the
real property such person represents in such person’s fiduciary capacity, and
such person shall be liable as such fiduciary for the payment of taxes thereon
up to the amount of the available property held by such person in such
capacity, but such person shall not be personally liable. Such person may
retain, out of the money or other property that such person may hold or that
may come to such person in such person’s fiduciary capacity, so much as may be
necessary to pay the taxes or to recoup oneself for the payment thereof, or
such person may recover the amount thereof paid by such person from the
beneficiary to whom the property shall have been distributed.
(Sec. 8-6.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 6, § 8-6.6)
§ 8-6.7 Assessment of property of unknown owners.
   The taxable property of persons unknown, or some of whom are unknown, shall
be assessed to “unknown owners,” or to named persons and “unknown owners,” as
the case may be. The taxable property of persons not having record title
thereto on October 1, preceding the tax year for which the assessment is made,
may be assessed to “unknown owners,” or to named persons and “unknown owners,”
as the case may be. Such property may be levied upon for unpaid taxes.
(Sec. 8-6.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 6, § 8-6.7) (Am.
Ord. 96-15)
ARTICLE 7: VALUATIONS
Sections
   
8-7.1   Valuation—Considerations in fixing
   
8-7.2   Water tanks
   
8-7.3   Dedication of lands for agricultural use
   
8-7.4   Lands dedicated for golf course use
   
8-7.5   Certain property dedicated for residential use
   
8-7.6   Property dedicated for low-income rental housing
§ 8-7.1 Valuation—Considerations in fixing.
(a)   The director shall cause the fair market value of all taxable real
property to be determined and annually assessed by the market data and cost
approaches to value using appropriate systematic methods suitable for mass
valuation of real property for ad valorem taxation purposes, so selected and
applied to obtain, as far as possible, uniform and equalized assessments
throughout the city.
(b)   So far as practicable, records must be compiled and kept which must show
the methods established by or under the authority of the director, for the
determination of values.
(c)   (1)   Real property must be classified into the following general
classes, upon consideration of its highest and best use, and upon other
criteria set forth in this section:
(A)   Residential;
(B)   Hotel and resort;
(C)   Commercial;
(D)   Industrial;
(E)   Agricultural;
(F)   Preservation;
(G)   Public service;
(H)   Vacant agricultural;
(I)   Residential A;
(J)   Bed and breakfast home; and
(K)   Transient vacation.
(2)   In assigning real property to one of the general classes, the director
shall give major consideration to the districting established by the city in
its general plan and zoning ordinance, specific class definitions or criteria
set forth in this section, and such other factors which influence highest and
best use.
Notwithstanding the city’s zoning district classification, the director shall
assign to the agricultural class any real property classified as tree farm
property under HRS Chapter 186.
(3)   When real property is subdivided into condominium units, each unit and
its appertaining common interest:
(A)   Will be deemed a parcel and assessed separately from other units; and
(B)   Will be classified as follows:
(i)   If the unit has a single, legally permitted, exclusive actual use, it
must be classified upon consideration of the unit’s actual use into one of the
general classes in the same manner as real property;
(ii)   If the unit has multiple, legally permitted uses, it must be classified:
(aa)   Upon consideration of the unit’s highest and best use into one of the
general classes in the same manner as real property; or
(bb)   Residential, only upon approved dedication as provided in §
8-7.5 when the unit is legally permitted multiple exclusive uses, including
residential use; or
(iii)   If the unit is a condominium parking unit or a condominium storage
unit, it must be classified residential, only upon approved dedication when the
unit is used in conjunction with a unit in residential use within the project.
(4)   “Residential A” means a parcel, or portion thereof, which:
(A)   Is improved with no more than two single-family dwelling units; and
(i)   Has an assessed value of $1,000,000 or more;
(ii)   Does not have a home exemption; and
(iii)   Is zoned R-3.5, R-5, R-7.5, R-10, or R-20 or is dedicated for
residential use;
(B)   Is vacant land zoned R-3.5, R-5, R-7.5, R-10, or R-20 and has an assessed
value of $1,000,000 or more; or
(C)   Is a condominium unit with an assessed valuation of $1,000,000 or more
and does not have a home exemption.
Residential A excludes any parcel, or portion thereof, improved with military
housing located on or outside of a military base.
(5)   Notwithstanding this subsection, real property with the following uses
must be classified as follows:
(A)   Real property used as a bed and breakfast home, in accordance with
Chapter 21 (the land use ordinance), must be classified as bed and breakfast
home. “Bed and breakfast home” has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
(B)   Real property used as a transient vacation unit, in accordance with
Chapter 21 (the land use ordinance), must be classified as transient vacation.
“Transient vacation unit” has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
(C)   Real property used as a time share unit. in accordance with HRS Chapter
514E and
Chapter 21 (the land use ordinance), must be classified as hotel and resort.
“Time share unit” has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Property used as a bed and breakfast home, transient vacation unit, or time
share unit must not be classified as residential or residential A.
(6)   “Vacant agricultural” means a parcel, or portion thereof, that would
otherwise be classified agricultural by the director upon major consideration
of the districting established by the city in its general plan and zoning
ordinance and of such other factors that influence highest and best use, but
which parcel, or portion thereof:
(A)   Has no residential buildings; and
(B)   Is not dedicated for agricultural purposes.
If a portion of a parcel is dedicated as vacant agricultural, the remainder of
the parcel that is zoned agricultural must be dedicated for agricultural use.
(7)   Notwithstanding this subsection, all real property actually used by a
public service company in its public service business will be classified as
public service. For the purposes of this subsection,”public service company”
means a public utility, except airlines, motor carriers, common carriers by
water, and contract carriers, where:
(A)   “Public utility” includes every person who may own, control, operate, or
manage as owner, lessee, trustee, receiver, or otherwise, whether under a
franchise, charter, license, articles of association, or otherwise, any plant
or equipment, or any part thereof, directly or indirectly for public use, for
the transportation of passengers or freight, or the conveyance or transmission
of telecommunications messages, or the furnishing of facilities for the
transmission of intelligence by electricity by land, water, or air within the
State, or between points within the State, or for the production, conveyance,
transmission, delivery, or furnishing of light, power, heat, cold, water, gas,
or oil, or for the storage or warehousing of goods, or the disposal of sewage;
provided that the term:
(i)   Includes any person insofar as that person owns or operates a private
sewer company or sewer facility;
(ii)   Includes any telecommunications carrier or telecommunications common
carrier;
(iii)   Does not include any person insofar as that person owns or operates an
aerial transportation enterprise;
(iv)   Does not include persons owning or operating taxicabs, as defined in
this subsection;
(v)   Does not include common carriers transporting only freight on the public
highways, unless operating within localities or along routes or between points
that the State Public Utilities Commission finds to be inadequately serviced
without regulation under this chapter;
(vi)   Does not include persons engaged in the business of warehousing or
storage, unless the State Public Utilities Commission finds that regulation
thereof is necessary in the public interest;
(vii)   Does not include:
(aa)   The business of any carrier by water to the extent that the carrier
enters into private contracts for towage, salvage, hauling, or carriage between
points within the State and the carriage is not pursuant to either an
established schedule or an undertaking to perform carriage services on behalf
of the public generally; and
(bb)   The business of any carrier by water, substantially engaged in
interstate or foreign commerce, transporting passengers on luxury cruises
between points within the State or on luxury round-trip cruises returning to
the point of departure;
(viii)   Does not include any person who:
(aa)   Controls, operates, or manages plants or facilities for the production,
transmission, or furnishing of power primarily or entirely from nonfossil fuel
sources; and
(bb)   Provides, sells, or transmits all of that power, except such power as is
used in its own internal operations, directly to a public utility for
transmission to the public;
(ix)   Does not include a telecommunications provider only to the extent
determined by the State Public Utilities Commission, pursuant to applicable
State law;
(x)   Does not include any person who controls, operates, or manages plants or
facilities developed pursuant to applicable State law for conveying,
distributing, and transmitting water for irrigation and such other purposes
that shall be held for public use and purpose; and
(xi)   Does not include any person who owns, controls, operates, or manages
plants or facilities for the reclamation of wastewater; provided that:
(aa)   The services of the facility must be provided pursuant to a service
contract between the person and a State or city agency and at least 10 percent
of the wastewater processed is used directly by the State or a city agency that
has entered into the service contract;
(bb)   The primary function of the facility must be the processing of secondary
treated wastewater that has been produced by a municipal wastewater treatment
facility that is owned by a State or city agency;
(cc)   The facility must not make sales of water to residential customers;
(dd)   The facility may distribute and sell recycled or reclaimed water to
entities not covered by a State or city service contract; provided that in the
absence of regulatory oversight and direct competition, the distribution and
sale of recycled or reclaimed water must be voluntary and its pricing fair and
reasonable. For the purposes of this subparagraph, “recycled water” and
“reclaimed water” mean treated wastewater that by design is intended or used
for a beneficial purpose; and
(ee)   The facility must not be engaged, either directly or indirectly, in the
processing of food wastes;
(B)   “Motor carrier” means a common carrier or contract carrier transporting
freight or other property on the public highways, other than a public utility
or taxicab;
(C)   “Contract carrier” means a person other than a public utility or taxicab
which, under contracts or agreements, engages in the transportation of persons
or property for compensation, by land, water, or air;
(D)   “Carrier” means a person who engages in transportation, and does not
include a person such as a freight forwarder or tour packager who provides
transportation by contracting with others, except to the extent that such
person engages in transportation;
(E)   “Taxicab” includes:
(i)   Any motor vehicle used in the movement of passengers on the public
highways under the following circumstances, namely, the passenger hires the
vehicle on call or at a fixed stand, with or without baggage for
transportation, and controls the vehicle to the passenger’s destination; and
(ii)   Any motor vehicle having seating accommodations for eight or less
passengers used in the movement of passengers on the public highways between a
terminal, i.e., a fixed stand, in the city, and a terminal in a geographical
district outside the limits of the city, and vice versa, without picking up
passengers other than at the terminals or fixed stands; provided that
passengers may be unloaded at any point between terminals; and provided further
that this definition relating to motor vehicles operating between terminals
pertains only to those motor vehicles whose operators or owners were duly
licensed under any applicable provision of law or ordinance and doing business
between such terminals on January 1, 1957;
(F)   “Telecommunications carrier” or “telecommunications common carrier” means
any person that owns, operates, manages, or controls any facility used to
furnish telecommunications services for profit to the public, or to classes of
users as to be effectively available to the public, engaged in the provision of
services, such as voice, data, image, graphics, and video services, that make
use of all or part of their transmission facilities, switches, broadcast
equipment, signaling, or control devices; and
(G)   “Telecommunications service” or “telecommunications” means the offering
of transmission between or among points specified by a user, of information of
the user’s choosing, including voice, data, image, graphics, and video without
change in the form or content of the information, as sent and received, by
means of electromagnetic transmission, or other similarly capable means of
transmission, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium, and
does not include cable service as defined under applicable State law.
(d)   Whenever land has been divided into lots or parcels as provided by law,
each such lot or parcel must be separately assessed.
(e)   When a parcel of land that has been classified as agricultural is
improved with a single-family dwelling and has been granted a home exemption
for the tax year, that portion of the parcel that is used for residential
purposes will be classified as residential. This classification will:
(1)   Apply only to that portion used for residential purposes;
(2)   Not exceed 5,000 square feet of land and the buildings and improvements
on that land; and
(3)   Remain in effect only so long as the property qualifies for a home
exemption.
(f)   When a parcel of land that has been classified as preservation is
improved with a single-family dwelling and has been granted a home exemption
for the tax year, that portion of the parcel that is used for residential
purposes will be classified as residential. This classification will:
(1)   Apply only to that portion used for residential purposes;
(2)   Not exceed 5,000 square feet of land and the buildings and improvements
on that land; and
(3)   Remain in effect only so long as the property qualifies for a home
exemption.
(g)   (1)   In determining the value of buildings, consideration must be given
to any additions, alterations, remodeling, modifications, or other new
construction, improvement, or repair work undertaken upon or made to existing
buildings as the same may result in a higher assessable valuation of the
buildings; provided that any increase in value resulting from any additions,
alterations, modifications, or other new construction, improvement, or repair
work to buildings undertaken or made by the owner occupant thereof pursuant to
the requirements of any urban redevelopment, rehabilitation, or conservation
project under HRS Chapter 53, Part II, must not increase the assessable
valuation of any building for a period of seven years from the date of
certification as hereinafter provided.
(2)   It is further provided that the owner occupant shall file with the
director, in the manner and at the place the director may designate, a
statement of the details of the improvements certified in the following manner:
(A)   In the case of additions, alterations, modifications, or other new
construction, improvement, or repair work to a building that is undertaken
pursuant to any urban redevelopment, rehabilitation, or conservation project as
hereinabove mentioned, the statement must be certified by the mayor or any
governmental official designated by the mayor and approved by the council, that
the additions, alterations, modifications, or other new construction,
improvement, or repair work to the buildings were made and satisfactorily
comply with the particular urban development, rehabilitation, or conservation
act provision; or
(B)   In the case of maintenance or repairs to a residential building
undertaken pursuant to any health, safety, sanitation, or other governmental
code provision, the statement must be certified by the mayor or any
governmental official designated by the mayor and approved by the council,
that:
(i)   The building was inspected by them and found to be substandard when the
owner or occupant made the claim; and
(ii)   The maintenance or repairs to the buildings were made and satisfactorily
comply with the particular code provision.
(Sec. 8-7.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 7, §
8-7.1) (Am. Ords. 91-84, 92-63, 94-08, 94-79, 00-66, 02-39, 02-45, 02-57, 04-
34, 04-35, 07-4, 07-10, 09-32, 10-31, 13-33, 13-41, 17-13, 19-32, 23-5)
§ 8-7.2 Water tanks.
   Any provision to the contrary notwithstanding, any tank or other storage
receptacle required by any government agency to be constructed or installed on
any taxable real property before water for home and farm use is supplied, and
any other water tank, owned and used by a real property taxpayer for storing
water solely for the taxpayer’s own domestic use, shall be exempted in
determining and assessing the value of such taxable real property.
(Sec. 8-7.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 7, § 8-7.2)
§ 8-7.3 Dedication of lands for agricultural use.
(a)   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Agricultural Products. Includes such products as floricultural, horticultural,
viticultural, aquacultural, forestry, nut, coffee, dairy, livestock, poultry,
bee, animal, tree farm, animals raised by grazing and pasturing, and any other
farm, agronomic, or plantation products.
Agricultural Use of Land. The active use of the land for the production of
agricultural products.
Land Use Change. For land dedicated for a specific agricultural use, either:
(1)   A change in the State land use classification from agricultural to urban
or rural district;
(2)   A change in the county zoning from agricultural, preservation, or country
district; or
(3)   A subdivision of the land dedicated for a specific agricultural use into
parcels of 5 acres or less, which change or subdivision is initiated or
authorized by the owner.
Land Use Change Cancellation. A written notice of cancellation, filed by the
owner with the director, due to a land use change whereby the land dedicated
for a specific agricultural use or a portion thereof is no longer being
maintained as agricultural land. The notice shall specify the nature of the
land use change, the acreage and location of the land removed from the
dedication, and the acreage and location of the dedicated land remaining, if
any. Upon receipt of the notice, the dedication shall be canceled or amended,
as the case may be, and the land affected by the land use change shall be
subject to rollback tax and penalty as calculated in subsection (m)(1) or (m)
(2). Such cancellation shall be effective on the next July 1 that is at least
nine months after the filing.
Maintain as Agricultural Land. That the land dedicated for a specific
agricultural use shall remain in substantial and continuous agricultural use
throughout the dedication period, unless the owner files with the director a
land use change cancellation.
Owner or Property Owner. The fee simple owner of the real property provided
that for government-owned real property, owner or property owner means a lessee
of the land where:
(1)   The lease allows the specific agricultural use; and
(2)   The lease term extends through the period of the dedication.
Residential Homesite Area. That portion of the parcel, which is zoned
agricultural and used for residential purposes, including land upon which the
house is located and the land designated to be the yard space. A residential
homesite area cannot be dedicated for agricultural use.
Substantial and Continuous Agricultural Use. No less than 75 percent of the
area of the subject land, but excluding the area of unusable land, is in
active, continuous and revenue-generating agricultural use throughout the
subject time period. For lands dedicated for a period of five years or 10
years, substantial and continuous agricultural use shall include necessary and
customary fallowing periods.
Tree Farm Property and Tree Farm. Land classified as tree farm property under
HRS Chapter 186.
Unusable Land. That portion of the lands dedicated for a specific agricultural
use that the director determines to be unsuitable for the dedicated
agricultural use.
(b)   Lands for which the director has approved a petition for dedication for a
specific agricultural use for a period of five or 10 years shall be classified
and assessed for real property tax purposes at a percentage of the land’s fair
market value as established in subdivision (2) and shall be subject to the
following:
(1)   The land dedicated must be substantially and continuously used for the
business of raising and producing agricultural products in their natural state;
(2)   Dedicated land shall be assessed as follows:
(A)   Except as provided in paragraph (C), land dedicated for a period of five
years, the land shall be assessed at 3 percent of its fair market value;
(B)   For land dedicated for a period of 10 years, the land shall be assessed
at 1 percent of its fair market value; and
(C)   For land dedicated for a pasture use for a period of five or 10 years,
the land shall be assessed at 1 percent of its fair market value; and
(3)   The land dedicated shall be substantially and continuously in a use
specified under subdivision (1) for the duration of the dedication period.
(c)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b), in the event the
highest per-acre calculation for lands dedicated for five years under
subsection (b)(2)(A) based on the minimum lot size as designated in
Chapter 21 for lands located in agricultural districts exceeds the average
agricultural production value per acre for the county for vegetables and melon
crops, and fruits excluding pineapple, as determined annually by the director,
then the percent of market value for five-year dedications set forth in
subsection (b)(2)(A) shall be changed so as not to exceed the average
agricultural production value per acre for such crops. The percent of market
value for 10-year dedications set forth in subsection (b)(2)(B) shall be
changed to not exceed the percent of market value for five-year dedications by
more than 0.33 times.
(d)   Lands for which the director has approved a petition for dedication as
vacant agricultural land for a period of 10 years shall be classified and
assessed for real property tax purposes at 50 percent of the land’s fair market
value, provided that for the period of the dedication, the land dedicated is
not, at the initiation of the owner or with the authorization of the owner,
subject to:
(1)   A change in the State land use classification from agricultural to urban
or rural district;
(2)   A change in the county zoning from agricultural; or
(3)   A subdivision of the land into parcels of 10 acres or less.
(e)   A petition to dedicate land or a portion thereof for a specific
agricultural use or as vacant agricultural land shall be filed with the
director. An owner of the land may petition for dedication, or with the written
authorization of the owner, a lessee, permittee, or licensee may petition for
dedication of the owner’s land. The petition for dedication for a specific
agricultural use shall require a declaration that if the petition is approved
by the director, the land shall be used for the specific agricultural use for
the duration of the dedication period, unless the owner files with the director
a land use change cancellation, and a petition for dedication as vacant
agricultural land shall require a declaration that if the petition is approved
by the director, the land shall be maintained as agricultural land for the
duration of the dedication period. The petition for a dedication for a specific
agricultural use shall be supported by an agricultural plan. The director shall
prescribe the form of the petition and of the agricultural plan. The
agricultural plan shall include the following:
(1)   A description of the specific agricultural use;
(2)   A tax map key number of the owner’s land;
(3)   A description of the total acreage of the land;
(4)   A description of the acreage to be used for the specific agricultural use
or as vacant agricultural land;
(5)   A description of the residential homesite area, if any, excluded from the
dedication;
(6)   A timetable for implementation of the plan; and
(7)   A copy of a valid State of Hawaii general excise tax license issued for
agricultural purposes.
With the owner’s written authorization, lessees, licensees, and permittees of
government-owned land not currently in productive agricultural use, may
petition to dedicate the government-owned land for a period of 24 months as
vacant agricultural land, effective as of the commencement date of the lease,
license, or permit, provided the petitioner files a subsequent petition for the
dedication of the land for a specific agricultural use no later than the next
September 1 after 24 months in vacant agricultural use has lapsed. The lessee,
licensee, or permittee may petition for a dedication of the land for a specific
agricultural use at any time during the 24 months that the land is dedicated to
vacant agricultural use. If a petition for the dedication of the land for a
specific agricultural use is not filed by the next September 1 after the 24
months in vacant agricultural use has lapsed or if the director disapproves the
petition, the property will be subject to rollback taxes and penalties as
stated in subsection (m)(3).
(f)   A parcel, or portion thereof, which has been approved for dedication as
vacant agricultural land may have its dedicated use, for all or a portion
thereof, changed to a specific agricultural use without the imposition of the
rollback tax and penalty upon petition to the director to change the dedication
of the parcel or portion thereof to a specific agricultural use, provided that:
(1)   When the remaining period of the dedication for vacant agricultural land
is more than five years, the dedication for a specific agricultural use shall
be for a 10-year period; or
(2)   When the remaining period of the dedication for vacant agricultural land
is less than five years, the dedication for a specific agricultural use shall
be for a five- or 10-year period.
The petition for a change of the dedication shall be filed by the owner of the
land or with the written authorization of the owner, by a lessee, permittee, or
licensee of the land, as the case may be. The director shall prescribe the form
of the petition to change the dedication.
(g)   Upon receipt of a petition as provided in subsection (e), the director
shall make a finding of fact as to whether the land in the petition area is
reasonably well suited for the designated specific agricultural use or is
classified vacant agricultural under §
8-7.1 and qualifies to be maintained as agricultural land. The finding shall be
based upon a study of the ownership, size of operating unit, the present use of
surrounding similar lands, the State and county land use restrictions for the
land and other criteria as may be appropriate. The director shall also make a
finding of fact as to whether the designated specific agricultural use or
vacant agricultural land use conforms to the development plan for the area. The
director shall also make a finding of fact as to the economic feasibility of
the designated specific agricultural use of the land. If all the findings are
favorable, the director shall approve the petition and declare the land to be
dedicated for the designated specific agricultural use or as vacant
agricultural land.
(h)   The approval by the director of the petition to dedicate shall constitute
a forfeiture on the part of the owner of any right to change the use of the
owner’s land to a use other than agricultural for a minimum period of five or
10 years, as the case may be, except in the case of land dedicated for a
specific agricultural use where the owner files with the director a land use
change cancellation, or to cease to maintain the land as vacant agricultural
land for a minimum of 10 years.
(i)   The petition for dedication shall be filed with the director by September
1 of any calendar year. The notice of assessment shall serve as notice of
approval or disapproval of the petition for dedication. If approved, the
assessment based upon the use requested in the petition for dedication shall be
effective on October 1 of the same calendar year.
(j)   The owner of any parcel of land dedicated under this section shall
annually submit a report to the director no later than September 1 following
each tax year of the dedication. The report may be rejected by the director in
the event the report is incomplete or contains erroneous or incorrect
information. The report shall be accepted or rejected by the director by
December 15 of the year in which it is submitted. The director shall prescribe
the form of the report. The report may include but is not limited to:
(1)   An updated description of the agricultural use of the land during the
immediately preceding and current tax years;
(2)   A copy of all State general excise tax returns for the immediately
preceding tax year concerning activities conducted on the parcel of land
dedicated for a specific agricultural use;
(3)   A description of the acreage and percentage of the area of the parcel of
land used for the specified agricultural use during the immediately preceding
and current tax years; and
(4)   A declaration, if applicable, that the owner will keep the land in
substantial and continuous agricultural use, or will maintain the land as
agricultural land through the remaining period of the dedication.
Any part of the report containing confidential commercial or financial
information, including income statements or tax statements, shall be clearly
labeled by the owner as such and shall not be open to inspection by the public.
(k)   If land dedicated for agricultural use undergoes a change in
classification that is not at the initiation of the owner or with the
authorization of the owner, such that there is:
(1)   A change in the State land use classification from agriculture to urban
or rural district; or
(2)   A change in the county zoning from agriculture, preservation or country
district, the dedication shall continue, unless the owner files a written
notice of cancellation with the director within 60 days of the change.
Such cancellation shall be effective on the next July 1 that is at least nine
months after the filing.
(l)   If a dedication is canceled or expires, the director shall execute an
expiration or cancellation of the dedication.
(m)   If the director, upon inspection, finds that dedicated agricultural land
is not in substantial and continuous agricultural use, that the land has not
been maintained as agricultural land, that the property owner failed to file
the required report in a timely manner, or that the required report must be
rejected, the owner shall be notified of the finding and the owner shall have
60 days to address the finding. In the event the owner fails to satisfactorily
address the finding, the dedication shall be canceled and the property owner
shall be subject to a rollback tax and penalty. The rollback tax shall be the
difference between the taxes owed for the land at 100 percent of the land’s
assessed value at fair market value and the taxes actually imposed on the land,
retroactive from June 30 of the tax year in which the dedication was canceled
to July 1 of the initial year of the dedication at the tax rate applicable for
the respective tax years, except as provided in subdivisions (1), (2), and (3).
The penalty shall be 10 percent for each year of the rollback tax. The rollback
tax and penalty shall be a paramount lien upon the property.
(1)   For lands dedicated for five years and subject to a cancellation after
the third tax year of the dedication period, the period of the rollback tax
shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
(A)   For two tax years for a cancellation in the fourth tax year of the
dedication period, retroactive from June 30 of the fourth tax year to July 1 of
the third tax year of the dedication period; or
(B)   For one tax year for a cancellation in the fifth tax year of the
dedication period, retroactive from June 30 of the fifth tax year to July 1 of
the fifth tax year of the dedication period.
(2)   For lands dedicated for 10 years and subject to a cancellation after the
fifth year of the dedication period, the period of the rollback tax shall be in
accordance with the following schedule:
(A)   For five tax years for a cancellation in the sixth tax year of the
dedication period, retroactive from June 30 of the sixth tax year to July 1 of
the second tax year of the dedication period;
(B)   For four tax years for a cancellation in the seventh tax year of the
dedication period, retroactive from June 30 of the seventh tax year to July 1
of the fourth tax year of the dedication period;
(C)   For three tax years for a cancellation in the eighth tax year of the
dedication period, retroactive from June 30 of the eighth tax year to July 1 of
the sixth tax year of the dedication period;
(D)   For two tax years for a cancellation in the ninth tax year of the
dedication period, retroactive from June 30 of the ninth tax year to July 1 of
the eighth tax year of the dedication period; or
(E)   For one tax year for a cancellation in the tenth tax year of the
dedication period, retroactive from June 30 of the tenth tax year to July 1 of
the tenth tax year of the dedication period.
(3)   For government-owned land dedicated as vacant agricultural land for a
period of 24 months, if a petition for the dedication of the land for a
specific agricultural use is not filed by the next September 1 after the 24
months during which the land is dedicated to vacant agricultural use has lapsed
or that the director disapproves the petition, a rollback tax and penalty will
be imposed. The rollback tax will be the difference between the taxes owed for
the land at 100 percent of the land’s assessed value at fair market value and
the taxes actually imposed on the land and will be retroactive to the
commencement date of the lease, license, or permit. The penalty will be 10
percent for each year of the rollback tax.
(n)   The owner may appeal any disapproved petition for dedication, rejection
of the annual report, cancellation of the dedication, or imposition of a
rollback tax and penalty in the same manner as an appeal from an assessment.
(o)   Notwithstanding any provision in this section to the contrary, the
occurrence of any of the following events shall cause the dedication to be
canceled without the imposition of any rollback taxes or penalties:
(1)   The death of any owner;
(2)   Events beyond the owner’s control that make it unfeasible to continue the
agricultural use of the dedicated property, including but not limited to:
(A)   A serious or debilitating long-term illness or injury suffered by the
owner;
(B)   A natural disaster such as a windstorm, flood, disease, or infestation
that destroys the crop or livestock on the dedicated parcel; or
(C)   The taking of the dedicated parcel or any portion thereof by a
governmental entity, provided that where only a portion of the parcel is taken,
the cancellation shall be effective only as to the portion taken; or
(3)   The change of a dedication of vacant agricultural lands to a dedication
for a specific agricultural use under subsection (f).
(p)   Notwithstanding any provisions in this section to the contrary, for five-
and 10-year dedications of land for a specific agricultural use, the director
may grant an owner a grace period, subject to the following conditions:
(1)   A grace period may be granted only if one of the following events occurs:
(A)   A bank or other lending institution acquires possession of a property as
a result of a default of a mortgage on the property; or
(B)   The agricultural use of a dedicated parcel is terminated because a lessee
has abandoned or terminated a lease before the end of the term of the lease,
the owner of the parcel has not found another lessee, and the lease has a term
of five years or longer;
(2)   During the grace period, the owner is not required to use the land for
the business of raising and producing agricultural products;
(3)   At the end of the grace period, the owner shall use the land for the
business of raising and producing agricultural products for the entire
remaining period of the owner’s dedication. The grace period shall not be
counted in determining the owner’s compliance with the dedication;
(4)   The grace period shall not exceed two years;
(5)   During the grace period, the land shall be assessed at 100 percent of
market value; and
(6)   No grace period shall be granted for a parcel of land within five years
following the expiration of a previous grace period.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 7, § 8-7.3) (Added by Ord. 04-34; Am. Ords. 07-4, 11-
26, 12-16, 15-32, 17-2)
§ 8-7.4 Lands dedicated for golf course use.
(a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Cost of Development. The actual or estimated costs to improve the land into an
operating golf course.
Golf Course. Property that has been developed for the sport of golf, including
its related and incidental activities.
Golf Course Use. The actual use of property for the sport of golf and its
related and incidental activities.
Owner. A fee owner or any lessee of real property whose lease term extends at
least 10 years effective from the date of the petition. Such lease must be duly
entered into and recorded at the bureau of conveyances or filed in the office
of the assistant registrar of the land court, on or before the date of the
petition.
Rental Income. Land rent based on golf course use.
Rollback Tax. The difference between the amount of taxes that a dedicated golf
course owner paid and the higher amount of taxes, if any, that would have been
due from the owner if the golf course had not been dedicated under this
section.
Sale Price. The sale price of a property operated and used as a golf course and
land acquired for golf course use.
(b)   To qualify in having land valued and assessed as a golf course, the owner
of any parcel of land desiring to use or presently using such person’s land for
a golf course shall as a condition precedent qualify as follows.
(1)   Dedication of land.
(A)   The owner of any parcel of land for a golf course shall petition the
director and declare in the owner’s petition that the owner will dedicate the
owner’s parcel of land for golf course use.
(B)   The approval by the director of the petition to dedicate the land shall
constitute a forfeiture on the part of the owner of any right to change the use
of the land for a minimum period of 10 years, automatically renewable
indefinitely, subject to cancellation by either the owner or the director upon
five years’ notice at any time.
(C)   The failure of the owner to observe the restrictions on the use of the
land as a golf course shall cancel the land assessment based on golf course use
retroactive to the date of the dedication, but not more than 10 years before
the tax year in which the dedication is canceled; and all differences in the
amount of taxes that were paid and those that would have been due from
assessment in the higher use shall be payable with a 6 percent a year penalty
from the respective dates that these payments would have been due. Failure to
observe the restrictions on the use means failure for a period of over 12
consecutive months to use the land in that manner requested in the petition as
a golf course by the overt act of changing the use for any period. Nothing in
this paragraph shall preclude the county from pursuing any other remedy to
enforce the covenant on the use of that land as a golf course.
(D)   The director shall prescribe the form of the petition. The petition shall
be filed by September 1 of any calendar year and shall be approved or
disapproved by October 31 of such year. If approved, the assessment based upon
the use requested in the dedication shall be effective on October 1 of the same
calendar year.
(E)   The owner may appeal any disapproved petition as in the case of an appeal
from an assessment.
(F)   When the owner has failed to observe the dedication restriction on golf
course use, and at which time the dedication is canceled, the amount of
additional taxes due and owing shall attach to the property as a paramount lien
in favor of the county.
(c)   Dedicated property operated and used as a golf course shall be valued and
assessed for property tax purposes on the following basis:
(1)   The value to be assessed by the director shall be on the basis of its
actual use as a golf course rather than on the valuation based on the highest
and best use of the land; and
(2)   In determining the value of actual use, the factors to be considered
shall include, among others, rental income, cost of development, and sale
price.
(d)   Covenant not to engage in discrimination. The owner shall covenant in the
owner’s petition with the director that the owner will not discriminate against
any individual in the use of the golf course facilities because of the
individual’s race, sex, religion, color, or ancestry.
(Sec. 8-7.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 7, §
8-7.4) (Am. Ords. 96-15, 00-64)
§ 8-7.5 Certain property dedicated for residential use.
(a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Apartment Building. A multi-unit dwelling that is situated on a single parcel,
which parcel is not subdivided into condominium units.
Condominium Parking Unit. A unit that is a part of a condominium property
regime established pursuant to the State Condominium Property Act described as
a parking stall.
Condominium Storage Unit. A unit that is a part of a condominium property
regime established pursuant to the State Condominium Property Act described as
a storage space.
Condominium Unit. A dwelling or lodging unit that is part of a condominium
property regime established pursuant to the State Condominium Property Act.
Dwelling Unit. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Lodging Unit. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Multi-Unit Dwelling. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1, which is not a hotel.
Owner. A person who is the fee simple owner of real property, or who is the
lessee of real property whose lease term extends at least five years from the
date of the petition.
Residential Use. The actual use of a dwelling unit or lodging unit as a
residence:
(1)   By occupants for compensation for periods of 90 or more consecutive days;
(2)   By the unit owner personally; or
(3)   By the unit owner’s guests without compensation.
For the purposes of this definition, compensation includes but is not limited
to monetary payment, services or labor of employees. Residential use
specifically excludes the use of the unit as a transient vacation unit or
timeshare. For the purposes of this dedication, residential use shall include
the use of the dwelling unit for large and small group living.
(b)   The owner of a parcel may dedicate the parcel for residential use and
have the property classified as residential and assessed at its value in
residential use; provided that the property:
(1)   Is within an apartment, apartment mixed-use, resort, business, business
mixed-use, industrial, or industrial mixed-use zoning districts; or if it is in
the Waikiki special district, is zoned apartment mixed-use subprecinct, resort
mixed-use precinct, or resort-commercial precinct; or is in a transit-oriented
development special district pursuant to §
21-9.100;
(2)   Is used exclusively for residential use, except that a portion of the
property may be used for nonprofit purposes pursuant to §
8-10.9; and
(3)   (A)   Is improved with one or more dwelling units as defined in §
21-10.1 , or with one or more apartment buildings, or with both dwelling units
and apartment buildings; or
(B)   Is a condominium unit that is legally permitted for multiple uses
including residential use and is actually and exclusively used as a residence,
or a condominium parking unit or a condominium storage unit that is used in
conjunction with a unit in residential use within the project.
(c)   The owner of real property who wishes to dedicate such property for
residential use and have the property assessed at its value in residential use
according to subsection (b) shall petition the director and declare in such
petition that if the petition is approved, the owner shall meet the applicable
requirements of subsection (b) pertaining to the property.
(d)   The approval of the petition by the director to dedicate constitutes a
forfeiture on the part of the owner of any right to change the use of such
person’s property for a minimum period of five years, automatically renewable
thereafter for additional periods of five years subject to cancellation by
either the owner or the director. Cancellation of the dedication by the owner
must be in writing and submitted to the director by September 1 only within the
fifth year of the date of the dedication, or the latest five-year renewal
period.
Upon sale or transfer of the dedicated property, the dedication will continue
for the remainder of the five- year dedication or latest five-year renewal
subject to all restrictions and penalties. Upon expiration of the fifth year,
the dedication will not automatically renew and will be canceled by the
director.
For the purpose of this dedication, there is no change in use if the owner
demolishes and constructs or reconstructs one or more dwelling units or multi-
unit dwellings; provided that such construction or reconstruction is permitted
pursuant to
Chapter 21, the replacement structure or structures are completed no less than
24 months after the building permit is issued, and at least the same number of
dwelling or lodging units as those demolished are developed. The five-year
dedication will be suspended during this period of demolition and construction
or reconstruction, and the parcel and any improvements thereon will continue to
be classified and assessed at their value in residential use during the
suspension.
(e)   (1)   Failure of the owner to observe the restrictions on the use of such
person’s property shall cancel the dedication retroactive to the tax year
preceding the tax year in which the breach of the dedication occurs, and all
differences in the amount of taxes that were paid and those that would have
been due from assessment in the higher use shall be payable with a 10 percent
per year penalty retroactive to the tax year preceding the tax year in which
the breach of the dedication occurs. Any assessment under
Chapter 28, levied upon a special improvement district noted in
Appendix 28-A, that would have been due but for the dedication shall also be
due and payable along with applicable penalties and interest, retroactive to
the tax year preceding the tax year in which the breach of the dedication
occurs. Failure to observe the restrictions on the use means failure for a
period of over 12 consecutive months to use the property in the manner
requested in the petition or the overt act of changing the use for any period.
Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the county from pursuing any other
remedy to enforce the covenant on the use of the property.
(2)   The additional taxes and penalties, due and owing as a result of failure
to observe the restrictions on use or any other breach of the dedication shall
be a paramount lien upon the property as provided for by this chapter. Any
special assessment under
Chapter 28, due and owing as a result of failure to observe the restrictions on
use or any other breach of the dedication shall be a lien against the land and
improvements of the parcel of land in accordance with §
28-3.5.
(f)   The director shall prescribe the form of the petition. The petition shall
be filed with the director by September 1 of any calendar year. The notice of
assessment shall serve as notification of approval or disapproval of the
petition for dedication. If the petition is approved, the assessment based upon
the use requested in the dedication shall be effective as of October 1 of the
same calendar year.
(g)   The owner may appeal any disapproved petition as in the case of an appeal
from an assessment.
(Sec. 8-7.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 7, §
8-7.5) (Am. Ords. 96-15, 09-32, 10-14, 10-30, 10-31, 12-14, 17-13, 25-2)
§ 8-7.6 Property dedicated for low-income rental housing.
(a)   For the purposes of this section, “low-income rental housing” means
housing rented at or below the rental rate limits established by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development for households earning 80
percent of the city’s area median income for the applicable household size, or
less.
(b)   An owner of real property classified as Residential A used as low-income
rental housing may make a five-year dedication of the property for low-income
rental housing use and have the property classified as Residential provided
that:
(1)   The property was purchased by the owner for less than $1,000,000;
(2)   The property is exclusively used during the dedication period as a rental
home or apartment unit with a lease period of at least one year; and
(3)   The rental home or apartment unit is rented at a rate that meets the
requirements of low-income rental housing as defined in subsection (a).
(c)   Any owner desiring to dedicate the owner’s property for low-income rental
housing shall petition the director, describing the property to be dedicated,
providing evidence that the property is currently used exclusively for
affordable rental housing, and declaring that such use will continue in the
dedicated tax years and the owner shall meet the applicable requirements of
subsection (b) pertaining to the property.
(d)   The director shall prescribe the form of the petition. The petition for
the following tax year must be filed with the director by September 1 of any
calendar year. The notice of assessment will serve as notification of approval
or disapproval of the petition for dedication. If the petition is approved, the
assessment based upon the use requested in the dedication will be effective on
October 1 of the same calendar year and apply to the following tax year.
(e)   The director shall make a finding whether the property is and will be
maintained and used for the sole purpose of providing low-income rental
housing. That finding will be based on the rental agreement or agreements and
such other evidence required of and provided by the owner as the director may
deem pertinent.
(f)   The approval of the petition by the director shall constitute a
forfeiture on the part of the owner of any right to change the use of the
owner’s real property for low-income rental housing for the dedication period.
The dedication period may be renewed in the same manner as the initial
petition.
(g)   The owner may appeal any disapproved petition as in the case of an appeal
from an assessment.
(h)   (1)   Failure of the owner to observe the restrictions on the use of such
person’s real property will cancel the exemption retroactive to the date of the
initial dedication, and all differences between the amount of taxes that were
paid and the amount that would have been due from assessment without the
dedication will be payable with a 10 percent per year penalty from the
respective dates that these payments would have been due. Failure to observe
the restrictions on the use means any failure of 45 consecutive days or more
during the tax year of the exemption to use the real property in the manner
certified in the petition or the overt act of changing the use for any period.
Nothing in this subsection precludes the city from pursuing any other remedy to
enforce the covenant on the use of the real property.
(2)   The additional taxes and penalties, due and owing as a result of failure
to use or any other breach of the dedication will be a paramount lien upon the
property as provided for by this chapter.
(i)   Before September 1 in each of the five years of the dedication, the owner
shall submit to the director a copy of the rental agreement to be in force in
the upcoming tax year.
(j)   The director shall make and adopt necessary rules to administer this
section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 7, § 8-7.6) (Added by Ord. 15-6; Am. Ords. 16-8, 18-17)
ARTICLE 8: WASTELAND DEVELOPMENT
Sections
   
8-8.1   Definitions
   
8-8.2   Eligibility
   
8-8.3   Application
   
8-8.4   Classification
   
8-8.5   Development and maintenance of wasteland development property
   
8-8.6   Special tax assessment
   
8-8.7   Declassification
   
8-8.8   Appeals
§ 8-8.1 Definitions.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Department. The department of budget and fiscal services.
Director. The director of budget and fiscal services.
Owner. Includes any person leasing the real property of another under a lease
having a stated term of not less than 30 years.
Wasteland. Land that is classified as such by the director.
(Sec. 8-8.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 8, § 8-8.1)
§ 8-8.2 Eligibility.
   Any property of not less than 25 acres in area is eligible for
classification as wasteland development property if it meets the classification
requirements of wasteland property as established by the director. No real
property under a lease having an unexpired term of less than 30 years shall be
eligible for classification as wasteland development property.
(Sec. 8-8.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 8, § 8-8.2)
§ 8-8.3 Application.
   The owner of any property may apply to the director for classification of
the owner’s land as wasteland development property. The application shall
include a description of the property, the manner in which the property will be
developed, and such additional information as may be required by the director.
The application shall state that all persons having any interest in or holding
any encumbrance upon the property have joined in making the application and
that all of them will comply with the laws and regulations relating to the use,
building requirements, and development of real property.
(Sec. 8-8.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 8, § 8-8.3)
§ 8-8.4 Classification.
(a)   Within four months after the filing of the application with the director,
the director shall make a finding of fact as to the eligibility of such land
for classification as wasteland development property, whether it can be
developed in the manner specified by the owner, whether the development will
add to the development of the economy of the State, and whether the development
will broaden the tax base of the State. The determination shall be based upon
all available information on soils, climate, land use trends, watershed values,
present use of surrounding similar lands, and other criteria as may be
appropriate.
(b)   Upon the finding by the director that the property is eligible for
classification as wasteland development property, that it can be developed in
the manner specified by the owner, that the development will add to the economy
of the State, and that it will broaden the tax base of the State, the property
shall be classified as wasteland development property. If the director finds it
otherwise for any one of the above criteria, the application shall be
disapproved.
(c)   The applicant may appeal any disapproved application as in the case of an
appeal from an assessment.
(d)   Land classified as wasteland development property shall be administered
by the department and the department may from time to time adopt rules for
their administration pursuant to HRS Chapter 91.
(Sec. 8-8.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 8, § 8-8.4)
§ 8-8.5 Development and maintenance of wasteland development property.
   Within one year following the approval of the application, the owner shall
develop that portion of the owner’s land as specified in the owner’s
application and as approved by the director. Additional areas shall be
developed each year as prescribed by the director.
(Sec. 8-8.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 8, § 8-8.5)
§ 8-8.6 Special tax assessment.
   Any property classified as wasteland development property by the director
shall be, for a period of five years, assessed for real property tax purposes
at its value as wasteland. The five-year period shall commence after June 30 of
the tax year following the approval of the application.
(Sec. 8-8.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 8, §
8-8.6)
§ 8-8.7 Declassification.
   Thirty days after notification to the owner by the department for
noncompliance of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation, the director may
declassify any land classified as wasteland development property. The
department shall notify the owner of the declassification and in that event,
the director shall cancel the special tax assessment provided in §
8-8.6 retroactive to the date that the property qualified for special tax
assessment and the difference between the real property taxes that would have
become due and payable but for such classification for all the years the land
was classified as wasteland development property and the real property taxes
paid by the owner during such period shall become immediately due and payable
together with a 5 percent a year penalty from the respective dates that such
additional tax would otherwise have been due.
(Sec. 8-8.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 8, § 8-8.7)
§ 8-8.8 Appeals.
   Any person aggrieved by the additional assessment for any year may appeal
from such assessment in the manner provided in the case of real property tax
appeals.
(Sec. 8-8.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 8, § 8-8.8)
ARTICLE 9: NONTAXABLE PROPERTY—ASSESSMENT
Section
   
8-9.1   Nontaxable property
§ 8-9.1 Nontaxable property.
(a)   For purposes of accountability, the director shall prepare a notice of
property assessment for each parcel of nontaxable real property within the
city.
(b)   The notice shall contain the valuation of the real property and an
exemption in the full amount of the valuation.
(Sec. 8-9.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 9, § 8-9.1) (Am.
Ords. 92-124, 02-45)
ARTICLE 10: EXEMPTIONS
Sections
   
8-10.1   Claims for certain exemptions
   
8-10.2   Rules
   
8-10.3   Exemption—Homes
   
8-10.4   Home, lease, lessees defined
   
8-10.5   Exemption—Homes of totally disabled veterans
   
8-10.6   Exemption—Persons affected with leprosy
   
8-10.7   Exemption—Persons with impaired sight or hearing and persons totally
disabled
   
8-10.8   Exemption—Nonprofit medical, hospital indemnity association
   
8-10.9   Exemption—Charitable purposes
   
8-10.10   Exemption—Crop shelters
   
8-10.11   Exemption—Dedicated lands in urban districts
   
8-10.12   Exemption—Renewable energy
   
8-10.13   Exemption—Fixtures used in manufacturing or producing tangible
personal products
   
8-10.14   Exemption—Public property
   
8-10.15   Lessees of exempt real property
   
8-10.16   Property of the United States leased under the National Housing Act
   
8-10.17   Exemption—Low-income rental housing
   
8-10.18   Claim for exemption
   
8-10.19   Exemption—Historic residential real property dedicated for
preservation
   
8-10.20   Other exemptions
   
8-10.21   Exemption—Credit union
   
8-10.22   Exemption—Slaughterhouses
   
8-10.23   Exemption—Qualifying construction work
   
8-10.24   Exemption—Public service
   
8-10.25   Additional terms and conditions for exemption of low-income rental
housing projects on Hawaiian home lands
   
8-10.26   Exemption—Nonprofit organization thrift shops
   
8-10.27   Exemption—Historic commercial real property dedicated for
preservation
   
8-10.28   Exemption—Qualifying agricultural improvements for dedicated vacant
agricultural lands
   
8-10.29   Exemption—Kuleana land
   
8-10.30   Exemption—For-profit group child care centers
   
8-10.31   Exemption—Central Kakaako industrial zone limited development
   
8-10.32   Claim for exemption—Central Kakaako industrial zone limited
development
   
8-10.33   Exemption—Qualifying affordable rental dwelling units or affordable
rental housing units
   
8-10.34   Exemption—During construction work for and marketing of affordable
dwelling units or affordable rental housing projects
   
8-10.35   Exemption—Qualifying construction—Film studio facility
   
8-10.36   Exemption—Film studio facilities
§ 8-10.1 Claims for certain exemptions.
(a)   None of the exemptions from taxation granted in §§
8-10.3,
8-10.5 through
8-10.9,
8-10.21,
8-10.24,
8-10.26,
8-10.29, and
8-10.30 will be allowed in any case, unless the claimant has filed with the
department of budget and fiscal services on or before September 30 preceding
the tax year for which the exemption is claimed, a claim for exemption in a
form as prescribed by the department.
(b)   A claim for exemption, once allowed, shall have continuing effect until:
(1)   The exemption is disallowed;
(2)   The assessor voids the claim after first giving notice (either to the
claimant or to all claimants in the manner provided for by this chapter) that
the claim or claims on file will be voided on a certain date, not less than 30
days after such notice;
(3)   The five-year period for exemption, as allowed in §
8-10.3(e) expires; or
(4)   The report required by subsection (d) is made.
(c)   A claimant may file a claim for exemption even though there is on file
and in effect a claim covering the same premises, or a claim previously filed
and disallowed or otherwise voided. However, no such claim shall be filed if it
is identical with one already on file and having continuing effect. The report
required by subsection (d) may be accompanied by or combined with a new claim.
(d)   The owner of any property that has been allowed an exemption under §§
8-10.3,
8-10.5 through
8-10.9,
8-10.21,
8-10.24,
8-10.26,
8-10.29, or
8-10.30 has a duty to report to the assessor within 30 days after such owner or
property ceases to qualify for such an exemption for, among others, the
following reasons:
(1)   The ownership of the property has changed;
(2)   A change in the facts previously reported has occurred concerning the
occupation, use or renting of the premises, buildings or other improvements
thereon; or
(3)   A change in status has occurred that affects the owner’s exemption.
Such report shall have the effect of voiding the claim for exemption previously
filed, as provided in subsection (b)(4). The report shall be sufficient if it
identifies the property involved, states the change in facts or status, and
requests that the claim for exemption previously filed be voided.
In the event the property comes into the hands of a fiduciary who is answerable
as provided for by this chapter, the fiduciary shall make the report required
by this subsection within 30 days after the assumption of the fiduciary’s
duties or within the time otherwise required, whichever is later.
A penalty shall be imposed if the change in facts occurred in the 12 months
ending September 30 preceding the tax year for which an exemption is to take
effect and the report required by this subsection is not filed by the
immediately following November 1. The amount of the penalty shall be $300
imposed on the November 2 preceding the tax year for which the owner or the
property no longer qualifies for the exemption and on November 2 for each year
thereafter that the change in facts remains unreported. In addition to this
penalty, the taxes due on the property plus any additional penalties and
interest thereon shall be a paramount lien on the property as provided for by
this chapter.
(e)   If the assessor is of the view that, for any tax year, the exemption may
not be allowed, in whole or in part, the assessor may at any time within five
years of October 1 of that year disallow the exemption for that year, in whole
or in part, and may add to the assessment list for that year the amount of
value involved, in the manner provided for by this chapter for the assessment
of omitted property.
(Sec. 8-10.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, §
8-10.1) (Am. Ords. 88-1, 89-129, 95-67, 96-15, 01-60, 03-05, 06-04, 07-7, 09-
24, 09-32, 12-29; 20-37)
§ 8-10.2 Rules.
   The director may adopt rules as may be necessary to administer the
exemptions specified in this chapter.
(Sec. 8-10.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.2)
§ 8-10.3 Exemption—Homes.
(a)   For real property owned and occupied as the owner’s principal home as of
the date of assessment by an individual or individuals, $120,000 of the total
assessed value is exempt from property taxes, subject to the following:
(1)   For real property where the value of the property is not in excess of the
exemption amount established pursuant to this subsection, the real property is
totally exempt;
(2)   For all other real property, the exemption is the amount established
pursuant to this subsection; provided that:
(A)   No such exemption will be allowed to any corporation, copartnership, or
company;
(B)   The exemption under this section will not be allowed on more than one
home for any one taxpayer;
(C)   Where the taxpayer has acquired the taxpayer’s home by a deed made on or
after July 1, 1951, the deed is recorded on or before September 30 immediately
preceding the year for which the exemption is claimed;
(D)   Spouses will not be permitted exemption of separate homes owned by each
of them, unless they are living separate and apart, in which case each is
entitled to one-half of one exemption;
(E)   A person living on premises, a portion of which is used for commercial
purposes, is not entitled to an exemption with respect to such portion, but is
entitled to an exemption with respect to the portion thereof used exclusively
as a home;
(F)   Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, real property will continue to
be entitled to the exemption contained in this section in the event the owner
of the real property moves from the home on which the exemption is granted to a
long-term care facility or an adult residential care home licensed to operate
in the State; provided that:
(i)   The taxpayer designates the adult residential care home or long-term care
facility on the form necessary to administer this subsection;
(ii)   The home the taxpayer moves from is not rented, leased, or sold during
the time the taxpayer is in the long-term care facility or the adult
residential care home; and
(iii)   Continuation of the home exemption entitles the taxpayer to the
benefits of this section in effect during the applicable time period;
(G)   Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, in the event the owner of real
property vacates the home for which an exemption is granted and moves to a
temporary residence within the city during the renovation of the home, the real
property will continue to be entitled to the exemption contained in this
section; provided that:
(i)   The taxpayer submits to the director a change in status report regarding
vacating the home during renovations which identifies:
(aa)   The building permit number issued by the city department of planning and
permitting;
(bb)   The renovation start date as indicated on the building permit; and
(cc)   A verifiable address within the city where the taxpayer will reside
during the renovation period and where the assessment notices will be mailed;
(ii)   The renovation period will commence on the renovation start date and
must not exceed two years. The taxpayer may reoccupy the home before the
expiration of two years. Prior to the reoccupation of the home, the taxpayer
must submit to the director a change in status report regarding reoccupation of
the home along with a dated certificate of occupancy, notice of completion, or
close permit indicating the date the renovations have been completed;
(iii)   Upon receipt by the director of the change in status report regarding
reoccupation of the home and a dated certificate of occupancy, notice of
completion, or close permit, assessment notices will be mailed to the
reoccupied home and the owner may sell the home without penalty;
(iv)   The home must not be rented, leased, or sold during the renovation
period; and
(v)   Continuation of the home exemption entitles the taxpayer to the benefits
of this section in effect during the applicable time period;
(H)   Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, in the event the owner of the
real property vacates the home for which the exemption is granted and moves to
a temporary residence outside the city during a sabbatical or temporary work
assignment, the real property will continue to be entitled to the exemption
contained in this section; provided that:
(i)   The taxpayer submits to the director a change in status report that
provides verification of the sabbatical or temporary work assignment and
documentation from the taxpayer’s employer that specifies the start and
completion dates of the sabbatical or temporary work assignment;
(ii)   Within the report, the taxpayer provides a verifiable address of the
temporary residence and certification of intent to reoccupy the home on which
the exemption is granted after the sabbatical or temporary work assignment
concludes;
(iii)   The home the taxpayer moves from is not rented, leased, or sold during
the time the taxpayer resides in the designated temporary residence;
(iv)   The taxpayer reoccupies the home on which the exemption is granted
within 24 months after the sabbatical or temporary work assignment begins,
however, prior to reoccupation of the home, the taxpayer must submit to the
director a change in status report with the actual date the home will be
reoccupied; and
(v)   Continuation of the home exemption entitles the taxpayer to the benefits
of this section in effect during the applicable time period; and
(I)   Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, in the event the owner of real
property vacates the home for which an exemption is granted and moves to a
temporary residence within the city as a result of the home being damaged or
destroyed by fire, the real property will continue to be entitled to the
exemption contained in this section; provided that:
(i)   The damage or destruction of the home is not the result of the taxpayer
or any person residing in the home intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly
setting fire to the home;
(ii)   The taxpayer submits to the director a change in status report that
provides the date the fire occurred and evidence that the fire caused the home
to be uninhabitable;
(iii)   The taxpayer intends to remain in the city and within the report
provides a verifiable address of temporary residence and certification of
intent to reoccupy the home on which the exemption is granted after the home is
repaired or replaced;
(iv)   The home the taxpayer moves from is not rented, leased, or sold during
the time the taxpayer resides in the designated temporary residence;
(v)   The taxpayer reoccupies the home on which the exemption is granted within
24 months after the date of the fire; however, prior to reoccupation of the
home, the taxpayer must submit to the director a change in status report with
the actual date the home will be reoccupied; and
(vi)   Continuation of the home exemption entitles the taxpayer to the benefits
of this section in effect during the applicable time period.
Failure to comply with any of the requirements in paragraphs (F), (G), (H), and
(I) will result in the disallowance of the home exemption and will subject the
taxpayer to rollback taxes, interest, and penalties as set forth in §§
8-10.1(d) and (e) for the period of time the home exemption is continued.
For the purposes of this section, “real property owned and occupied as the
owner’s principal home” means occupancy of a home in the city and may be
evidenced by but not limited to the following indicia: occupancy of a home in
the city for more than 270 calendar days of a calendar year; registering to
vote in the city; being stationed in the city under military orders of the
United States; and filing of an income tax return as a resident of the State,
with a reported address in the city. The director may demand documentation of
the above or other indicia from a property owner applying for an exemption or
from an owner as evidence of continued qualification for an exemption.
Failure to respond to the director’s request is grounds for denying a claim for
an exemption or disallowing an existing exemption. The director may demand
documentary evidence such as a tax clearance from the State indicating that the
taxpayer filed an income tax return as a full-time resident for the year prior
to the effective date of the exemption. Failure to respond to the director’s
demand in 30 days is grounds for disallowance or denial of a claim for an
exemption.
In the event the director receives satisfactory evidence that an individual
occupies a home outside the city or there is documented evidence of the
individual’s intent to reside outside the city, that individual will not be
qualified for an exemption or continued exemption under this section, as the
case may be.
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, for real property held by a
trustee or other fiduciary, the trustee or other fiduciary is entitled to the
exemption where:
(1)   The settlor of the trust occupies the property as the settlor’s principal
home; or
(2)   The settlor of the trust dies and a beneficiary entitled to live in the
home under the terms of the trust document occupies the property as the
beneficiary’s principal home.
For the purposes of this subsection, real property is “sold” when title to the
real property is transferred to a new owner; and property is deemed
“uninhabitable” if the property owner is unable to live in or on the property
for health or safety reasons.
The director may adopt rules and shall provide forms as may be necessary to
administer this subsection.
(b)   The use of a portion of any building or structure for the purpose of
drying coffee and the use of a portion of real property, including structures,
in connection with the planting and growing for commercial purposes, or the
packing and processing for such purposes, of flowers, plants, or foliage, will
not affect the exemptions provided for by this section.
(c)   Where two or more individuals jointly, by the entirety, or in common own
or lease land on which their homes are located, each home, if otherwise
qualified for the exemption granted by this section, will receive the
exemption. If a portion of land held jointly, by the entirety, or in common by
two or more individuals is not qualified to receive an exemption, such
disqualification will not affect the eligibility for an exemption or exemptions
of the remaining portion.
(d)   A taxpayer who is 65 years of age or over on or before June 30 preceding
the tax year for which the exemption is claimed and who qualifies for a home
exemption under subsection (a) is entitled to a home exemption of $160,000 from
the total assessed valuation of the real property.
For the purposes of this subsection, spouses who own property jointly, by the
entirety, or in common, on which a home exemption under subsection (a) has been
granted, are entitled to the $160,000 home exemption under this subsection when
at least one of the spouses qualifies for the exemption.
(e)*   (1)   In lieu of the home exemption amount provided in subsection (d), a
low-income taxpayer who:
(A)   Is 75 years of age or over on or before June 30 preceding the tax year
for which the exemption is claimed;
(B)   Qualifies for a home exemption under subsection (a);
(C)   Applies for the exemption as required in subdivision (2); and
(D)   Has household income that meets the definition of “low-income” in §
8-10.17(a),
is entitled to one of the following home exemption amounts for that tax year:
 
Age of Taxpayer                                         Home Exemption Amount
75 years of age or over but not 80 years of age or over $160,000
80 years of age or over but not 85 years of age or over $160,000
85 years of age or over but not 90 years of age or over $180,000
90 years of age or over                                 $200,000
 
(2)   The claim for exemption, allowed at the applicant’s attainment of 75, 80,
or 85 years, continues for a maximum period of five years, after which period
of time the home exemption amount reverts to the amount provided in subsection
(d), except the claim for exemption at 90 years of age extends for the life of
the applicant or until June 30, 2039. The director may not accept claims for
exemption under this subsection after September 30, 2013.
(3)   For the purposes of this subsection, spouses who own property jointly, by
the entirety, or in common, on which a home exemption under subsection (a) has
been granted and qualify under this subsection are entitled to the applicable
home exemption under this subsection when at least one of the spouses qualifies
each year for the minimum age of the applicable home exemption.
(f)   To qualify for the exemptions under subsections (d) and (e), a taxpayer
must provide, upon request, a photocopy of or submit for inspection, a current,
valid government-issued identification containing the taxpayer’s photo and date
of birth, such as a State driver’s license, a State identification card, or a
passport.
(Sec. 8-10.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.4) (Am.
Ords. 88-84, 89-132, 94-76, 96-15, 04-31, 05-004, 06-04, 06-07, 09-32, 13-32,
15-33, 15-51, 16-3, 19-7, 23-23)
Editor’s note:
   * Section 8-10.3(e) shall be repealed on June 30, 2039 pursuant to Ord. 13-
32, § 3.
§ 8-10.4 Home, lease, lessees defined.
(a)   For the purposes of §
8-10.3, the word “home” includes:
(1)   The entire homestead when it is occupied by the taxpayer as such;
(2)   A residential building on land held by the lessee or the lessee’s
successor in interest under a lease for a term of five years or more for
residential purposes and owned and used as a residence by the lessee or the
lessee’s successor in interest, where the lease and any extension, renewal,
assignment, or agreement to assign the lease, have been duly entered into and
recorded before October 1 preceding the tax year for which the exemption is
claimed, and whereby the lessee agrees to pay all taxes during the term of the
lease;
(3)   A condominium unit, with its appertaining common interest, that is
occupied as a residence by the owner of the unit. The “owner of a condominium
unit” means the individual:
(A)   Owning the fee simple interest in the unit and its appertaining common
interest; or
(B)   Holding the leasehold interest in the unit and its appertaining common
interest under a lease:
(i)   For a term of five years or more for residential purposes;
(ii)   Duly entered into and recorded before October 1 preceding the tax year
for which the exemption is claimed; and
(iii)   Requiring the holder of the leasehold interest to pay all real property
taxes during the term of the lease;
(4)   An apartment that is a living unit (held under a proprietary lease by the
tenant thereof) in a multiunit residential building on land held by a
cooperative apartment corporation (of which the proprietary lessee of such
living unit is a stockholder) under a lease for a term of five years or more
for residential purposes and which apartment is used as a residence by the
lessee-stockholder, where the lease and any extension or renewal have been duly
entered into and recorded before October 1 preceding the tax year for which the
exemption is claimed, and whereby the lessee-stockholder agrees to pay all
taxes during the term of the lease; provided that:
(A)   The exemption is not allowed in respect to any cooperative apartment unit
where the owner of the cooperative apartment unit claims exemption on a home or
other cooperative apartment unit; and
(B)   The owner or owners of a cooperative apartment building or premises may
not be permitted exemptions where spouses who own a cooperative apartment unit
own separate cooperative apartment units or separate homes owned by each spouse
unless the spouses are living separate and apart, in which case the owner of
the cooperative apartment or premises shall be entitled to one-half of one
exemption;
(5)   An apartment in a multiunit apartment building that is occupied by the
owner of the entire apartment building as the person’s residence; provided
that:
(A)   The exemption is not allowed in respect to any apartment owner who claims
any other home exemption; and
(B)   A spouse owner of the aforementioned type of apartment may not be allowed
a full exemption where the spouses are living separate and apart and each
spouse maintains an apartment or home entitled to an exemption, in which case
each spouse shall be entitled to one-half of one exemption;
(6)   That portion of a residential duplex and that portion of land appurtenant
to the duplex that are occupied by the owner of the duplex and land as the
owner’s residence; provided that:
(A)   The exemption is not allowed in respect to any duplex owner who claims
any other home exemption;
(B)   The portion of the appurtenant land is not exempt unless owned in fee by
the duplex owner; and
(C)   A spouse owner of the duplex may not be allowed a full exemption where
the spouses are living separate and apart and each spouse maintains a duplex or
home entitled to an exemption, in which case each spouse shall be entitled to
one-half of one exemption;
(7)   Premises held under an agreement to purchase the same for a home, where
the agreement has been duly entered into and recorded before October 1
preceding the tax year for which the exemption is claimed, whereby the
purchaser agrees to pay all taxes while purchasing the premises;
(8)   An apartment that is a living unit (held under a lease by the tenant
thereof) in a multiunit residential building used for retirement purposes under
a lease for a term to last during the lifetime of the lessee and the lessee’s
surviving spouse and which apartment is used as a residence by the lessee and
the lessee’s surviving spouse, and where the apartment unit reverts back to the
lessor upon the death of the lessee and the lessee’s surviving spouse, and
where the lease has been duly entered into and recorded before October 1
preceding the tax year for which the exemption is claimed, and whereby the
lessee agrees to pay all taxes during the term of the lease; and
(9)   That portion of a property that is occupied as the property owner’s
principal home.
(b)   The subletting by the taxpayer of not more than two rooms to a tenant
will not affect the exemption provided for by §
8-10.3.
(c)   As used in §
8-10.3, in the first paragraph of §
8-6.3, and in §
8-10.1, the word “lease” includes a sublease, and the word “lessee” includes a
sublessee.
(Sec. 8-10.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.5) (Am.
Ords. 92-63, 96-15, 09-32, 19-18, 23-23)
§ 8-10.5 Exemption—Homes of totally disabled veterans.
(a)   Real property:
(1)   Owned and occupied as a home by any person who is totally disabled due to
injuries received while on duty with the armed forces of the United States;
(2)   Owned by any such person together with such person’s spouse and occupied
by either or both spouses as a home; or
(3)   Owned and occupied by a widow or widower of such totally disabled veteran
who shall remain unmarried and who shall continue to own and occupy the
premises as a home;
is exempt from all property taxes, other than special assessments, subject to
subsection (b).
(b)   The exemption provided for in subsection (a) is subject to the following:
(1)   The total disability of the veteran was incurred while on duty as a
member of the armed forces of the United States;
(2)   The home exemption is granted only as long as the veteran claiming
exemption remains totally disabled, and the director may require proof of total
disability;
(3)   The exemption may not be allowed on more than one house for any one
person;
(4)   A person living on premises, a portion of which is used for commercial
purposes, is not entitled to an exemption with respect to such portion, but is
entitled to an exemption with respect to the portion used exclusively as a
home; provided that the exemption does not apply to any structure, including
the land thereunder, which is used for commercial purposes; and
(5)   A widow or widower of a disabled veteran may apply for an exemption and
the exemption may be granted even if the disabled veteran did not apply for and
obtain the exemption provided for in subsection (a) during the veteran’s
lifetime, provided that the widow or widower submits proof satisfactory to the
director that, at the time of the veteran’s death, the veteran would have
qualified for the exemption.
(c)   The exemption will take effect beginning with the next tax payment date,
provided that the claimant has filed with the department a claim for a
disability exemption along with a copy of a certificate of disability issued by
a licensed physician on such form as the department prescribes.
(d)   Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, real property will continue to
be entitled to the exemption provided for in subsection (a) in the event the
owner of the real property moves from the home on which the exemption is
granted, to a long-term care facility or an adult residential care home
licensed to operate in the State of Hawaii, provided that:
(1)   The owner designates the adult residential care home or long-term care
facility on a form as prescribed by the department; and
(2)   Neither the home the owner moves from, nor any portion thereof, is
rented, leased, or sold during the time the owner is in the long-term care
facility or the adult residential care home.
(e)   For the purposes of this section, the word "home" includes:
(1)   The entire homestead, when it is occupied as a residence by a qualified
totally disabled veteran or the veteran's qualifying widow or widower;
(2)   Except for houses that are part of real property qualifying for the
exemption pursuant to subsection (d), houses where the occupant disabled
veteran owner or the qualifying widow or widower owner lets or sublets not more
than one room to a tenant; and
(3)   Premises held under an agreement by which the disabled veteran agrees to
purchase the same for a residence, where the agreement has been duly entered
into and recorded prior to October 1st preceding the tax year for which the
exemption is claimed, whereby the purchaser agrees to pay all taxes while
purchasing the premises.
(Sec. 8-10.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.6) (Am.
Ords. 96-15, 00-63; 20-37)
§ 8-10.6 Exemption—Persons affected with leprosy.
   Any person who has been declared by authority of law to be a person affected
with leprosy in the communicable stage and is admitted to a hospital for
isolation treatment shall, so long as such person is so hospitalized, and
thereafter for so long as such person has been so declared to be therefrom
temporarily released, and so long as such person remains or continues under
temporary release, be exempted from real property taxes on all real property
owned by such person on the date when such person was declared to be a person
so affected with leprosy, up to, but not exceeding, a taxable value of $25,000.
(Sec. 8-10.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.7)
§ 8-10.7 Exemption—Persons with impaired sight or hearing and persons totally
disabled.
(a)   Any person who is blind or deaf, so long as the person’s sight or hearing
is so impaired, shall be exempt from real property taxes on all real property
owned by the person up to, but not exceeding a taxable value of $25,000. The
impairment of sight or hearing shall be certified to by a qualified
ophthalmologist, optometrist, or otolaryngologist, as the case may be, on forms
prescribed by the department of budget and fiscal services.
(b)   Any person who is totally disabled, as long as the person is totally
disabled, shall be exempt from real property taxes on all real property owned
by the person up to, but not exceeding a taxable value of $25,000. The
disability shall be certified to by a physician licensed under HRS Chapter 453
on forms prescribed by the department of budget and fiscal services.
(c)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Blind. A person whose visual acuity does not exceed 20/200 in the better eye
with correcting lenses, or whose visual acuity is greater than 20/200 but is
accompanied by a limitation in the field of vision such that the widest
diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees.
Deaf. A person whose average loss in speech frequencies (500-2000 Hertz) in the
better ear is 82 decibels, A.S.A., or worse.
Totally Disabled. A person who is totally and permanently disabled, either
physically or mentally, which results in the person’s inability to engage in
any substantial gainful business or occupation.
(Sec. 8-10.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.8) (Am.
Ord. 89-138)
§ 8-10.8 Exemption—Nonprofit medical, hospital indemnity association.
   Every association or society organized and operating under HRS Chapter 432,
solely as a nonprofit medical indemnity or hospital service association or
society or both shall be from the time of such organization, exempt from real
property taxes on all real property owned by it.
(Sec. 8-10.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.9)
§ 8-10.9 Exemption—Charitable purposes.
(a)   There shall be exempt from real property taxes real property, or a
portion thereof, designated in subsection (b) or (c) and meeting the
requirements stated therein, actually and (except as otherwise specifically
provided) exclusively used for nonprofit purposes. If an exemption is claimed
under either subsection (b) or (c), an exemption for the same property, or a
portion thereof, may not also be claimed under the other of these subsections.
(b)   This subsection applies to property, or a portion thereof, owned in fee
simple, leased, or rented for a period of one year or more, by the person using
the property for the exempt purposes, hereinafter referred to as the person
claiming the exemption. If the property, or a portion thereof, for which
exemption is claimed is leased or rented, the lease or rental agreement shall
be in force and recorded in the bureau of conveyances or filed in the office of
the assistant registrar of the land court.
Exemption is allowed by this subsection to the following property:
(1)   Property used for school purposes including:
(A)   Kindergartens, grade schools, junior high schools, and high schools,
which carry on a program of instruction meeting the requirements of the
compulsory school attendance law, HRS § 302A-1132, or which are for preschool
children who have attained or will attain the age of five years on or before
December 31 of the school year; provided that any claim for exemption based on
any of the foregoing uses shall be accompanied by a certificate issued by or
under the authority of the State department of education stating that the
foregoing requirements are met;
(B)   Junior colleges or colleges carrying on a general program of instruction
of college level. The property exempt from taxation under this paragraph is
limited to buildings for educational purposes (including dormitories), housing
owned by the school or college and used as residence for personnel employed at
the school or college, campus and athletic grounds, and realty used for
vocational purposes incident to the school or college; and
(C)   Group child care centers, which meet the child care facilities
requirements of HRS Chapter 346, Part VIII; provided that any claim for
exemption based on the foregoing use shall be accompanied by a certificate
issued by or under the authority of the State department of human services
stating that the foregoing requirements are met. As used herein, “group child
care centers” means a facility other than a residence, maintained by an
individual, organization, or agency for the purpose of providing child care for
preschool age children ages two years to six years and infants and toddlers
ages six weeks to 36 months;
(2)   Property used for hospital and nursing home purposes, including housing
for personnel employed at the hospital; to qualify under this subsection the
person claiming the exemption shall present with the claim a certificate issued
by or under the authority of the State department of health that the property
for which the exemption is claimed consists in, or is a part of, hospital or
nursing home facilities that are properly constituted under the law and
maintained to serve, and which do serve the public;
(3)   Property used for church purposes, including incidental activities,
parsonages, and church grounds, the property exempt from taxation being limited
to realty exclusive of burying grounds (exemption for which may be claimed
under subdivision (4));
(4)   Property used as cemeteries (excluding, however, property used for
cremation purposes) maintained by a religious society, or by a corporation,
association, or trust organized for such purpose;
(5)   Property dedicated to public use by the owner, which dedication has been
accepted by the State or county, reduced to writing, and recorded in the bureau
of conveyances; and property that has been set aside for public use and
actually used therefor for a period not less than five years; and
(6)   Property owned by any nonprofit corporation, admission to membership of
which is restricted by the corporate charter to members of a labor union;
property owned by any government employees’ association or organization, one of
the primary purposes of which is to improve employment conditions of its
members; property owned by any trust, the beneficiaries of which are restricted
to members of a labor union; property owned by any association or league of
federal credit unions chartered by the United States, the sole purpose of which
is to promote the development of federal credit unions in the State.
Notwithstanding any provision in this section to the contrary, the exemption
shall apply to property or any portion thereof which is leased, rented, or
otherwise let to another, if such leasing, renting or letting is to a nonprofit
association, organization, or corporation.
(c)   This subsection applies to property owned in fee simple or leased or
rented for a period of one year or more, the lease or rental agreement being in
force and recorded in the bureau of conveyances when the exemption is claimed,
by either:
(1)   A corporation, society, association, or trust having a charter or other
enabling act or governing instrument that contains a provision or has been
construed by a court of competent jurisdiction as providing that in the event
of dissolution or termination of the corporation, society, association, or
trust, or other cessation of use of the property for the exempt purpose, the
real property must be applied for another charitable purpose or must be
dedicated to the public; or
(2)   A corporation chartered by the United States under Title 36, United
States Code, as a patriotic society.
Exemption is allowed by this subsection for property used for charitable
purposes which are of a community, character building, social service, or
educational nature, including museums, libraries, art academies, and senior
citizen housing facilities qualifying for a loan under the laws of the United
States as authorized by § 202 of the Housing Act of 1959, being 12 USC §§ 1701q
et seq., as amended by the Housing Act of 1961, being 12 USC §§ 1701 et seq.,
the Senior Citizens Housing Act of 1962, being 12 USC § 1701r, and the Housing
and Urban Development Act of 1965 (P.L. 89-117, 79 Stat. 451).
(d)   If any portion of the property that might otherwise be exempted under
this section is used for commercial or other purposes not within the conditions
necessary for exemption (including any use the primary purpose of which is to
produce income even though such income is to be used for or in furtherance of
the exempt purposes) that portion of the premises shall not be exempt but the
remaining portion of the premises shall not be deprived of the exemption if the
remaining portion is used exclusively for purposes within the conditions
necessary for exemption. In the event of an exemption of a portion of a
building, the tax shall be assessed upon so much of the value of the building
(including the land thereunder and the appurtenant premises) as the proportion
of the floor space of the nonexempt portion bears to the total floor space of
the building.
(e)   As used in this section, the term “for nonprofit purposes” requires that
no monetary gain or economic benefit inure to the person claiming the
exemption, or any private shareholder, member, or trust beneficiary. “Monetary
gain” includes without limitation any gain in the form of money or money’s
worth. “Economic benefit” includes without limitation any benefit to a person
in the course of that person’s business, trade, occupation, or employment.
(Sec. 8-10.10, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.10)
(Am. Ords. 88-1, 01-52, 09-24)
§ 8-10.10 Exemption—Crop shelters.
   Any other law to the contrary notwithstanding, any permanent structure
constructed or installed on any taxable real property consisting of frames or
supports and covered by rigid plastic, fiberglass or other rigid and semirigid
transparent or translucent material, and including wooden laths, used primarily
for the protection of crops shall be exempted in determining and assessing the
value of such taxable real property for 10 years or for a period of 10 years
from October 1 following commencement of construction or installation of the
structure on the property for such purpose; provided that any temporary
structure so constructed or installed and covered by flexible plastic or other
flexible transparent or translucent material, used for such purpose, shall be
so exempted not subject to the 10-year limitation; provided further, that such
exemption shall continue only so long as the structure is maintained in good
condition. Only structures used for commercial agricultural or horticultural
purposes shall be included in the exemption.
(Sec. 8-10.12, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.12)
(Am. Ord. 96-15)
§ 8-10.11 Exemption—Dedicated lands in urban districts.
(a)   Portions of taxable real property that are dedicated and approved by the
director as provided for by this section shall be exempted in determining and
assessing the value of such taxable real property.
(b)   Any owner of taxable real property in an urban district desiring to
dedicate a portion or portions thereof for landscaping, open spaces, public
recreation, and other similar uses shall petition the director stating the
exact area of the land to be dedicated and that the land is not within the
setback and open space requirements of applicable zoning and building code laws
and ordinances, and that the land shall be used, improved and maintained in
accordance with and for the sole purpose for which it was dedicated, except
that land within a historic district may be so dedicated without regard to the
setback and open space requirements of applicable zoning and building code laws
and ordinances.
The director shall make a finding as to whether the use to which such land will
be dedicated has a benefit to the public at least equal to the value of the
real property taxes for such land. Such finding shall be measured by the cost
of improvements, the continuing maintenance thereof, and such other factors as
the director may deem pertinent. If the director finds that the public benefit
is at least equal to the value of real property taxes for such land, the
director shall approve the petition and declare such land to be dedicated land.
(c)   The approval of the petition by the director shall constitute a
forfeiture on the part of the owner of any right to change the use of the
owner’s land for a minimum period of 10 years, automatically renewable
indefinitely, subject to cancellation by either the owner or the director upon
five years’ notice at any time after the end of the fifth year.
(d)   Failure of the owner to observe the restrictions on the use, improvement,
and maintenance of the owner’s land shall cancel the special tax exemption
privilege retroactive to the date of the original dedication, and all
differences in the amount of taxes that were paid and those that would have
been due from the assessment of the tax exempted portion of the owner’s land
shall be payable together with interest of 5 percent a year from the respective
dates that these payments would have been due. Failure to observe the
restrictions on the use means failure for a period of over 12 consecutive
months to use, improve, and maintain the land in the manner requested in the
petition or any overt act changing the use for any period. Nothing in this
subsection shall preclude the county from pursuing any other remedy to enforce
the covenant on the use of the land.
(e)   The director shall prescribe the form of the petition. The petition shall
be filed with the director by September 1 of any calendar year and shall be
approved or disapproved by October 31 of such year. If approved, the exemption
based upon the use requested in the dedication shall be effective July 1 of the
following tax year.
(f)   The owner may appeal any disapproved petition as in the case of an appeal
from an assessment.
(g)   The director shall make and adopt necessary rules including such rules
governing minimum areas that may be dedicated for the improvement and
maintenance of such areas.
(h)   As used in this section, “landscaping” means lands that are improved by
landscape architecture, cultivated plantings, or gardening.
(i)   As used in this section, “open spaces” means lands that are open to the
public for pedestrian use and momentary repose, relaxation, and contemplation.
(j)   As used in this section, “public recreation” refers to lands that may be
used by the public as parks, playgrounds, historical sites, campgrounds,
wildlife refuges, scenic sites, and other similar uses.
(k)   As used in this section, “owner” includes lessees of real property whose
lease term extends at least 10 years from January 1 following the filing of the
petition.
(Sec. 8-10.13, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10,
§ 8-10.13) (Am. Ord. 95-15)
§ 8-10.12 Exemption—Renewable energy.
(a)   The value of all improvements affixed to land (not including a building
or its structural components, except where renewable energy improvements are
incorporated into the building, and then only that part of the building
necessary to such improvement) and actually used for a renewable energy
improvement is exempt from real property taxes, as provided in this section, if
a timely claim for exemption is approved by the director.
(b)   The portions of land actually used for the active production or storage
of renewable energy shall be exempt from 80 percent of its value from the
measure of the taxes imposed by this chapter; provided that:
(1)   A state-approved special use permit or county-approved conditional use
permit allowing for such production is required if the production of renewable
energy is inconsistent with or not permitted by the underlying zoning; and
(2)   The production or storage of renewable energy must be primarily for use,
distribution, or sale to public utilities or for public consumption under a
power purchase agreement or power purchase contract with the utility.
As used in this subsection, "portions of land actually used" means the land
area in physical contact with renewable energy structures.
(c)   The exemption provided in this section does not apply to any portion of
land or improvements used primarily for the production or storage of renewable
energy for personal use, or used to sustain private enterprises or operations.
(d)   As used in this section, “renewable energy improvement” means any
construction or addition, alteration, modification, improvement, or repair work
undertaken upon or made to any building, property, or land that results in:
(1)   The production or storage of energy from a source, or uses a process that
does not use fossil fuels, or nuclear fuels. Such energy source may include,
but is not limited to, solid wastes, wind, sun, falling water, biogas,
geothermal, ocean water, currents and waves, biomass biofuels, hydrogen, or any
combination of the foregoing; or
(2)   An increased level of efficiency in the use of energy produced by fossil
fuels or in the use of secondary forms of energy dependent upon fossil fuels
for its generation.
(e)   Application for the exemption provided by this section must be filed by
the taxpayer with the director on or before September 30 preceding the tax year
for which the exemption is claimed. No improvement exemption may be claimed for
devices that convert solar radiation to electricity or heat because these
devices are excluded from the definition of “property” or “real property” and
are not assessed. The director may require the taxpayer to furnish reasonable
information in order that the director may ascertain the validity of the claim
for exemption.
(f)   The claim for exemption, once allowed, shall continue for the period of
the power purchase agreements or contract with the utility.
(g)   The director may require that the claimant provide documentation to
support an initial claim for exemption or the continuing qualification for the
exemption. Failure to provide the director with such documentation is grounds
for denying a claim for an exemption or disallowing an existing exemption. The
director may require that the claimant provide documentation evidencing active
production of renewable energy, such as a current, valid copy of a state-
approved special use permit or county-approved conditional use permit,
approvals or orders from the state public utilities commission, or if the
claimant is not the fee owner, a copy of the lease or agreement describing the
allowable uses and period of use of the real property. Failure to provide the
director with such documentation within 30 days of the director's request is
grounds for disallowance or denial of a claim for the exemption.
(h)   The director may cancel the exemption if the renewable energy improvement
ceases operations that generate or store renewable energy, and when the
production or storage of renewable energy on the land ceases or terminates.
Scheduled equipment maintenance and forced shut downs due to unforeseen
circumstances beyond the control of the claimant will be considered.
(i)   The claimant may cancel the exemption by filing a written notice of
cancellation with the director.
(j)   The land portions granted in this exemption may not be subject to other
real property tax exemption in this article or dedication program in Article 7.
(k)   The director may adopt rules in accordance with HRS Chapter 91 to
implement this section.
(Sec. 8-10.15, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.15)
(Am. Ords. 96-15, 09-31, 15-23; 21-32)
Editor’s note:
   Pursuant to Ordinance 21-32, properties for which an exemption under § 8-
10.12, as it read prior to December 14, 2021 (as ROH 1990 § 8-10.15), had been
granted by the Director of Budget and Fiscal Services will continue to be
allowed the exemption until the exemption expires under § 8-10.12(d), as it
read prior to December 14, 2021 (as ROH 1990 § 8-10.15(d)).
§ 8-10.13 Exemption—Fixtures used in manufacturing or producing tangible
personal products.
   There shall be exempted and excluded from the measure of the taxes imposed
by this chapter, all fixtures that are categorized as machinery and other
mechanical or other allied equipment which are primarily and substantially used
in manufacturing or producing tangible personal products.
(Sec. 8-10.16, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.16)
§ 8-10.14 Exemption—Public property.
   The following real property shall be exempt from taxation:
(a)   Real property belonging to the United States, to the State or to the
county; provided that real property belonging to the United States shall be
taxed upon the use or occupancy thereof as provided in §
8-10.15, and there shall be a tax upon the property itself if and when the
Congress of the United States so permits, to the extent so permitted and in
accordance with any conditions or provisions prescribed in such act of
Congress; provided further, that real property belonging to the State or the
county, or belonging to the United States and in the possession, use, and
control of the State, shall be taxed on the fee simple value thereof, and
private persons shall pay the taxes thereon and shall be deemed the “owners”
thereof for the purposes of this chapter, in the following cases:
(1)   Property held on October 1 preceding the tax year under an agreement for
its conveyance by the government to private persons shall be deemed fully
taxable, the same as if the conveyance had been made;
(2)   Property held on October 1 preceding the tax year under a government
lease shall be entered in the assessment lists and such tax rolls for that year
as fully taxable for the entire tax year, but adjustments of the taxes so
assessed may be made as provided for by this chapter so that such tenants are
required to pay only so much of the taxes as is proportionate to the portion of
the tax year during which the real property is held or controlled by them;
(3)   Property held under a government lease commencing after October 1
preceding the tax year or under an agreement for its conveyance or a conveyance
by the government, made after October 1 preceding the tax year, shall be
assessed as omitted property as provided for by this chapter, but the taxes
thereon shall be prorated so as to require the payment of only so much of the
taxes as is proportionate to the remainder of the tax year;
(4)   Property where the occupancy by the tenant for commercial purposes has
continued for a period of one year or more, whether the occupancy has been on a
permit, license, month-to-month tenancy, or otherwise, shall be fully taxable
to the tenant after the first year of occupancy, and the property shall be
assessed in the manner provided in subdivisions (2) and (3) for the assessment
of properties held under a government lease; provided that the property
occupied by the tenant solely for residential purposes on a month-to-month
tenancy shall be excluded from this subdivision; and
(5)   (A)   In any case of occupancy of a building or structure by two or more
tenants, or by the government and a tenant, under a lease for a term of one
year or more, the tax shall be assessed to the tenant upon so much of the value
of the entire real property as the floor space occupied by the tenant
proportionately bears to the total floor space of the structure or building;
(B)   For the purposes of subdivisions (2) and (3): “lease” means any lease for
a term of one year or more or which is renewable for such period as to
constitute a total term of one year or more. A lease having a stated term
shall, if it otherwise comes within the meaning of the term “lease,” be deemed
a lease notwithstanding any right of revocation, cancellation, or termination
reserved therein or provided for thereby. Whenever a lease is such that the
highest and best use cannot be made of the property by the lessee, the measure
of the tax imposed on such property pursuant to subdivisions (2) and (3) shall
be its fee simple value upon consideration of the highest and best use that can
be made of the property by the lessee;
(C)   Provided further, that real property belonging to the United States, even
though not in the possession, use, and control of the State, shall be taxed on
the fee simple value thereof, and private persons shall pay the taxes thereon
and shall be deemed the “owners” thereof for the purposes of this chapter, in
the following cases:
(i)   Property held on October 1 preceding the tax year under an agreement for
the conveyance of the same by the government to private persons shall be deemed
fully taxable, the same as if the conveyance had been made, but the assessment
thereof shall not impair and shall be so made as to not impair, any right,
title, lien, or interest of the United States; and
(ii)   Property held under an agreement for the conveyance of the same or a
conveyance of the same by the government, made after October 1 preceding the
tax year, shall be assessed as omitted property as provided for by this
chapter, but the taxes thereon shall be prorated so as to require the payment
of only so much of such taxes as is proportionate to the remainder of the tax
year, and in the case of property held under an agreement for the conveyance of
the same but not yet conveyed, the assessment thereof shall not impair, and
shall be so made as to not impair, any right, title, lien, or interest of the
United States;
(b)   Subject to HRS § 101-39(B), any real property in the possession of the
State or county that is the subject of eminent domain proceedings commenced for
the acquisition of the fee simple estate in such land by the State or county;
provided that the fact of such possession has been certified to the director as
provided by HRS § 101-36 or 101-38, or is certified not later than September 30
preceding the tax year for which such exemption is claimed;
(c)   Real property with respect to which the owner has granted to the State or
county a right of entry and upon which the State or county has entered and
taken possession under the authority of the right of entry with intention to
acquire the fee simple estate therein and to devote the real property to public
use; provided that the State or county shall have, before September 30
preceding the tax year for which the exemption is claimed, certified to the
director the date upon which it took possession;
(d)   Any portion of real property within the area upon which construction of
buildings is restricted or prohibited and that is actually rendered useless and
of no value to the owners thereof by virtue of any ordinance establishing
setback lines thereon; provided that to secure the exemption the person
claiming it shall annually file between September 15 and September 30 preceding
the applicable tax year a sworn written statement with the director describing
the real property in detail and setting forth the facts upon which exemption is
claimed, together with a written agreement that in consideration of the
exemption from taxes the owner will not make use of the land in any way during
the ensuing year. Any person who has secured such exemption who violates the
terms of the agreement shall be fined twice the amount of the tax that would be
assessed upon the land but for such exemption;
(e)   Real property exempted by any laws of the United States which exemption
is not subject to repeal by the council; and
(f)   Any other real property exempt by law.
(Sec. 8-10.17, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.17)
(Am. Ords. 95-67, 96-15)
§ 8-10.15 Lessees of exempt real property.
(a)   When any real property which for any reason is exempt from taxation is
leased to and used or occupied by a private person in connection with any
business conducted for profit, such use or occupancy shall be assessed and
taxed in the same amount and to the same extent as though the lessee were the
owner of the property and as provided in subsection (b); provided that:
(1)   The foregoing shall not apply to the following:
(A)   Federal property for which payments are made in lieu of taxes in amounts
equivalent to taxes which might otherwise be lawfully assessed;
(B)   Any property or portion thereof taxed under any other provision of this
chapter to the extent and for the period so taxed; and
(C)   Federal property for which payment of certain contributions are made
under §
6-58.3, and which is leased to a private person, who under such lease is
contractually obligated to develop, rehabilitate, maintain, and operate a
military housing project under the authority of the National Defense
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1996, P.L. 104-106, Title XXVIII, Subtitle A
- Military Housing Privatization Initiative (codified at 10 USC §§ 2871 through
2885), as amended, including all improvements thereon; provided that such
federal property does not use the county’s refuse and road maintenance
services, and routine police, fire, and ambulance services, where “routine
police, fire, and ambulance services” do not include services provided by the
county on such federal property:
(i)   Pursuant to agreements between the federal government and the county or
the State, including without limitation, mutual aid agreements; or
(ii)   In accordance with policies or procedures developed by the county to
coordinate the provision of such services as between the federal government and
the county;
(2)   The term “lease” means any lease for a term of one year or more, or which
is renewable for such period as to constitute a total term of one year or more.
A lease having a stated term shall, if it otherwise comes within the meaning of
the term “lease,” be deemed a lease notwithstanding any right of revocation,
cancellation, or termination reserved therein or provided for thereby; and
(3)   The assessment of the use or occupancy shall be made in accordance with
the highest and best use permitted under the terms and conditions of the lease.
(b)   The tax shall be assessed to and collected from such lessee as nearly as
possible in the same manner and time as the tax assessed to owners of real
property, except that the tax shall not become a lien against the property. If
the use or occupancy is in effect on October 1 preceding the tax year, the
lessee shall be assessed for the entire year but adjustments of the tax so
assessed shall be made in the event of the termination of the use or occupancy
during the year so that the lessee is required to pay only so much of the tax
as is proportionate to the portion of the tax year during which the use or
occupancy is in effect, and the director is authorized to remit the tax due for
the balance of the tax year. If the use or occupancy commences after October 1
preceding the tax year, the lessee shall be assessed for only so much of the
tax as is proportionate to the period that the use or occupancy bears to the
tax year.
(c)   The assessment of the use or occupancy of real property made under this
section shall not be included in the aggregate value of taxable realty for the
purposes of §
8-11.1 but the council, when it is furnished with information as to the value
of taxable real property, shall also be furnished with information as to the
assessments made under this section, similarly determined but separately
stated.
(d)   If a use or occupancy is in effect on October 1 preceding the tax year,
the assessment shall be made and listed for that year and the notice of
assessment shall be given to the taxpayer in the manner and when prescribed as
provided for by this chapter, and when so given, the taxpayer, if the taxpayer
deems oneself aggrieved, may appeal as provided for by this chapter, if a use
or occupancy commences after October 1 preceding the tax year or if for any
reason an assessment is omitted for any tax year, the assessment shall be made
and listed and notice thereof shall be given, and an appeal may be taken
therefrom in the manner and when prescribed in §
8-3.4.
(Sec. 8-10.18, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10,
§ 8-10.18) (Am. Ords. 96-15, 04-38)
§ 8-10.16 Property of the United States leased under the National Housing Act.
   Real property belonging to the United States leased pursuant to Title VIII
of the National Housing Act, as amended or supplemented from time to time:
(a)   Shall not be taxed under this chapter upon the lessee’s interest or any
other interest therein, except as provided in subsection (b); and
(b)   Shall be taxed under this chapter to the extent of and measured by the
value of the lessee’s interest in any portion of the real property (including
land and appurtenances thereof and the buildings and other improvements erected
on or affixed on the same) used for, or in connection with, or consisting in,
shops, restaurants, cleaning establishments, taxi stands, insurance offices, or
other business or commercial facilities. The tax shall be assessed to and
collected from the lessee. The assessment of such property shall not impair,
and shall be so made as to not impair, any right, title, lien, or interest of
the United States.
(Sec. 8-10.19, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.19)
§ 8-10.17 Exemption—Low-income rental housing.
(a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Dwelling Unit. A room or rooms connected together, constituting an independent
living unit and containing a single kitchen and at least one bathroom. A
dwelling unit shall not include a unit used for time sharing or as a transient
vacation unit.
Housing Project. A rental housing project where at least 20 percent of the
dwelling units are reserved for low-income residents. The housing project must
be situated on:
(1)   A single parcel of land;
(2)   Multiple parcels of land that are contiguous; or
(3)   Noncontiguous multiple parcels of land which are separated from each
other only by a road or roads.
If the housing project is comprised of multiple parcels of land, or is
comprised of individual dwelling units, each situated upon a subdivided parcel
of land, the regulatory agreement must specifically identify each such parcel
of land or dwelling units as comprising the housing project.
Kitchen. A facility in a dwelling unit that exists when there are fixtures,
appliances, or devices for all of the following:
(1)   Heating or cooking of food;
(2)   Washing of utensils used for dining and food preparation or for washing
and preparing food, or both; and
(3)   Refrigeration of food.
Low-Income. The annual income of a household that does not exceed 80 percent of
the area median income for the county as determined by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Nonprofit or Limited Distribution Mortgagor. A mortgagor who qualifies for and
obtains mortgage insurance under § 202, 221(d)(3), or 236 of the National
Housing Act, 12 USC Chapter 13, as amended, as a nonprofit or limited
distribution mortgagor.
Owner. Shall include a lessee of the property whose lease term extends at least
as long as the regulated period.
Regulatory Agreement. An agreement between an owner and the federal government,
State government, or a political subdivision of the State government, or agency
of the federal government, agency of the State government or agency of the
political subdivision of the State government, embodying provisions regulating
rents, charges, profits, dividends, development costs, and methods of
operation, in accordance with the laws, policies, or rules of the federal
government, State government, or of the political subdivision of the State
government, or agency of the federal government, agency of the State
government, or agency of the political subdivision of the State government.
Regulated Period. The period during which a housing project is subject to a
regulatory agreement, which shall not be less than 15 years.
(b)   Real property that is owned and operated by: a nonprofit, limited
distribution mortgagor; or a person, corporation, trust, partnership, or
association which is used for a housing project that is subject to a regulatory
agreement shall be exempt from property taxes for the duration of the regulated
period. This exemption shall be incorporated into any and all agreements,
including regulatory and loan agreements as applicable.
(1)   If the qualifying housing project is comprised of multiple parcels of
land, each parcel comprising the housing project shall be exempt from property
taxes.
(2)   If the housing project fails to meet the requirements under this section
at any time during the regulated period, the exemption shall be canceled and
the housing project shall be subject to taxes and penalties as determined in §
8-10.18(c).
(3)   If any portion of the housing project that qualifies for an exemption
under this section is transferred during the regulated period, the exemption
shall be canceled and the entire housing project, including the portion
retained, if any, and the portion transferred, shall be subject to the taxes
and penalties pursuant to §
8-10.18(c)(3). The taxes and penalties shall not apply to any portion of the
housing project for which a new claim is filed for an exemption for low-income
rental housing as described in this section within 30 days of the recordation
or filing of the sale or transfer with the registrar of the bureau of
conveyances or the assistant registrar of the land court, whichever applies and
the exemption is granted by the director.
(4)   If the entire housing project is sold or otherwise transferred during the
regulated period, a new claim for exemption must be filed within 30 days of the
recordation of filing of such sale or transfer with the registrar of the bureau
of conveyances or the assistant registrar of the land court, whichever applies.
Failure to file a new claim for exemption or meet the qualifications under this
section shall result in cancellation of the exemption and taxes and penalties
imposed pursuant to §
8-10.18(c).
(c)   The exemption provided in this section shall not apply to any portion of
the property that is used for commercial or other purposes, and not for the
primary use of the tenants of the housing project.
(d)   Where a housing project is situated upon a single parcel of land, if any
portion of the property is ineligible for the property tax exemption under this
section:
(1)   The remaining eligible portion shall not be deprived of the exemption;
(2)   The ineligibility of a portion of the property for exemption under this
section shall not disqualify that portion from exemption under any other law;
and
(3)   The tax shall be assessed upon so much of the value of the building and
land thereunder as the proportion of the nonexempt floor area bears to the
total floor area of the building.
(e)   Exemptions claimed under this section shall disqualify the same property
from receiving an exemption under HRS § 53-38.
(Sec. 8-10.20, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.20)
(Am. Ords. 90-31, 02-68)
§ 8-10.18 Claim for exemption.
(a)   Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, any real
property determined by the director to be exempt from property taxes under §
8-10.17 shall be exempt from property taxes effective as of the date the
application is filed with the director; provided that the initial application
for exemption shall be filed with the director within 60 days of the
qualification or in the failure thereof by September 30 preceding the tax year
for which the exemption is claimed. A copy of the regulatory agreement that has
been recorded with the registrar of the bureau of conveyances or filed with the
assistant registrar of the land court, whichever applies, shall be filed with
the application along with any additional documents determined by the director
to be necessary to supplement the application. As used herein, the date of the
qualification shall be the earlier of:
(1)   The date when the mortgage made by the nonprofit or limited distribution
mortgagor and insured under § 202, 221(d)(3), or 236 of the National Housing
Act, 12 USC Chapter 13, as amended, is recorded; or
(2)   The date the regulatory agreement is recorded with the registrar of the
bureau of conveyances or the assistant registrar of the land court of the
State, whichever applies.
For a housing project that qualified for an exemption from real property
taxation under §
8-10.17 before December 20, 2002,* the first application filed after December
20, 2002* shall be deemed the initial filing under this subsection.
After the initial year for which the real property has qualified for an
exemption, a claim for an exemption shall be filed annually on or before
September 30, together with a document from the agency regulating the housing
project certifying that the housing project continues to be in compliance with
the initial regulatory agreements and is in compliance with the applicable low-
income rental requirements in the manner provided by applicable law or rule.
(b)   In the event property taxes have been paid to the county in advance for
real property that subsequently qualifies for the exemption, the director shall
refund to the owner that portion of the taxes attributable to and paid for the
period after the qualification.
(c)   Continued exemption. A claim for a continued exemption may be filed after
September 30 but on or before November 15. Such a late filed claim is subject
to a nonwaivable late filing penalty of $500, which must be paid at the time of
such filing.
(1)   Notice by director.
Following the initial year for which real property has qualified for an
exemption, if an owner fails to file a claim for continued exemption by the
September 30 deadline, the director shall promptly mail a notice to the owner
at the owner’s address of record stating that unless a claim for continued
exemption, all the necessary documents, and the late filing penalty of $500 are
received by the director by November 15 of the same year, the exemption shall
be canceled.
(2)   Cancellation of continued exemption.
An owner who has been sent a notice under subdivision (1) by the director and
who fails to file for a continued exemption by the November 15 deadline or
fails to submit the late filing penalty of $500, shall have the exemption
canceled and the housing project shall be subject to taxes and penalties
pursuant to subdivision (3).
In the event the director finds that the initial or subsequent claim for
exemption contains false or fraudulent information, the housing project fails
to meet the requirements of §
8-10.17 during the regulated period, or the owner fails to file annually during
the regulated period as required under this section, the director shall cancel
the exemption retroactive to the date the exemption was first granted pursuant
to an initial filing under subsection (a), and the housing project shall be
subject to the taxes and penalties determined in subdivision (3).
(3)   Back taxes and penalties.
In the event a housing project is subject to taxes and penalties as provided in
subdivision (2), the differences in the amount of taxes that were paid and
those that would have been due but for the exemption allowed shall be payable,
together with interest at 10 percent a year, from the respective dates that
these payments would have been due. The taxes and penalties due shall be a
paramount lien upon the real property.
(Sec. 8-10.21, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.21)
(Am. Ords. 02-68, 16-37)
Editor’s note:
   * “December 20, 2002” is substituted for “the effective date of this
ordinance.”
§ 8-10.19 Exemption—Historic residential real property dedicated for
preservation.
(a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Alternative Visual Visitations. The alternative visual access provided to the
public from a viewing point on the property.
Average Condition of Property. A finding by the director that all major
components of a property are still functional and contributing toward an
extended life expectancy and effective age and utility are standard for like
properties of its class and usage; this finding will allow for some deferred
maintenance and normal obsolescence with age, in that a few minor repairs and
some refurbishing is needed.
Day. The seven consecutive hours running from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Historic Property. Property that has been placed on the Hawaii Register of
Historic Places.
Public Way. Includes any area open to the general public, such as a road,
alley, street, way, right-of-way, lane, trail, bikeway, highway, bridge,
sidewalk, park, or beach and any private property usually open to the public,
such as a parking lot.
Residential Property. Property improved with a single-unit, two-unit, or
duplex-unit dwelling. This definition includes associated structures, such as
carriage houses, ohana units, and outbuildings. This definition specifically
excludes vacant parcels, districts, areas, or sites, including heiau, burial,
and underwater sites.
Visual Access. Visual access at all times with the unaided eye from a distance
of not more than 50 feet from the owner’s property line from a public way as
defined in this section, of the entire front or rear of the single-unit, two-
unit, or duplex-unit dwelling that is the subject of the petition for
dedication under this section.
(b)   An owner of taxable historic residential property may dedicate a portion
or portions of the residential property thereof for historic preservation by
petitioning the director; provided that the residential property has visual
access or the owner allows alternative visual visitations.
(1)   If the historic residential property does not provide visual access, the
petition shall provide the public with alternative visual visitations to the
property from a viewing point on the historic residential property for at least
the 12 days a year designated in the rules adopted by the director.
(2)   The viewing point on the historic residential property for alternative
visual visitations shall:
(A)   Be clearly identified on the sketch or site plan included in the petition
for dedication;
(B)   Be identified by a sign on the historic residential property marking the
location of the viewing point; and
(C)   Establish the point beyond which the public shall not advance.
(c)   The director shall prescribe the form of the petition. The petition shall
be filed with the director by September 1 of any calendar year. The notice of
assessment shall serve as notification of approval, approval in part, or
disapproval of the petition for dedication. The owner may appeal any petition
for dedication approved in part or disapproved, on or before the date for
appealing an assessment as set forth in §
8-12.1. If the petition is approved or approved in part, the exemption provided
for by this section shall be effective October 1 of the same calendar year.
(d)   The director shall review the petition and determine what portion or
portions of the residential real property shall be exempted from real property
taxes. Any building or portion of a building less than 50 years old shall not
be exempted from real property taxes. The director shall consult with the State
historic preservation office in making this determination. The director shall
take into consideration whether the historic property has been maintained, at a
minimum, in average condition, and shall determine the total area or areas of
real property that shall be exempted. The director shall confirm that the
historic residential property has visual access. If the director determines
that the historic residential property does not provide visual access, then the
director shall confirm that the petition provides the public with acceptable
alternative visual visitations.
(e)   If the director determines that the historic residential property does
not provide visual access to the public or that the petition does not provide
the public with acceptable alternative visual visitations, the application for
dedication shall be denied.
(f)   Portions of residential real property that are dedicated and approved by
the director as provided for by this section, shall be exempt from real
property taxation except as provided by §
8-9.1.
(g)   The approval of the petition by the director shall constitute an
obligation on the part of the owner to meet the following requirements:
(1)   The owner shall provide visual access to the public of the dedicated
historic residential property, or shall provide alternative visual visitations
as described in the approved petition;
(2)   The owner shall certify that the historic property shall meet or exceed
average condition, and, during the dedicated period, shall maintain the
historic property in at least average condition. All repair, maintenance, and
improvements to the property, and use of the property, shall comply with all
statutes, ordinances, rules, and standards for historic properties; and
(3)   The owner of a historic residential property that has been approved for
dedication pursuant to this section shall place and maintain on the dedicated
historic residential property a plaque that has been approved by the director
and the State historic preservation officer. The director shall adopt rules
prescribing the requirements for such a plaque;
for a minimum period of 10 years, automatically renewable indefinitely, subject
to cancellation by either the owner or the director upon five years’ notice at
any time after the end of the fifth year. Legally permitted uses of the
historic residential property may continue during the dedication period without
cancellation of the dedication.
(h)   An owner may appeal any cancellation of the dedication or imposition of
any rollback tax or penalty as in the same manner as an appeal from an
assessment.
(i)   Any person who becomes an owner of historic residential property that is
subject to a dedication under this section shall be subject to the requirements
imposed under subsection (g).
(j)   The director shall cancel the dedication and disallow the tax exemption
if:
(1)   The owner fails to observe the requirements and obligations of this
section and the rules adopted to implement this section;
(2)   A city department issues a citation for noncompliance with or violation
of
Chapters 16 through
21; or
(3)   The property is removed from the historic register.
The cancellation and disallowance shall subject the owner to a rollback tax and
penalty, retroactive to the date of the last 10-year renewal of the dedication.
All differences in the amount of taxes that were paid and those that would have
been due but for the exemption allowed by this section shall be payable,
together with a 12 percent penalty and interest at 12 percent per year for each
year of the rollback tax; provided that the provision in this subsection shall
not preclude the city from pursuing any other remedy to enforce the covenant on
the use of the property.
(k)   The director shall cancel the dedication and the retroactive assessment
shall not apply:
(1)   Where the owner submits the written notice of cancellation within the
prescribed time as provided in subsection (g); and
(2)   Where the subject property is destroyed by any natural disaster or by
fire, and upon verification by the historic preservation officer that the
restoration or reconstruction of the property is not feasible.
(l)   The director shall adopt rules deemed necessary to accomplish the
foregoing in accordance with HRS Chapter 91.
(Sec. 8-10.22, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10,
§ 8-10.22) (Am. Ords. 96-15, 01-23, 11-7, 25-2)
§ 8-10.20 Other exemptions.
   Exemptions to real property taxes as set forth in HRS Chapter 53 (“Urban
Renewal Law”) and Chapter 183 (“Forest Reserves, Water Development, Zoning”),
and in § 208 of the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, and which were enacted
before November 7, 1978, shall remain in effect and be recognized and
implemented by the city in its administration of the real property tax system;
provided that real property leased under homestead and not general lease
pursuant to the authority granted the department of Hawaiian home lands by §
207 of the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, shall be exempt from real
property taxes, the seven-year limitation on the exemption afforded by § 208 of
the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, notwithstanding.
(Sec. 8-10.23, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.23)
(Am. Ords. 92-38, 92-63, 93-13, 93-112, 97-56, 00-65)
§ 8-10.21 Exemption—Credit union.
(a)   Real property owned in fee simple or leased for a period of one year or
more by a federal or State credit union which is actually and exclusively used
for credit union purposes shall be exempt from real property taxes to the
extent taxes assessed exceed $1,000. If the property for which exemption is
claimed is leased, the lease agreement shall be in force and recorded in the
bureau of conveyances when the exemption is claimed. As used in this section,
“federal credit union” means a credit union organized under any federal law
including the Federal Credit Union Act of 1934, 12 USC Chapter 14, as amended,
and “State credit union” means a credit union organized under State law.
(b)   If any portion of the property that might otherwise be exempted under
this section is used for commercial or other purposes not within the conditions
necessary for exemption (including any use the primary purpose of which is to
produce income even though such income is to be used for or in furtherance of
the exempt purposes) that portion of the premises shall not be exempt but the
remaining portion of the premises shall not be deprived of the exemption if the
remaining portion is used exclusively for purposes within the conditions
necessary for exemption. In the event of an exemption of a portion of a
building, the tax shall be assessed upon so much of the value of the building
(including the land thereunder and the appurtenant premises) as the proportion
of the floor space of the nonexempt portion bears to the total floor space of
the building.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.24) (Added by Ord. 88-1; Am. Ord. 15-36)
§ 8-10.22 Exemption—Slaughterhouses.
   All real property in the city used exclusively by the owner or lessee
thereof for purposes of slaughtering or butchering cattle, pigs, poultry
animals, or other domestic livestock for commercial slaughterhouse purposes
shall be exempt from real property taxes for a period of 10 years. In the case
of newly constructed slaughterhouses, the exemption shall apply to the tax year
following October 1 following commencement of construction of such
slaughterhouse.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.25) (Added by Ord. 93-06; Am. Ord. 96-15)
§ 8-10.23 Exemption—Qualifying construction work.
(a)   Any incremental increase in the valuation of buildings primarily
attributable to qualifying construction work shall be exempt from property
taxes for a period of seven years following the completion of the qualifying
construction work, provided that:
(1)   The qualifying construction work commences on or after January 1, 1999 as
evidenced by the issuance date of the building permits;
(2)   The qualifying construction work is completed on or before June 30, 2003,
unless extended pursuant to subsection (d); and
(3)   The laborers and mechanics who performed the qualifying construction work
were paid at or above the rate of wages established by HRS Chapter 104 and the
applicable rules adopted thereunder.
(b)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Incremental Increase in the Valuation of Buildings Primarily Attributable to
Qualifying Construction Work. Shall be determined by subtracting the valuation
of buildings on the property as determined in the real property tax assessment
immediately preceding June 22, 1999 from the valuation of buildings following
the completion of qualifying construction work as of June 22, 1999.
Qualifying Construction Work. Work to construct new buildings, or to construct
additions or renovations to existing buildings, located on land that is
classified in accordance with §
8-7.1 as hotel and resort, commercial, industrial, preservation, or
agricultural.
(c)   The date of the completion of the construction shall be established by
the date of the department of planning and permitting’s inspection completion
date, or the last of the inspection completion dates, where multiple
inspections are required for any one or more of the following: the electrical,
plumbing, architectural, or structural work allowed under the building permit.
(d)   The claimant may request an extension of time of up to one year but
before July 1, 2004 to complete construction, and only if a major change in
circumstances beyond the control of the claimant has occurred since the
issuance of the building permit that causes the delay. The request for an
extension setting forth the claimant’s justification for an extension shall be
made in writing to the director of planning and permitting and either receipt-
stamped by the department or U.S. postmarked. By either method, the request
shall be receipt-stamped or U.S. postmarked no later than June 29, 2003. The
decision of the director of planning and permitting on the request shall be
final.
(e)   The claim for exemption shall be filed with the department of budget and
fiscal services on or before September 30 preceding the first tax year for
which such exemption is claimed on such form as shall be prescribed by the
department, and shall be supported by documentation establishing the date of
the issuance of the building permit, the department of planning and
permitting’s inspection completion date, and the director of planning and
permitting’s decision to grant an extension of time to complete construction,
if applicable.
(f)   The claim for exemption, once allowed, shall continue for a period of
seven years; provided that where an extension has been granted under subsection
(d), in no event shall such exemption be allowed beyond June 30, 2012.
(g)   To confirm that the laborers and mechanics who performed the qualifying
construction work were paid at or above the applicable rate of wages, every
claim for exemption filed with the department of budget and fiscal services
shall include documentation in a form satisfactory to the director that
establishes that the wage rates for the laborers and mechanics who performed
the qualifying construction work were not less than the wage rates established
by HRS Chapter 104 and the applicable rules adopted thereunder. This
documentation shall include but not be limited to a notarized affidavit from
the claimant establishing that the wage rates for the laborers and mechanics
who performed the qualifying construction work were not less than the wage
rates established by HRS Chapter 104 and the applicable rules adopted
thereunder.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.26) (Added by Ord. 99-42; Am. Ords. 00-45,
02-39)
§ 8-10.24 Exemption—Public service.
(a)   Real property that is owned or leased and actually used by a public
service company shall be exempt from real property taxes.
(b)   If the property for which exemption is claimed is leased by the public
service company for a period of one year or more, the lease agreement shall be
in force and recorded in the bureau of conveyances when the exemption is
claimed.
(c)   The exemption provided in this section shall not apply to any portion of
the property that is not used for the primary purpose of the public service
company.
(d)   If any portion of the property is ineligible for the property tax
exemption under this section:
(1)   The remaining eligible portion shall not be deprived of the exemption;
(2)   The ineligibility for exemption under this section shall not disqualify
that portion for an exemption under any other law; and
(3)   The tax shall be assessed upon so much of the value of the building and
land thereunder as the proportion of the nonexempt floor area bears to the
total floor area of the building.
(e)   “Public service company” has the same meaning as defined in §
8-7.1(c)(6).
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.27) (Added by Ord. 01-60; Am. Ords. 04-34,
04-35)
§ 8-10.25 Additional terms and conditions for exemption of low-income rental
housing projects on Hawaiian home lands.
(a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Hawaiian Home Lands. The lands described in the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act,
HRS § 201.
The definitions provided in §
8-10.17(a) shall also apply to this section.
(b)   A low-income rental housing project that occupies Hawaiian home lands and
qualifies for an exemption from real property taxes pursuant to §
8-10.17 shall be subject to the following additional terms and conditions:
(1)   The exemption shall be for the duration of the regulated period; provided
that the lease remains in force and effect for the duration of the regulated
period. This exemption shall be incorporated into any and all agreements,
including regulatory and loan agreements as applicable.
(2)   If the qualifying housing project is comprised of multiple parcels of
land, each parcel comprising the housing project shall be:
(A)   Exempt from property taxes; and
(B)   Subject to the assessment of the minimum tax under §
8-11.1; provided that for an exempt rental housing project consisting of no
more than 100 parcels of land, in the event full payment of the annual minimum
tax is received on or before June 30 before the tax year for any one of the
parcels comprising the exempt rental housing project, no minimum tax shall be
due and owing for the tax year for any of the other parcels comprising the
exempt rental housing project; provided further, that no tax bill shall be
issued for the June 30 full minimum tax payment.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.28) (Added by Ord. 02-68)
§ 8-10.26 Exemption—Nonprofit organization thrift shops.
(a)   Notwithstanding §
8-10.9(d), real property used for a thrift shop shall be exempt from property
taxes; provided that:
(1)   The thrift shop is operated by a nonprofit organization that sells goods;
(2)   Ninety percent or more of the goods sold in the thrift shop have been
donated; and
(3)   All of the net revenues from the thrift shop are used to provide job
training and employment services or drug rehabilitation services at no cost to
the person being trained or rehabilitated.
(b)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Nonprofit Organization. An association, corporation, or other entity, organized
and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, literary,
cultural, educational, recreational, or other nonprofit purposes, no part of
the assets, income, or earnings of which inures to the benefit of any
individual or member thereof, and whose charter or other enabling act contains
a provision that, in the event of dissolution, the assets owned by such
association, corporation, or other entity shall be distributed to another
association, corporation, or other entity organized and operated exclusively
for nonprofit purposes, and which further qualifies for exemption under § 501
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended.
Thrift Shop. A retail outlet.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.29) (Added by Ord. 03-05)
§ 8-10.27 Exemption—Historic commercial real property dedicated for
preservation.
(a)   An owner of commercial property that has been placed on either the
National or the Hawaii Register of Historic Places after January 1, 1977 who
wishes to dedicate such property for historic preservation may petition the
director to obtain an exemption from real property taxation as provided herein.
As used in this section, “commercial property” means properties classified for
real property tax purposes as commercial and excludes properties classified for
real property tax purposes as hotel and resort or industrial.
(b)   The director shall prescribe the form of the petition. The petition shall
be filed with the director by September 1 of any calendar year and shall be
approved or disapproved by December 15 of such year. If approved, the exemption
shall be effective July 1 of the immediately following tax year.
(c)   The petition shall include a copy of a covenant that has been recorded
with the bureau of conveyances or the land court, whichever applies. The
covenant shall ensure that the public is provided reasonable visual access to
the historic commercial real property and that the property is maintained in
accordance with a maintenance agreement approved by the director, in
consultation with the State historic preservation division, nonprofit historic
preservation organizations and the director of planning and permitting.
(d)   The director shall review the petition and determine whether the historic
commercial landmark shall be granted the real property tax exemption. The
director shall consult with the State historic preservation office and
nonprofit historic preservation organizations in making this determination.
(e)   Upon approval of the petition, 50 percent of the value of that real
property or portion thereof that is designated as a historic site shall be
exempt from real property taxes.
(f)   The approval of the petition by the director shall constitute a
forfeiture on the part of the owner of any right to change the use of the
owner’s exempted property as specified in the maintenance agreement for a
minimum period of 10 years. The petition shall be automatically renewable for
an unlimited number of additional 10-year periods.
(g)   Upon determining that the owner has failed to observe the restrictions of
the covenant, the director shall cancel the exemption retroactive to the date
of the dedication, and all differences in the amount of taxes that were paid
and those that would have been due but for the exemption allowed by this
section shall be payable together with interest at 12 percent per year from the
respective dates that these payments would have been due; provided that the
provision in this subsection shall not preclude the county from pursuing any
other remedy to enforce the covenant on the use of the land.
(h)   An owner applicant may appeal any adverse determination as in the case of
an appeal from an assessment.
(i)   The director shall adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 as deemed
necessary to accomplish the purposes of this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.30) (Added by Ord. 04-17)
§ 8-10.28 Exemption—Qualifying agricultural improvements for dedicated vacant
agricultural lands.
(a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Drainage Systems. Agricultural systems of channels, ditches, pipes, pumps, and
accessory facilities established for the purpose of drawing off water from a
land area.
Incremental Increase in the Valuation of Real Property Attributable to
Qualifying Agricultural Land Improvements. The sum of all documented expenses
incurred to construct the qualifying agricultural land improvements.
Irrigation Systems. The agricultural systems of intakes, diversions, wells,
ditches, siphons, pipes, reservoirs, and accessory facilities established for
the purpose of providing water for agricultural production.
Qualifying Agricultural Land Improvements. Construction, reconstruction, or
improvement of irrigation systems, drainage systems or roads, soil
conservation, fire protection, or animal control measures on land classified as
vacant agricultural land as defined in §
8-7.1(c) and dedicated for 10 years under §
8-7.3(d), where the cost of such improvements is equal to or greater than
$10,000.
(b)   Any incremental increase in the valuation of real property attributable
to qualifying agricultural land improvements shall be exempt from property
taxes for a period of seven years following the construction of the
agricultural land improvements.
(c)   The claim for exemption shall be filed with the director on or before
September 30 preceding the tax year for which such exemption is claimed on such
form as shall be prescribed by the department. The claim shall be supported by
documentation describing the agricultural land improvements, establishing that
the agricultural land improvements have been constructed, and establishing the
amount of expenses therefor. Any additional qualifying agricultural
improvements for a subsequent fiscal year shall be separately claimed.
(d)   The claim for exemption, once allowed, shall continue for a period of
seven years.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.31) (Added by Ord. 04-34)
§ 8-10.29 Exemption—Kuleana land.
(a)   Real property zoned as residential or agricultural, any portion of which
is designated as kuleana land, shall pay the minimum real property tax as long
as the real property is owned in whole or in part by a lineal descendant of the
person that received the original title to the kuleana land.
(b)   An application for this exemption shall be filed with the director on
forms prescribed by the director. The application shall include documents
verifying that the condition set forth in subsection (a) has been satisfied.
The director shall prescribe what shall be sufficient to show genealogy
verification; provided that:
(1)   Genealogy verification by the Office of Hawaiian Affairs or by court
order shall be deemed sufficient; and
(2)   The applicant/landowner shall be responsible for the cost of such
evidence.
The director shall require the applicant to obtain a court order verifying
ownership of property if the applicant is not identified as the owner of the
property in the records of the director.
(c)   For the purposes of this section, “kuleana land” means those lands
granted to native tenants pursuant to L. 1850, p. 202, entitled “An Act
Confirming Certain Resolutions of the King and Privy Council, Passed on the
21st Day of December, A.D. 1849, Granting to the Common People Allodial Titles
for Their Own Lands and House Lots, and Certain Other Privileges,” as amended
by L. 1851, p. 98, entitled “An Act to Amend An Act Granting to the Common
People Allodial Titles for Their Own Lands and House Lots, and Certain Other
Privileges” and as further amended by any subsequent legislation.
(d)   Notwithstanding subsection (a), kuleana lands which are Hawaiian home
lands, shall not pay the minimum real property tax if they qualify for the
exemption set forth in §
8-10.25(b)(2)(B).
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.32) (Added by Ord. 07-7)
§ 8-10.30 Exemption—For-profit group child care centers.
(a)   Real property, or a portion thereof, used for a for-profit group child
care center shall be exempt from property taxes; provided that:
(1)   The property is actually and exclusively used for a group child care
center;
(2)   If an exemption is claimed under this section, an exemption for the same
property may not also be claimed under any other section;
(3)   The property is owned in fee simple, leased, or rented for a period of
one year or more, by the person using the property for the exempt purposes,
hereinafter referred to as the person claiming the exemption;
(4)   If the property for which exemption is claimed is leased or rented, the
lease or rental agreement shall be in force and recorded in the bureau of
conveyances or filed in the office of the assistant registrar of the land
court;
(5)   The group child care center meets the child care facilities requirements
of HRS Chapter 346, Part VIII; and
(6)   Any claim for exemption based on the foregoing use shall be accompanied
by a certificate issued by or under the authority of the State department of
human services stating that the foregoing requirements are met.
(b)   For purposes of this section, the term “group child care center” means a
facility other than a residence, maintained by an individual, organization, or
agency for the purpose of providing child care for preschool age children ages
two years to six years and infants and toddlers ages six weeks to 36 months.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.33) (Added by Ord. 09-24)
§ 8-10.31 Exemption—Central Kakaako industrial zone limited development.
(a)   The central Kakaako industrial zone is identified as a demonstration area
in which to exempt a portion of certain industrial properties from taxation to
preserve such uses in the zone.
(b)   For the purposes of this section, “floor area ratio” has the same meaning
as defined in Hawaii Administrative Rules § 15-217-8.
(c)   The exemption from real property taxes for real property, or a portion
thereof, is 50 percent of the assessed value; provided that the property is:
(1)   Located within the central Kakaako industrial zone as illustrated in
attached Exhibit 1, which includes:
(A)   The area bounded by the following street segments:
Starting at the intersection of Waimanu Street/Kamani Street; Waimanu Street to
the intersection of Waimanu Street/Kamakee Street; Kamakee Street to the
intersection of Kamakee Street/Kona Street; Kona Street to the intersection of
Kona Street/Hopaka Street; Hopaka Street to the intersection of Hopaka Street/
Piikoi Street; Piikoi Street to the intersection of Piikoi Street/Waimanu
Street; Waimanu Street to the intersection of Waimanu Street/Queen Street;
Queen Street to the intersection of Queen Street/Ward Avenue; Ward Avenue to
the intersection of Ward Avenue/Halekauwila Street; Halekauwila Street to the
intersection of Halekauwila Street/Cooke Street; Cooke Street to the
intersection of Cooke Street/Kawaiahao Street; Kawaiahao Street to the
intersection of Kawaiahao Street/Kamani Street; and ending at Kamani Street to
the intersection of Kamani Street/Waimanu Street;
(B)   The parcels on the makai side of Queen Street identified as Tax Map Keys:
2-3-002:057, 058, 066, 067, 069, 086, 087, and a portion of 059; and
(C)   The parcels on the mauka side of Kawaiahao Street and the makai side of
Waimanu Street identified as Tax Map Keys: 2-1-049:070, 072, 071, 073, 049,
048, 047, 046, 045, 043, 042, 041, 040, 050, 076, and 054;
(2)   Is actively and continuously used for one of the following industrial
uses:
(A)   Repair services; provided that all operations are enclosed;
(B)   Warehouses;
(C)   Manufacturing, including furniture and fixtures; stone, clay, and glass
products, including pottery and related products, flat glass, glass and
glassware (pressed or blown), and cut stone and stone products; fabricated
metal products, except ordnance, machinery and transportation; office,
computing and accounting machines; electrical machinery, equipment and
supplies; motorcycles, bicycles, and parts; professional, scientific, and
controlling instruments, musical instruments, photographic and optical goods;
watches and clocks; food and related products; textile mill products; apparel
and other finished products made from fabrics and similar materials; printing,
publishing, and allied industries; chemicals and allied products; rubber and
miscellaneous plastic products; tobacco products; leather and leather products;
and miscellaneous manufacturing industries;
(D)   Manufacturing services and warehousing, including: special trade
construction and storage yards; provided that all operations are totally
enclosed; electric substations, transformery; gas substation; water reservoir
or pump station; telephone; nonextensive yard use; wholesaler with stock; and
automotive repair and services; provided that all operations are totally
enclosed;
(E)   Laundry, laundry service, and cleaning and dyeing plant (includes self-
service laundry);
(F)   Motion picture recording and sound studios;
(G)   Miscellaneous business services, including duplicating; blueprinting;
linen supply; services to dwellings; typewriter repair; armature rewinding; and
general fix-it shop;
(H)   Freight movers and canteen services;
(I)   Printing, lithographic, publishing, photographic processing, or similar
uses;
(J)   Lumber and building materials storage and sales; provided that all
operations are totally enclosed;
(K)   Miscellaneous services, including electrical shop; reupholstery and
furniture repair; and electrical motor repair and rebuild; data processing;
food preparation, and catering;
(L)   Wholesaler without stock, including motor vehicle and equipment; drug,
chemical, and allied product; dry goods and apparel; groceries and related
products; farm product, raw material; electrical goods; hardware and supply;
and machinery, equipment, and supply;
(M)   Aluminum cans collection; provided that all operations are totally
enclosed;
(N)   Automobile service stations, car washes, and car rental establishments;
provided that they comply with the following requirements:
(i)   A solid fence or wall of 6 feet in height is required on the side and
rear property lines;
(ii)   The station must be illuminated so that no unshielded, unreflected, or
undiffused light source is visible from any public area or private property
immediately adjacent thereto;
(iii)   All areas not landscaped must provide an all-weather surface; and
(iv)   No water produced by activities on the lot is permitted to fall upon, or
drain across, public streets and sidewalks; or
(O)   Personal services establishments, including dry cleaning and dyeing; and
(3)   Determined by the Hawaii Community Development Authority as being limited
to a maximum floor area ratio of 1.5 due to inadequate infrastructure under
Hawaii Administrative Rules § 15-217-57.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.34) (Added by Ord. 16-21)
§ 8-10.32 Claim for Exemption—Central Kakaako industrial zone limited
development.
(a)   An initial application for exemption under §
8-10.31 shall be filed with the director by September 30 preceding the tax year
for which the exemption is claimed. A copy of a certification from the Hawaii
Community Development Authority confirming that the property is subject to the
maximum floor area ratio of 1.5, as required by Hawaii Administrative Rules §
15-217-57, shall be filed with the application along with any additional
documents determined by the director to be necessary to supplement the
application.
(b)   Two years after the initial year for which the property has qualified for
an exemption under §
8-10.31, and every two years thereafter for as long as applicable, the owner of
the property shall file, on or before September 30, a recertification by the
Hawaii Community Development Authority confirming that the property is still
subject to the maximum floor area ratio of 1.5, as required by Hawaii
Administrative Rules § 15-217-57.
(c)   An owner who fails to file for a recertification from the Hawaii
Community Development Authority by the respective September 30 deadline shall
have the exemption canceled by the director, and the property shall be subject
to taxes and penalties pursuant to subsection (f).
(d)   In the event the director finds that the initial claim for exemption or
subsequent recertification by the Hawaii Community Development Authority
contains false or fraudulent information, the director shall cancel the
exemption retroactive to the date the exemption was first granted pursuant to
an initial filing under subsection (a), and the project shall be subject to the
taxes and penalties determined in subsection (f).
(e)   The owner may cancel the exemption by filing a notice of cancellation,
and the owner shall not be subject to any penalties; provided that the owner
has not filed any claim for exemption or any recertification that contained
false or fraudulent information.
(f)   In the event a property is subject to taxes and penalties as provided in
subsection (c) or (d), the differences in the amount of taxes that were paid
and those that would have been due but for the exemption allowed shall be
payable, together with interest at 10 percent per year, from the respective
dates that these payments would have been due. The taxes and penalties due
shall be a paramount lien upon the real property.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.35) (Added by Ord. 16-21)
§ 8-10.33 Exemption—Qualifying affordable rental dwelling units or affordable
rental housing units.*
(a)    For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Affordable Housing Agreement. An affordable housing agreement as described in §
29-1.8, or a “regulatory agreement” as defined in §
8-10.17(a).
Declaration of Restrictive Covenants. Has the same meaning as defined in
Chapter 32.
Exemption Period. The 15-year period commencing upon the effective date of the
claim for a real property tax exemption pursuant to subsection (b)(4), and
ending on June 30 of the last year of the 15-year period. Any exemptions
granted pursuant to §
8-10.33 prior to May 28, 2025 will be extended by five years.
Regulated Period. The period during which a project is subject to an affordable
housing agreement.
(b)    This section applies only to the following:
(1)   That portion of real property used for affordable rental dwelling units
as provided on-site or off-site pursuant to
Chapter 29;
(2)   That portion of real property used for affordable rental dwelling units
provided pursuant to a planned development-transit permit under §
21-9.100-10, or an interim planned development-transit permit under §
21-9.100-5;
(3)   That portion of real property used for affordable rental dwelling units
located on real property used in connection with a housing project developed in
compliance with HRS § 201H-36(a)(5); or
(4)   That portion of real property used for affordable rental housing units
that:
(A)   Are rented to households earning 80 percent and below of the AMI; and
(B)   For a period of at least 15 years after a certificate of occupancy is
issued for the affordable rental housing project, the affordable units are
rented at or below the rental rate limits established by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development for households earning 80 percent
of the AMI for the applicable household size;
pursuant to
Chapter 32.
(c)   The exemption provided in this section does not apply to any portion of
the real property that is:
(1)   Used for commercial or other non-residential purposes;
(2)    Not for the exclusive use of the tenants of the affordable rental
dwelling units; or
(3)   Subject to any other exemption from real property taxation.
(d)    Real property specified in subsection (b) that is subject to an
affordable housing agreement will be exempt from property taxes for the
duration of the regulated period, and real property specified in subsection (b)
(4) that is subject to a declaration of restrictive covenants will be exempt
from property taxes for the duration of the exemption period.
(1)   If the project fails to meet the requirements under this section at any
time during the regulated period or exemption period, whichever is applicable,
the exemption will be canceled and the real property will be subject to taxes
and penalties pursuant to subsection (i)(3).
(2)   If the ownership of any portion of the real property that qualifies for
an exemption under this section changes during the regulated period or
exemption period, whichever is applicable, the exemption will be canceled and
the entire project, including any retained portion and the portion that changed
ownership, will be subject to taxes and penalties pursuant to subsection (i)
(3). The taxes and penalties do not apply to any portion of the real property
for which a new claim is filed for an exemption within 30 days of the
recordation or filing of the real property title change with the registrar of
the bureau of conveyances or the assistant registrar of the land court, or
both, as appropriate, if the director grants the exemption.
(3)   If the ownership of the real property changes during the regulated
period, a new claim for exemption must be filed within 30 days of the
recordation of filing of such change with the registrar of the bureau of
conveyances or the assistant registrar of the land court, or both, as
appropriate. Failure to timely file a new claim for an exemption, or to meet
the qualifications under this section, will result in cancellation of the
exemption, and taxes and penalties will be imposed pursuant to subsection (i)
(3).
(e)   Where a project is situated upon a single parcel of land, if any portion
of the property is ineligible for the property tax exemption under this
section:
(1)    The remaining eligible portion will not be deprived of the exemption;
and
(2)    The ineligibility of a portion of the property for exemption under this
section will not disqualify that portion from an exemption under any other law.
(f)   Exemptions claimed under this section disqualify the same property from
receiving an exemption under HRS § 53-38; provided that exemptions claimed
under subsection (b)(4) also disqualify the same real property from receiving a
real property tax exemption under any other law, except for §
8-10.34.
(g)    Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, any real
property determined by the director to be exempt from property taxes under this
section will be exempt from property taxes effective as of the date the
application is filed with the director; provided that the initial application
for an exemption must be filed with the director within 60 days after the real
property qualifies for the exemption, but in no event later than September 30
preceding the tax year for which the exemption is claimed. A copy of the
affordable housing agreement that has been recorded with the registrar of the
bureau of conveyances or the assistant registrar of the land court, or both, as
appropriate, or the declaration of restrictive covenants that has been executed
by the owner of the zoning lot on which an affordable rental housing project is
situated, must be filed with the application along with any additional
documents determined by the director to be necessary to supplement the
application.
(1)   For exemptions claimed under subsections (b)(1), (b)(2), and (b)(3),
after the initial year for which the real property has qualified for an
exemption, a claim for a continued exemption must be filed annually on or
before September 30, together with a document from the agency regulating the
project certifying that the project continues to be in compliance with the
initial affordable housing agreement and is in compliance with the applicable
rental requirements.
(2)   For exemptions claimed under subsection (b)(4), after the initial year
for which the real property has qualified for an exemption, a report must be
filed with the director annually on or before September 30 during the exemption
period. The report must certify that the affordable rental housing project
continues to be in compliance with the declaration of restrictive covenants and
the applicable rental requirements pursuant to this chapter, including but not
limited to the number of affordable rental housing units that are rented to
households earning 80 percent or below of the AMI, and rented at or below the
rental rate limits established by the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development for households earning 80 percent of the AMI for the
applicable household size or less.
(3)   The director may, after 30 days’ written notice, audit the records of the
real property exempt from taxes under this section. A taxpayer’s refusal or
failure to cooperate and produce all records requested by the director may
result in the cancellation of the exemption and subject the real property to
the taxes and penalties determined in subsection (i)(3).
(h)    In the event property taxes have been paid in advance to the city for
real property that subsequently qualifies for the exemption, the director shall
refund to the owner that portion of the taxes attributable to, and paid for the
period after the qualification.
(i)   Cancellation of exemption—penalties.
(1)    Notice by director. Following the initial year for which real property
has qualified for an exemption under this section, if an owner fails to file a
claim for continued exemption by the September 30 deadline, the director shall
promptly mail a notice to the owner at the owner’s address of record stating
that unless a claim for continued exemption and all the necessary documents are
received by the director by November 15 of the same year, the exemption will be
canceled.
(2)   Cancellation of exemption. An owner who has been sent a notice under
subdivision (1) by the director and who fails to file for an exemption by the
November 15 deadline will have the exemption canceled and the project will be
subject to taxes and penalties pursuant to subdivision (3). In the event the
director finds that the initial or a subsequent claim for exemption contains
false or fraudulent information, the project fails to meet the requirements
during the regulated period, or the owner fails to file annually during the
regulated period as required under this section, the director shall cancel the
exemption retroactive to the date the exemption was first granted pursuant to
an initial filing under subsection (g), and the project will be subject to the
taxes and penalties determined in subdivision (3).
(3)   Back taxes and penalties. In the event a project is subject to taxes and
penalties, as provided in subdivision (2), the differences in the amount of
taxes that were paid and those that would have been due but for the exemption
allowed are payable, together with a penalty in the form of interest at 10
percent per annum, from the respective dates that these payments would have
been due. The taxes and penalties due will be a paramount lien upon the real
property. In the event a claim for an exemption is submitted after the
September 30 deadline but on or before the November 15 deadline, a late filing
penalty of $500 will be imposed.
(Added by Ord. 18-1; Am. Ords. 18-10, 19-8, 20-13, 25-25)
Editor’s note:
   * Amendments made to § 8-10.33(a) in Ordinance 18-10 will be repealed on
June 1, 2030, in accordance with Ordinance 18-10, as amended by Ordinance 25-
25.
   Section 8-10.33 will be repealed on June 1, 2030, in accordance with
Ordinance 18-1 and Ordinance 19-8, as amended by Ordinance 25-25; provided that
any real property tax exemptions granted pursuant to § 8-10.33 prior to its
repeal on June 1, 2030, will continue for the regulated period, subject to the
requirements and consequences established under § 8-10.33.
   Amendments made to § 8-10.33 in Ordinance 19-8, as amended by Ordinance 23-
12, will be repealed on June 1, 2030; provided that any exemption under § 8-
10.33(b)(4), for portions of real property use for affordable housing units
that are rented to households earning 80 percent and below of the area median
income, will remain in effect for the duration of the 10-year exemption period
in Ordinance 19-8.
   *“May 28, 2025” is substituted for “the effective date of this ordinance.”
In accordance with Ord. 25-25, the amendments made to § 8-10.33 do not affect
the repeal date of Ord. 18-1.
§ 8-10.34 Exemption—During construction work for and marketing of affordable
dwelling units or affordable rental housing projects.
(a)    For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Qualifying Construction Work. Work:
(1)    To construct new buildings or portions thereof, or to construct
additions or substantial rehabilitations, as defined in §
29-1.2, to existing buildings; provided that the new or existing building is
located on land that is classified in accordance with §
8-7.1 as residential, residential A, hotel and resort, or commercial; or
(2)   To construct an affordable rental housing project pursuant to
Chapter 32.
(b)    Any incremental increase in the valuation of the real property primarily
attributable to qualifying construction work will be exempt from property
taxes; provided that:
(1)   The qualifying construction work creates affordable dwelling units
pursuant to
Chapter 29;
(2)   The qualifying construction work creates affordable dwelling units
pursuant to a planned development-transit permit pursuant to §
21-9.100-10, or an interim planned development-transit permit pursuant to §
21-9.100-5;
(3)   The real property is developed in compliance with HRS § 201H-36(a)(5); or
(4)   The qualifying construction work creates affordable rental housing units
that:
(A)   Are rented to households earning 100 percent and below of the AMI; and
(B)   For a period of at least 15 years after a certificate of occupancy is
issued for the affordable rental housing project, the affordable units are
rented at or below the rental rate limits established by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development for households earning 100 percent
of the AMI for the applicable household size;
pursuant to
Chapter 32.
(c)    A claim for exemption must be filed with the director on or before
September 30 preceding the first tax year for which the exemption is claimed on
a form as may be prescribed by the director, and must be supported by
documentation establishing the date of the issuance of the building permit for
demolition, if applicable, or the building permit for new buildings or portions
thereof, additions, or substantial rehabilitations, and documenting the
creation of:
(1)   Affordable dwelling units pursuant to
Chapter 29;
(2)   A planned development-transit permit pursuant to §
21-9.100-10;
(3)   An interim planned development-transit permit pursuant to §
21-9.100-5;
(4)   Affordable rental dwelling units pursuant to HRS § 201H-36(a)(5); or
(5)   Affordable rental housing units that:
(A)   Are rented to households earning 100 percent and below of the AMI; and
(B)   For a period of at least 15 years after a certificate of occupancy is
issued for the affordable rental housing project, the affordable units are
rented at or below the rental rate limits established by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development for households earning 100 percent
of the AMI for the applicable household size;
pursuant to
Chapter 32.
(d)    The real property tax will be based on the assessed value of the
property for the tax year immediately preceding the tax year during which the
building permit for demolition, if applicable, or a building permit for new
buildings or portions thereof, additions, or substantial rehabilitations for
the qualifying construction work was issued.
(e)   The claim for exemption, once allowed, will expire:
(1)    Three calendar years after issuance of a building permit for new
buildings or portions thereof, additions, or substantial rehabilitations;
(2)    Upon issuance of a certificate of completion; or
(3)    Upon issuance of any certificate of occupancy;
whichever occurs first. The director may extend this exemption for good cause.
(f)   If, within five years after the expiration of the claim for an exemption
under subsection (b)(4), an affordable rental housing project is not in
compliance with the executed declaration of restrictive covenants, the
exemption will be retroactively revoked and the taxpayer shall reimburse the
city for the total exemption amount.
(Added by Ord. 18-1; Am. Ords. 19-8, 20-13)
Editor’s note:
   * Section 8-10.34 will be repealed on June 1, 2030, in accordance with
Ordinance 18-1 and Ordinance 19-8, as amended by Ordinance 25-25.
    Amendments made to § 8-10.34 in Ordinance 19-8, as amended by Ordinance 23-
12, will be repealed on June 1, 2030; provided that any exemption under § 8-
10.34(b)(4) for qualifying work for affordable rental housing units that are
rented to households earning 100 percent and below of the area median income,
will remain in effect for the duration of the exemption period as determined
under § 8-10.34(e).
§ 8-10.35 Exemption—Qualifying construction—Film studio facility.
(a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Film Studio Facility. A building or complex of buildings and associated back-
lot facilities on real property situated within the geographic boundary of the
city in which pre-production, production, and post-production activities occur,
which contain at least one sound stage; pre-production, production, and post-
production offices; catering or dining facilities; parking; facades; and mill
space, and which is closed to the general public and is within a footprint of
the site plan that forms a secure compound that is clearly delineated with a
tall perimeter enclosure. The term excludes buildings and facilities that are
not used for pre-production, production, and post-production activities, but
are constructed or used in connection with the film studio facility, including
hotel and lodging facilities, or portions thereof.
Post-Production. Has the same meaning as defined in §
8-10.36(a).
Pre-Production. Has the same meaning as defined in §
8-10.36(a).
Production. Has the same meaning as defined in §
8-10.36(a).
Property Owner or Owner. Has the same meaning as defined in §
8-6.3, except that the remaining term of the lease of a lessee claiming an
exemption must be a minimum of 20 years; provided that the lease:
(1)   Has been duly entered into and recorded in the State bureau of
conveyances, or the office of the assistant registrar of the land court, or
both, as appropriate; and
(2)   Provides that the lessee shall pay all real property taxes levied on the
property during the term of the lease.
Qualifying Construction. The construction of a new film studio facility that:
(1)   Is located on real property a minimum of 10 acres in size and situated
within the geographic boundary of the city, that has been leased or purchased
from the United States, the State, or the city within five years of the
application for the exemption;
(2)   Is constructed in accordance with land use and labor statutes,
ordinances, rules, and regulations, as applicable, including Title 12, Chapter
22, Hawaii Administrative Rules; provided that if specialty construction is
involved, a project labor agreement for the specialty construction work must be
negotiated and executed between the applicable construction unions and the
specialty construction contractors or subcontractors; and
(3)   Has a minimum of $100,000,000 in actual costs to design and construct a
film studio facility.
Specialty Construction.  The construction, assembly, or installation of
equipment or systems for which a specific vendor or supplier has notable
expertise, and local labor is not trained or experienced to construct,
assemble, or install.
(b)   The assessed building value of a new film studio facility will be exempt
from property taxes during construction; provided that the owner files a claim
for exemption with the director, on a form prescribed by the director, on or
before September 30 preceding the first tax year for which the exemption is
claimed. The claim for exemption must be accompanied by documentation
evidencing that the construction of the film studio facility is qualifying
construction, including documents evidencing that:
(1)   A minimum $100,000,000 financial commitment was made to design and
construct the film studio facility in the city;
(2)   Building permits were issued for the development and construction of the
new film studio facility, in accordance with the construction and building
permit plans for the film studio facility;
(3)   The land on which the film studio facility is located was leased or
purchased from the United States, State, or city within five years of the
application for the exemption;
(4)   The owner is registered and in good standing with the State department of
commerce and consumer affairs;
(5)   A site plan has been prepared for the proposed film studio facility; and
(6)   Construction of the film studio facility and all appurtenant buildings,
facilities, and grounds within the film studio facility must be performed in
accordance with land use and labor statutes, ordinances, rules, and
regulations, as applicable, including the payment of wages that are not less
than the rates for classifications stated in the wage rate schedule bulletin
posted on the State department of labor and industrial relations website, or if
a classification is not set forth in the wage rate schedule bulletin, then the
prevailing local area standard wage; provided that if specialty construction is
involved, a project labor agreement for the specialty construction work must be
negotiated and executed between the construction unions holding the applicable
jurisdiction over the scope of the work and the specialty construction
contractors or subcontractors.
If the construction of the new film studio facility involves more than one
zoning lot or parcel, the owner shall file a separate claim for exemption for
each zoning lot or parcel that has an assigned tax map key number, together
with a copy of a conditional use permit for joint development and a joint
development agreement approved pursuant to §
21-5.380.
(c)   The claim for exemption, once allowed, will expire:
(1)   Within five calendar years after the claim for exemption has been
accepted by the director, if design of the new film studio facility has not
commenced within the five-year period;
(2)   Within 10 calendar years after the claim for exemption has been accepted
by the director, if construction of the new film studio facility has not been
completed within the 10-year period; or
(3)   Upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the new film studio
facility by the department of planning and permitting;
whichever occurs first. The director may extend the exemption period for up to
one year if the owner demonstrates good cause for the extension.
(d)   The owner shall provide written notice to the director within 30 days
after the owner or property ceases to qualify for an exemption.
(1)   The written notice will have the effect of voiding the claim for
exemption previously filed. The written notice is sufficient if it identifies
the property involved, states the change in facts or status, and requests that
the claim for exemption previously filed be voided.
(2)   Failure to provide the requisite written notice to the director within 60
days after the owner or property ceases to qualify for the exemption may
subject the owner to a penalty. Failure to provide the written notice to the
director prior to the following November 1 will subject the owner to a penalty
of $1,000 on November 2 preceding the tax year for which the owner or the
property no longer qualifies for the exemption, and on November 2 of each year
thereafter that written notice of the change in exemption status is not
provided to the director. In addition to this penalty, the taxes due on the
property plus any additional penalties and interest thereon will be a paramount
lien on the property as provided for by this chapter.
(e)   The claim for exemption may be canceled by the director:
(1)   When the building permit is closed or canceled by the department of
planning and permitting at the request of the owner; or
(2)   When the building permit is closed by the department of planning and
permitting for lack of response by the owner or its agents, or otherwise deemed
abandoned.
If the exemption is canceled by the director under this subsection, the owner
will be subject to and assessed the difference in the amount of taxes that were
paid and the taxes that would have been due retroactive to the first year of
the exemption, together with a penalty in the form of interest at 10 percent
per year, from the respective dates that these payments would have been due.
The taxes and penalties due will be a paramount lien upon the real property.
(Added by Ord. 25-1)
Editor’s note:
   In accordance with Ord. 25-1, §§ 8-10.35 and 8-10.36 apply to tax years
beginning July 1, 2026 and ending on June 30, 2036, and will be repealed on
July 1, 2036; provided that notwithstanding the repeal, any exemption approved
under these sections before July 1, 2036 will continue in effect for the
duration of the relevant exemption period in §§ 8-10.35 and 8-10.36, subject to
ongoing requirements and the consequences of failing to meet the requirements
of these sections.
§ 8-10.36 Exemption—Film studio facilities.
(a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Digital Media. Production methods and platforms to create cinematic imagery and
content using digital means, including but not limited to digital cameras,
digital sound equipment, and computers, to be delivered via film, videotape,
interactive game platform, or other digital distribution media.
Film Studio Facility. Has the same meaning as defined in §
8-10.35(a).
Film Studio Name. The name associated with the film studio facility.
Local Workforce. Workers who have been determined to be residents as defined by
the State department of taxation Tax Information Release No. 97-1.
Local Workforce Development. Programs conducted in the city that have the
primary purpose of assisting members of the local workforce to acquire and
retain employment, increase their wages and earning potential, and provide
career advancement in the motion picture, film, and digital media industry.
Programs include but are not limited to internships, apprenticeships, and other
educational endeavors connected to an anchor institution, union or government
training program, or nonprofit training program engaged in activities with the
State or city.
Post-Production.  Activities and services conducted at the film studio facility
after production of the visual and cinematic imagery has been completed,
including but not limited to editing, film and video transfers, duplication,
transcoding, dubbing and sound mixing, subtitling, credits, closed captioning,
audio production, special effects (audio and visual), graphics, and animation.
Pre-Production. The planning process and execution of every task that must
occur before the production process begins, including but not limited to
forming a new company, locking the script, breaking down the script, hiring key
department heads, finalizing the budget, creating storyboards and shot lists
for the scenes to be captured, scouting and securing locations, casting actors
and hiring the crew, obtaining permits and insurance for the project,
scheduling the shoot days, performing a technical scout, and arranging for
equipment rentals.
Production. A stage in the process, also known as principal photography, in
which the media project is captured, including but not limited to a series of
activities to create and capture the visual and cinematic imagery that is to be
delivered for mass consumption via various methods including film, video, or
digital means, either for sale or display.
Property Owner or Owner. Has the same meaning as defined in §
8-10.35(a).
Qualified Production. A series of pre-production, production, and post-
production activities at a film studio facility, with the primary purpose of
creating and capturing visual and cinematic imagery to be delivered via film,
video, or digital media for sale, distribution, or display as entertainment, or
for the advertisement of products or services for mass public consumption, in
which all film, videotape, or digital media produced at the film studio
facility display the film studio name as required in subsection (b)(4).
(b)   Real property that is improved with a film studio facility for qualified
production will be exempt from the assessed building value of the film studio
facility during the exemption period; provided that:
(1)   The owner has expended a minimum of $100,000,000 to develop and construct
a new film studio facility on real property a minimum of 10 acres in size that
is leased or purchased from the United States, State, or city;
(2)   The owner is registered and in good standing with the State department of
commerce and consumer affairs, and holds a general excise tax license under HRS
Chapter 237 throughout the exemption period;
(3)   The film studio facility annually promotes local workforce development in
the field of motion picture, film, and digital media by partnering with its
film lease production companies, studio partners, and other users of the film
studio facility to provide paid on-set, production, or post-production
internship programs arranged with local colleges, universities, or vocational
schools for their students who are pursuing a degree or career in film or media
studies, or to provide on-set, production, or post-production apprenticeships;
(4)   The owner agrees to:
(A)   Include the film studio name in the end credits of all film, video, or
digital media it produces or creates at the film studio facility during the
exemption period; and
(B)   Include in all contracts with the users of the film studio facility,
including but not limited to film-lease production companies, studio partners,
and loan-out companies, a requirement that they include the film studio name in
the end credits of all film, video, or digital media they produce or create at
the film studio facility during the exemption period;
(5)   The film studio facility facilitates the creation of a minimum of 100
full-time equivalent local film industry jobs annually;
(6)   To the extent permitted by law, throughout the exemption period, all
employees responsible for the maintenance and operations of the film studio
facility building and grounds must be paid wages that are no less than:
(A)   The prevailing wage rates set forth in the current wage rate schedule
bulletin posted on the State department of labor and industrial relations
website if a wage classification exists for a particular scope of work; or
(B)   If a prevailing wage rate classification is not listed on the State
department of labor and industrial relations wage rate schedule bulletin, in
accordance with the local area standard wage if a standard wage exists for a
particular scope of work,
unless a prevailing wage rate under a collective bargaining agreement applies;
and
(7)   In the event that public tours are conducted onsite at the film studio
facility through the use of motorized or electric vehicles, all tour drivers or
tour vehicle operators must be paid wages that are not less than:
(A)   The prevailing wage rates stated in the current wage rate schedule
bulletin posted on the State department of labor and industrial relations
website if a wage classification exists for a particular scope of work; or
(B)   If a prevailing wage rate classification is not listed on the State
department of labor and industrial relations wage rate schedule bulletin, in
accordance with the local area standard wage if a standard wage exists for a
particular scope of work;
unless a prevailing wage rate under a collective bargaining agreement applies.
(c)   An owner that has been allowed an exemption for a new film studio
facility’s qualifying construction under §
8-10.35 shall file an initial claim for exemption under this section with the
director, on a form prescribed by the director, within 60 days of the earliest
of the expiring events in § 8-10.35(c). If approved by the director, the
exemption is retroactive to the date the qualifying construction exemption
expired. Alternatively, the owner shall file an initial claim for an exemption
by September 30 preceding the tax year for which the exemption is claimed. The
owner shall include with its claim for an exemption documents evidencing that:
(1)   The owner has expended at least $100,000,000 to develop and construct the
film studio facility;
(2)   The land on which the film studio facility is located was leased or
purchased from the United States, State, or city;
(3)   The owner is registered and in good standing with the State department of
commerce and consumer affairs, and has a general excise tax identification
number;
(4)   A preliminary plan has been prepared to provide incentives to filmmakers
and digital media artists who are engaged in the development of film or digital
products relating to the history of Hawaii, and local culture, traditions, or
customs to promote expansion of the motion picture, film, and digital media
industry in the city;
(5)   A preliminary plan has been prepared for creating and annually
maintaining local workforce development programs through film-lease production
companies, studio partners, loan-out companies, or other users of the film
studio facility;
(6)   The owner has required, or will require, the film studio name to appear
in the end credits of all film, video, or digital media produced or created at
the film studio facility by its film-lease production companies, studio
partners, loan-out companies, or other users of the film studio facility; and
(7)   To the extent permitted by law, throughout the exemption period, the
owner has required, or will require the payment of prevailing wages to all
employees responsible for the maintenance and operations of the film studio
facility building and grounds, and all tour drivers or tour vehicle operators
of motorized or electric vehicles used for public tours conducted onsite at the
film studio facility.
If the new film studio facility was constructed on more than one zoning lot or
parcel, the owner shall submit a separate claim for exemption for each zoning
lot or parcel that has an assigned tax map key number, and a copy of the
conditional use permit for joint development and joint development agreement
approved pursuant to §
21-5.380.
(d)   The notice of assessment serves as the notification of the approval,
approval in part, or disapproval of the claim for exemption. If the claim for
exemption is disapproved by the director, the claimant may appeal the
disapproval pursuant to §
8-12.1.
(e)   Upon the director’s approval of the initial claim for an exemption, the
exemption will continue for a period of 20 consecutive years; provided that the
owner annually certifies that in the preceding tax year, the film studio
facility or its users:
(1)   Promoted local workforce development in the field of motion picture,
film, and digital media by partnering with its film-lease production companies,
studio partners, and other users of the film studio facility to provide paid
on-set production or post-production internship programs arranged with local
colleges, universities, or vocational schools for their students who are
pursuing a degree or career in film or media studies, or to provide on-set,
production, or post-production apprenticeships;
(2)   Required the film studio name to be included in the end credits of all
film, video, digital media, or similar products developed or produced at the
film studio facility by its film-lease production companies, studio partners,
loan-out companies, or other users of the film studio facility; and
(3)   To the extent permitted by law, paid prevailing wages to all employees
responsible for the maintenance and operations of the film studio facility
building and grounds, and all tour drivers or tour vehicle operators of
motorized or electric vehicles used for public tours conducted onsite at the
film studio facility.
(f)   In order to maintain continuing eligibility for the exemption during the
exemption period, the owner shall file with the director, on a form prescribed
by the director, the annual certification and documents by September 30 of each
year following the director’s approval of the initial claim for an exemption.
The owner shall provide information and evidence from the preceding tax year
of:
(1)   The internship or apprenticeship programs provided;
(2)   The local filmmakers and media artists that used the film studio
facility;
(3)   The number of non-residents, State residents not living on Oahu, and city
residents employed by the film studio facility, and employed by any user of the
film studio facility;
(4)   The films, videos, or digital media developed or produced at the film
studio facility that included the film studio name in the end credits;
(5)   To the extent permitted by law, the payment of prevailing wages to all
employees responsible for the maintenance and operations of the film studio
facility building and grounds, and all tour drivers or tour vehicle operators
of motorized or electric vehicles used for public tours conducted onsite at the
film studio facility; and
(6)   Any other information required by the director.
(g)   If an owner fails to file an annual certification with the required
reporting and documentation by the September 30 deadline, the director will
mail a notice to the owner at the owner’s address of record stating that unless
the annual certification, required reporting and documentation, and a late
filing penalty of $1,000 are received by the director by November 15 of the
same year, the exemption will be canceled and the owner shall be subject to
taxes and penalties pursuant to subsection (j).
(h)   In the event the owner’s interest in the film studio facility is
transferred to a new owner, the owner that held the exemption shall notify the
director of the change in ownership as provided in §
8-10.1(d)(1). The new owner may qualify for a continued exemption; provided
that the new owner:
(1)   Files a claim for a continued exemption within 30 days after the closing
of the lease transfer or sale of the film studio facility;
(2)   Certifies and agrees to comply with the qualifications and requirements
set forth in subsections (b)(2) through (b)(7), and (c)(3) through (c)(7); and
(3)   Understands and agrees to file an annual certification pursuant to
subsection (f) on or before September 30 of the preceding the tax year that the
film studio facility or its users:
(A)   Promoted local workforce development in the field of motion picture,
film, and digital media by partnering with its film-lease production companies,
studio partners, and other users of the film studio facility, to provide paid
on-set, production, or post-production internship programs arranged with local
colleges, universities, or vocational schools for their students who are
pursuing a degree or career in film or media studies, or to provide on-set,
production, or post-production apprenticeships;
(B)   Fulfilled the requirement to include the film studio name in the end
credits of all film, video, digital media, or similar products developed or
created or produced at the film studio facility, including those created or
produced by its film-lease production companies, studio partners, loan-out
companies, and other users of the film studio facility during the exemption
period; and
(C)   To the extent permitted by law, paid prevailing wages to all employees
responsible for the maintenance and operations of the film studio facility
building and grounds, and all tour drivers or tour vehicle operators of
motorized or electric vehicles used for public tours conducted onsite at the
film studio facility.
(i)   Administration.
(1)   The director may prescribe the appropriate forms for the exemption.
(2)   The director may request supporting documents to verify the owner’s
eligibility upon the filing of an initial claim for an exemption. The director
may deny the claim for an exemption based on the owner’s refusal to provide any
supporting documents requested by the director.
(3)   At any time during the exemption period, the director may, after giving
the owner 30 days advance written notice, inspect the film studio facility and
audit the records to verify compliance with the requirements in subsection (e).
The owner’s refusal or failure to cooperate, provide a site inspection, or
produce all records requested by the director may result in the cancellation of
the exemption and subject the real property to the rollback taxes and penalties
determined in subsection (j).
(4)   The director may adopt rules having the force and effect of law for the
administration, implementation, and enforcement of this article, including
rules that set forth procedures to appeal the denial or cancellation of the
exemption.
(j)   Cancellation of exemption and rollback tax. In the event the director
finds that the initial claim for exemption, the claim for continued exemption
by a new owner, or the certification for continuing exemption contains false or
fraudulent information, or that the owner is not in compliance with the
requirements set forth in subsection (e), the director shall cancel the
exemption retroactive to five tax years preceding the year of cancellation. The
difference in the amount of taxes that were paid, and taxes that would have
been due but for the exemption allowed, will be due and payable, together with
a penalty in the form of interest at 10 percent per year. The taxes and
penalties due will be a paramount lien upon the real property.
(Added by Ord. 25-1)
Editor’s note:
   In accordance with Ord. 25-1, §§ 8-10.35 and 8-10.36 apply to tax years
beginning July 1, 2026 and ending on June 30, 2036, and will be repealed on
July 1, 2036; provided that notwithstanding the repeal, any exemption approved
under these sections before July 1, 2036 will continue in effect for the
duration of the relevant exemption period in §§ 8-10.35 and 8-10.36, subject to
ongoing requirements and the consequences of failing to meet the requirements
of these sections.
ARTICLE 11: DETERMINATION OF RATES
Section
   
8-11.1   Real property tax—Determination of rates
§ 8-11.1 Real property tax—Determination of rates.
(a)   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Base Tax Year. The tax year immediately before the budgeted tax year.
Budgeted Tax Year. The tax year beginning July 1 from which real property tax
revenues are to help finance the proposed legislative and executive budgets.
Class of Property. A class of real property established in accordance with §
8-7.1(c).
Estimated Uncontrollable Cost Adjustment. A factor representing costs that the
city is mandated or obligated to pay.
Initial Tax Rate. The preliminary tax rate for a class of property as
determined in subsection (b).
Net Taxable Real Property. The fair market value of property determined
pursuant to this chapter that the director certifies as the tax base as
provided by ordinance less exemptions as provided by ordinance and, in all
cases where appeals from the director’s assessment are then unsettled, less 50
percent of the value in dispute.
Tax Rate. The dollar amount of tax levied under this chapter per $1,000 of net
taxable real property, computed to the nearest cent.
(b)   The council shall annually set the tax rate or rates in accordance with
this subsection for the classes of real property established in accordance with
§
8-7.1(c). A resolution setting the tax rate or rates must be adopted by the
council during the same meeting at which the applicable legislative and
executive budget bills are passed on third reading. The tax rate or rates must
be set according to the following procedures. The procedures provide for
initial tax rates for the net taxable real property within each class of
property to be established by the director. The initial tax rates are
established in a way that the average real property tax liability within each
class of property does not change in the budgeted tax year compared to the base
tax except for the estimated uncontrollable cost adjustment only.
(1)   The director shall establish the initial tax rates for all taxable
classes of property using the following method:
(A)   The director shall establish the estimated change in the operating
uncontrollable costs of the city, expressed as a percentage of the base tax
year’s total net tax liability of all classes;
(B)   The director shall determine the average tax liability for each class of
property for the base tax year as follows: sum the net tax liability for the
base tax year of all parcels within the class, then divide the result by the
total number of tax parcels in the class;
(C)   The director shall then determine the average tax liability for each
class of property for the budgeted tax year as follows: adjust the figure
determined under paragraph (B) by the estimated uncontrollable cost adjustment;
(D)   The director shall then determine the amount to be raised by the initial
tax rate for each class of property for the budgeted tax year as follows:
multiply the figure determined under paragraph (C) for each class of property
by the total number of tax parcels in the class for the budgeted tax year; and
(E)   The director shall then determine the initial tax rate per $1,000 of net
taxable real property in each class of property for the budgeted tax year as
follows: divide the figure determined under paragraph (D) for each class of
property by the assessed valuation of net taxable real property within each
class of property for the budgeted tax year, then multiply the result by 1,000,
then round the result to the nearest cent.
(2)   The mayor may propose to the council that the initial tax rates be
adopted or be increased or decreased for any class of property. The tax rates
proposed by the mayor must be set forth in the form of a resolution transmitted
to the council at the same time that other revenue measures for the budgeted
tax year are transmitted.
(3)   Upon receipt of the mayor’s proposed tax rate resolution, the council may
adopt the initial tax rates, the mayor’s proposed tax rates, or propose new
rates.
(c)   (1)   The council shall advertise its intention to set the tax rate or
rates and the date, time, and place of a public hearing in accordance with law.
The date of the public hearing must be not less than 10 days after the
advertisement is first published and must set forth the proposed tax rate or
rates to be considered by the council.
(2)   After the public hearing provided for in subdivision (1), the council
shall readvertise and reconvene to adopt a resolution setting the tax rate or
rates for the tax year for which property tax revenues are to be raised. The
advertisement must state the rate or rates proposed to be set and the date,
time, and place of the meeting scheduled for setting the rate or rates. The
date, time, and place of the meeting must also be announced at the public
hearing required by subdivision (1).
(3)   If, after adopting an increase or decrease in the tax rates as provided
by subdivisions (1) and (2), the council determines that it requires a further
increase or decrease in tax rates, the council shall readvertise and follow the
requirements of subdivisions (1) and (2).
(d)   The council shall notify the director of the tax rate or rates set for a
tax year before the commencement of that tax year. Upon receipt of the
notification, the director shall use the rate or rates in the levying of
property taxes as provided by this chapter.
(e)   The director shall, on or before February 1 preceding the tax year,
furnish the council with a calculation certified by the director as being as
nearly accurate as possible of the net taxable real property within the city,
separately stated for each class established in accordance with §
8-7.1(c) plus such additional data relating to the property tax base as may be
necessary. The director shall include the amount of all tax credits granted
under
Article 13 for the current tax year and the amount of all tax credit denials
appealed during the current tax year as part of the information required by
this subsection.
(f)   Insofar as the validity of any tax rate is concerned, the provisions of
subsection (e) as to dates are directory; provided that all other provisions of
this section are mandatory.
(g)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, a minimum real property
tax of $300 a year is levied upon each individual parcel of real property
taxable under this chapter, except for properties exempt under §
8-10.24 and except as provided in §
8-10.25(b)(2).
(h)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, rates for property
classified as residential A must be assigned to two tiers based on the
valuation of the property. The tiers are as follows:
(1)   Residential A Tier 1 tax rate: applied to the net taxable value of the
property up to $1,000,000; and
(2)   Residential A Tier 2 tax rate: applied to the net taxable value of the
property in excess of $1,000,000.
(i)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, rates for property
classified as transient vacation must be assigned to two tiers based on the
valuation of the property. The tiers are as follows:
(1)   Transient vacation Tier 1 tax rate: applied to the net taxable value of
the property up to $800,000; and
(2)   Transient vacation Tier 2 tax rate: applied to the net taxable value of
the property in excess of $800,000.
(Sec. 8-11.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 11, §
8-11.1) (Am. Ords. 92-75, 96-15, 01-60, 02-45, 02-68, 03-28, 06-10, 10-9, 17-
12, 23-5)
ARTICLE 12: APPEALS
Sections
   
8-12.1   Generally
   
8-12.2   Appeals by persons under contractual obligations
   
8-12.3   Grounds of appeal—Real property taxes
   
8-12.4   Second appeal
   
8-12.5   Small claims
   
8-12.6   Boards of review—Appointment, removal, compensation
   
8-12.7   Boards of review—Duties, powers, procedure before
   
8-12.8   Appeal to tax appeal court
   
8-12.9   Appeal to board of review
   
8-12.10   Costs—Deposit for an appeal
   
8-12.11   Costs—Outcome of appeal
   
8-12.12   Taxes paid pending appeal
   
8-12.13   Amendment of assessment list to conform to decision
   
8-12.14   Appeals settled by director
§ 8-12.1 Generally.
   Any taxpayer or owner who may deem the taxpayer or owner aggrieved by an
assessment made by the director or by the director’s refusal to allow any
exemption, may appeal from the assessment or from such refusal to the board of
review or the tax appeal court pursuant to HRS § 232-16 on or before January 15
preceding the tax year, as provided in this article. Where such an appeal is
based upon the ground that the assessed value of the real property for tax
purposes is excessive, the valuation claimed by the taxpayer or owner in the
appeal shall be admissible in evidence, in any subsequent condemnation action
involving the property, as an admission that the fair market value of the real
property as of the date of assessment is no more than the value arrived at when
the assessed value from which the taxpayer or owner appealed is adjusted to 100
percent fair market value; provided that such evidence shall not in any way
affect the right of the taxpayer or owner to any severance damages to which the
taxpayer or owner may be entitled.
(Sec. 8-12.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 12, §
8-12.1) (Am. Ords. 96-15, 97-55)
§ 8-12.2 Appeals by persons under contractual obligations.
   Whenever any person is under a contractual obligation to pay a tax assessed
against another, the person shall have the same rights of appeal to the board
of review and the tax appeal court and the Hawaii Supreme Court, in such
person’s own name, as if the tax were assessed against such person. The person
against whom the tax is assessed shall also have a right to appear and be heard
on any such application or appeal.
(Sec. 8-12.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.2)
§ 8-12.3 Grounds of appeal—Real property taxes.
   In the case of a real property tax appeal, no taxpayer shall be deemed
aggrieved by an assessment, nor shall an assessment be lowered or an exemption
allowed, unless there is shown:
(1)   Assessment of the property exceeds by more than 10 percent the market
value of the property;
(2)   Lack of uniformity or inequality, brought about by illegality of the
methods used or error in the application of the methods to the property
involved;
(3)   Denial of an exemption to which the taxpayer is entitled and for which
such person has qualified; or
(4)   Illegality, on any ground arising under the Constitution or laws of the
United States or the laws of the State or the ordinances of the city in
addition to the ground of illegality of the methods used, mentioned in
subdivision (2).
(Sec. 8-12.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 12, §
8-12.3) (Am. Ord. 96-58)
§ 8-12.4 Second appeal.
   In every case in which a taxpayer appeals a real property tax assessment to
the board of review or to the tax appeal court and there is pending an appeal
of the assessment, the taxpayer shall not be required to file a notice of the
second appeal; provided that the first appeal has not been decided before
January 15 preceding the tax year of the second appeal; and provided further,
that the director gives notice that the tax assessment has not been changed
from the assessment which is the subject of the appeal.
(Sec. 8-12.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.4) (Am.
Ords. 96-15, 97-55)
§ 8-12.5 Small claims.
   Any protesting taxpayer who would incur a total tax liability, not including
penalties and interest, of less than $1,000 by reason of the protested
assessment or payment in question, may elect to employ the small claims
procedures of the tax appeal court as set out in HRS § 232-5.
(Sec. 8-12.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.5)
§ 8-12.6 Boards of review—Appointment, removal, compensation.
(a)   There shall be up to five boards of review for the City and County of
Honolulu, each of which shall consist of five members. In addition to meeting
the requirements established in Charter § 13-103, the members shall have
resided in the State for at least three years at the time of their
appointments. The appointment of a member shall be to serve on one of the
boards of review for the duration of the member’s appointment and, in
accordance with §
8-12.7(c), to serve, temporarily, as a substitute member of one of the other
board of review for meetings for which such other board is unable to establish
a quorum, but not due to a vacancy on such board. Any vacancy in any of the
boards shall be filled for the unexpired term as provided for in the charter.
(b)   A chair and vice-chair of each board shall be elected annually from among
the board’s membership by its respective members. The vice-chair shall serve as
the chair of the board during the chair’s temporary absence from the city,
illness, or disqualification. Each member may receive and be paid out of the
treasury compensation for such member’s services for each day’s actual
attendance and the member’s actual traveling expenses.
(Sec. 8-12.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 12, §
8-12.6) (Am. Ords. 96-16, 06-38)
§ 8-12.7 Boards of review—Duties, powers, procedure before.
(a)   Each board for the city shall hear disputes between the director and any
taxpayer in all cases in which appeals have been duly taken. The fact that a
notice of appeal has been duly filed by a taxpayer shall be conclusive evidence
of the existence of a dispute. However, this subsection shall not be construed
to permit a taxpayer to dispute an assessment to the extent that it is in
accordance with the taxpayer’s return, as may be required pursuant to this
chapter, unless the taxpayer shows lack of uniformity or inequality as set
forth in §
8-12.3.
(b)   The assignment of particular tax appeals to a specific board of review
shall be made by the director.
(c)   Upon the request of the chair of one board, the chair of one of the other
boards may administratively, and without requirement of formal action of that
chair’s board, temporarily assign a member of that board to serve as a
substitute member of the requesting board for purposes of establishing a quorum
at a designated meeting or designated meetings of the requesting board. The
substitute member temporarily assigned under this subsection shall serve only
for the particular board meeting or meetings for which the assignment is made
and only so long as a quorum may not be maintained by the board to which the
substitute member is assigned. During the period of the substitute member’s
assignment, the substitute member may participate in the discussion of and vote
on all appeals before the board. Nothing herein shall prevent a member from
again being assigned under this subsection.
(d)   Each board shall hold public meetings at some central location in the
city commencing not later than January 15 of each year and shall hear, as
expeditiously as possible, all appeals assigned to it for each year. With the
exception of questions involving the Constitution or laws of the United States,
each board shall have the authority to decide all questions of fact and all
questions of law necessary to the determination of the objections raised by the
taxpayer in the notice of appeal; provided that the board shall not have the
authority to determine or declare an assessment illegal or void. Each board
shall have the authority to allow or disallow exemptions pursuant to law,
whether previously allowed or disallowed by the director, and to increase or
lower any assessment.
(e)   Each board shall base each of its decisions on the evidence before it
and, as provided in §
8-1.18, the assessment made by the director shall be deemed prima facie
correct. Assessments for the year upon other similar property situated in the
city shall be received in evidence upon the hearing. In increasing or lowering
any real property assessment, the board shall be governed by this chapter. Each
board shall file with the director its written decision on each appeal, and a
certified copy thereof shall be delivered or mailed by the director to the
taxpayer concerned at the taxpayer’s last known place of residence or business.
(f)   Upon completion of its review of the property tax appeals for the current
year, each board shall compile and submit to the mayor and the council, and
shall file with the director for the use of the public, copies of a report
detailing the work of the board, which is directed at meeting the objectives of
this chapter. The board additionally shall report on instances in which the
director, in the application of the valuation methods selected by the director,
erred as to the assessment of a particular property or particular properties
not brought before the board by any appeal. Before commencing this phase of its
work, each board shall publish, during the first week of September, a notice
specifying a period of at least 10 days within which complaints may be filed by
any taxpayer. Each complaint shall be in writing, shall identify the particular
property involved, shall state the valuation claimed by the taxpayer and the
grounds of objection to the assessment, and shall be filed with the director
who shall transmit the same to the appropriate board. Not earlier than one week
after the close of the period allowed for filing complaints, the appropriate
board shall hear the same, after first giving reasonable notice of the hearing
to all interested taxpayers and the director. Like notice and hearing shall be
given in order for the board to include in its report any other property not
brought before it by an appeal. The board may proceed by districts designated
by their tax map designation, and may from time to time publish the notice
above provided for as the work proceeds by districts.
(g)   The director, in the making of assessments for the succeeding year, shall
give due consideration to the reports of the boards made pursuant to subsection
(f).
(h)   Each board, in addition to all other powers, also shall have the
authority to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, examine books and records,
and hear and take evidence in relation to any subject pending before the board.
It may request the tax appeal court to order the attendance of witnesses and
the giving of testimony by them, and the production of books, records and
papers at the hearings of the board.
(i)   In addition to any notice and publication required by State law or these
ordinances, the director, on behalf of each board, shall make available on the
city’s website all notices of hearings, decisions by the boards and all rules
pertaining to the boards.
(Sec. 8-12.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 12, §
8-12.7) (Am. Ords. 96-15, 96-16, 96-58, 97-55, 05-009, 06-38, 07-47, 15-4)
§ 8-12.8 Appeal to tax appeal court.
(a)   An appeal to the tax appeal court may be filed by a taxpayer or the
director as provided in HRS §§ 232-8 through 232-14 and HRS §§ 232-16 through
232-18.
(b)   Appeals to the State supreme court shall conform to HRS §§ 232-19 through
232-21.
(Sec. 8-12.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.8)
§ 8-12.9 Appeal to board of review.
(a)   A notice of appeal to the board of review must be lodged with the
director on or before the date fixed by law for the taking of the appeal by
either personal delivery, depositing the appeal in the mail, or by electronic
transmission, provided that a notice of appeal cannot be lodged by facsimile
transmission. Personal delivery shall include delivery by private delivery
services. Private delivery services are those designated by the Internal
Revenue Service. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary:
(1)   A notice of appeal with payment of costs personally delivered shall be
deemed to have been lodged with the director when personally delivered before
the close of city business hours;
(2)   A notice of appeal with payment of costs deposited in the mail, postage
prepaid, and properly addressed to the director, shall be deemed to have been
lodged with the director on the date shown by the postal service cancellation
mark stamped upon the envelope or other appropriate wrapper containing the
notice of appeal; and
(3)   A notice of appeal transmitted electronically, properly addressed to the
director, with payment of costs also transmitted electronically, shall be
deemed lodged with the director on the date the electronic transmission and
electronic payment are electronically received by the server designated by the
director to receive appeals and payment of costs transmitted electronically.
(b)   The notice of appeal must be in writing and any such notice, however
informal it may be, identifying the assessment involved in the appeal, stating
the valuation claimed by the taxpayer and the grounds of objection to the
assessment shall be sufficient, provided the payment of costs to be deposited
by the taxpayer pursuant to §
8-12.10, including the payment of costs electronically, must be made on or
before the date fixed by law for the taking of the appeal to perfect the appeal
and for the board of review to have jurisdiction to hear the appeal. Upon the
necessary information being furnished by the taxpayer to the director, the
director shall prepare the notice of appeal upon request of the taxpayer or
county and any notice so prepared by the director shall be deemed sufficient as
to its form.
(c)   The appeal shall be considered and treated for all purposes as a general
appeal and shall bring up for determination all questions of fact and all
questions of law, excepting questions involving the Constitution or laws of the
United States, necessary for the determination of the objections raised by the
taxpayer in the notice of appeal. Any objection involving the Constitution or
laws of the United States may be included by the taxpayer in the notice of
appeal and in such case the objections may be heard and determined by the tax
appeal from a decision of the board of review; but this provision shall not be
construed to confer upon the board of review the power to hear or determine
such objections. Any notice of appeal may be amended at any time before the
board’s decision; provided the amendment does not substantially change the
dispute or lower the valuation claimed.
(Sec. 8-12.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.9) (Am.
Ords. 93-20, 07-48)
§ 8-12.10 Costs—Deposit for an appeal.
(a)   The costs to be deposited by the taxpayer on appeal to the board of
review shall be $50 for each real property tax appeal.
(b)   The cost to be deposited by the taxpayer on any appeal to the tax appeal
court or the State supreme court shall be as provided in HRS §§ 232-22 and 232-
23.
(c)   Payment of costs to be deposited by the taxpayer must be made on or
before the date fixed by law for the taking of the appeal in order, pursuant to
§
8-12.9, to perfect a notice of appeal and for the board of review to have
jurisdiction to hear the appeal.
(Sec. 8-12.10, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.10)
(Am. Ords. 93-20, 07-48, 17-6)
§ 8-12.11 Costs—Outcome of appeal.
   In the event of an appeal by a taxpayer to the board of review, if the
appeal is compromised, or sustained as to any amount of the valuation in
dispute, the costs deposited shall be returned to the appellant. Otherwise, the
entire amount of costs deposited shall be retained by the city.
(Sec. 8-12.11, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.11)
(Am. Ords. 05-009, 07-47, 08-5, 09-2)
§ 8-12.12 Taxes paid pending appeal.
(a)   In any case of any appeal to the tax appeal court, 50 percent of the tax
paid upon the amount of the assessment actually in dispute and in excess of
that admitted by the taxpayer shall, pending the final determination of the
appeal, be paid by the director into the “litigated claims account.” If the
final determination by the tax appeal court is in whole or in part in favor of
the appealing taxpayer, the director shall repay to the taxpayer out of the
account, or if there is a deficit in the account, out of the general fund of
the city, the amount of the tax paid upon the amount held by the court to have
been excessive or nontaxable. Interest at a rate to be determined by the
director based upon the average interest rate earned on city investments in the
general fund during the previous fiscal year shall be paid to the appealing
taxpayer unless otherwise agreed to by the taxpayer and the director. Interest
shall be calculated from the date of each payment by the taxpayer. The balance,
if any, of the payment made by the appealing taxpayer and paid into the
litigated claims account, or the whole of the payment paid into the litigated
claims account, if the decision is wholly in favor of the assessor, shall, upon
the final determination become a realization of the general fund.
(b)   In case of any appeal to the board of review, 50 percent of the tax paid
upon the amount of the assessment actually in dispute and in excess of that
admitted by the taxpayer, shall during the pendency of the appeal and until and
unless an appeal is taken to the tax appeal court, be held by the director in a
special deposit account. If the final determination by the board of review is
in whole or in part in favor of the appealing taxpayer, the director shall
repay to the taxpayer out of the account, or if there is a deficit in the
account, out of the general fund of the city, the amount of the tax paid upon
the amount held by the board of review to have been excessive or nontaxable.
Interest at a rate to be determined by the director based upon the average
interest rate earned on city investments in the general fund during the
previous fiscal year shall be paid to the appealing taxpayer, unless otherwise
agreed to by the taxpayer and the director. Interest shall be calculated from
the date of each payment by the taxpayer. The balance, if any, of the payment
made by the appealing taxpayer and paid into the special deposit account or the
whole of the payment paid into the special deposit account, if the decision is
wholly in favor of the assessor, shall, upon the final determination become a
realization of the general fund.
(Sec. 8-12.12, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 12,
§ 8-12.12) (Am. Ords. 05-030, 10-22)
§ 8-12.13 Amendment of assessment list to conform to decision.
   The director shall alter or amend the assessment and the assessment list in
conformity with the decision or judgment of the last board or court to which an
appeal may have been taken.
(Sec. 8-12.13, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.13)
§ 8-12.14 Appeals settled by director.
(a)   The director may review any appeal before a hearing by the board of
review to which the appeal is assigned. The director shall notify the board of
review to which the appeal is assigned of the director’s review of the appeal.
(b)   For each appeal reviewed by the director, the director may make an offer
of settlement of the appeal, subject to further review and approval by the
board of review pursuant to §
8-12.7(a), by allowing or disallowing exemptions or credits pursuant to law, or
increasing or lowering the assessment amount, or both.
(c)   No later than 90 days following the close of each tax year, the director
shall submit to the city clerk a report of all settlements entered into by the
director and approved by the board during the tax year, detailing the name of
the taxpayer, the tax parcel involved, and the amount of the assessment as
initially determined and as settled.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.14) (Added by Ord. 05-009; Am. Ord. 07-47)
ARTICLE 13: COUNTY TAX CREDIT*
Sections
   
8-13.1   Definitions
   
8-13.2   Real property tax credit established
   
8-13.3   Administration
   
8-13.4   Appeal
   
8-13.5   Penalties
   
8-13.6   Revocation of credit
Editor’s note:
   * Article 13 title was amended by Ord. 03-28.
§ 8-13.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Income. The sum of federal total income as defined in the Internal Revenue Code
of the United States of 1954, as amended, and all nontaxable income, including
but not limited to:
(1)   Tax-exempt interest received from the federal government or any of its
instrumentalities;
(2)   The gross amount of any IRA distribution, pension, or annuity benefits
received (including Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 (45 USC Chapter 9, as
amended) benefits and veterans disability pensions), excluding rollovers;
(3)   All payments received under the federal Social Security and State
unemployment insurance laws;
(4)   Nontaxable contributions to any one or more of the following: public or
private pension, annuity or deferred compensation plans; and
(5)   Federal cost of living allowances.
All income set forth in the tax return filed by the titleholder, whether the
tax return is a joint tax return or an individual tax return, shall be
considered the titleholder’s income. Income does not include nonmonetary gifts
from private sources, or surplus foods or other relief in kind provided by
public or private agencies.
Property Owner. Has the same meaning as defined in §
8-6.3.
Qualified Surviving Spouse. A person who:
(1)   Is the surviving spouse of a property owner who, at the time of death,
was the owner of property that was granted a tax credit under this article;
(2)   Is a transferee of the property directly from the deceased property owner
or the estate thereof; and
(3)   Qualifies under this article for the tax credit on the same property.
Real Property Tax Credit. The tax credit established pursuant to §
8-13.2.
Taxes Owed. The tax calculated for the owner’s property in the tax roll under §
8-3.1(a).
Titleholder. The property owner and any other entity listed on the deed or any
other legal instrument establishing the entity’s ownership right in the
property. The term includes corporations and other business entities and
trusts. The term does not include mortgage lenders.
(Sec. 8-13.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 13, §
8-13.1) (Am. Ords. 03-28, 04-43, 05-026, 06-19, 07-30)
§ 8-13.2 Real property tax credit established.
   An owner is entitled to a real property tax credit equal to the amount by
which the taxes owed for the same tax year in which the application is filed
for the property exceed 3 percent of the titleholders’ income; provided that:
(1)   The owner has been granted the home exemption under §
8-10.3 when the application is filed;
(2)   The taxes owed for the same tax year in which the application is filed
for the tax credit exceed 3 percent of the titleholders’ combined income for
the calendar year immediately preceding the date of the application;
(3)   The combined income of all titleholders of the property for the calendar
year immediately preceding the date of the application does not exceed $80,000;
(4)   No titleholder owns any other real property anywhere during the
applicable tax year;
(5)   The titleholders have not violated §
8-13.5;
(6)   The amount of the tax after applying the credit is not less than the
minimum tax required in §
8-11.1(g);
(7)   If the taxes owed, less any other one-time tax credit, are less than or
equal to 3 percent of all titleholders’ combined income for the calendar year
immediately preceding the date of the application, no credit will be applied;
(8)   The titleholders of the property filed income tax returns, if required
under Hawaii income tax law and under Internal Revenue Service regulations, on
or before the date of filing an application for a tax credit; and
(9)   The grant of the application for a tax credit entitles the owner to a
credit only for the tax year succeeding the tax year in which the application
was filed. There will be no carryover tax credit.
(Sec. 8-13.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 13, §
8-13.2) (Am. Ords. 03-28, 04-43, 05-026, 06-08, 07-20, 07-30, 14-33, 16-20, 23-
22)
§ 8-13.3 Administration.
(a)   The director shall determine the eligibility of the owner for a tax
credit upon review and verification of each application for the tax credit. The
application form will be as prescribed by the director. To verify information
in the application, the director shall require proof of the income of each of
the titleholders. The director shall require that each titleholder provide
copies of:
(1)   A tax return transcript from the Internal Revenue Service, or, if a tax
return transcript cannot be obtained, a copy of United States Individual Income
Tax Return Form 1040 or 1040-SR, and any amendments thereto;
(2)   A tax account transcript, if applicable, from the Internal Revenue
Service, or, if a tax account transcript cannot be obtained, a copy of United
States Income Tax Return for Estates and Trusts Form 1041; and
(3)   Any accompanying forms and schedules as the director may require to
verify the veracity of the transcripts or tax returns.
For titleholders who did not have to file, and therefore did not file, an
income tax return under federal income tax law and under Internal Revenue
Service regulations, the director shall require other proof of the
titleholders’ income, which may include bank statements or other financial
records as verification. The director may also require proof of nonreceipt of
income from relief programs such as social security, welfare, and unemployment
compensation, etc., and may require such authorization from the titleholders as
may be necessary to enable the director to fully verify the titleholders’
income.
The applicant may refuse to provide such records, information, or
authorization. However, upon the applicant’s refusal to submit a true and
complete application, the director may deny the application for a tax credit.
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, there will be no appeal from
such a decision of the director to deny an application due to the applicant’s
refusal to provide records, information, or authorization.
(b)   The owner’s application for a tax credit must be filed on or before
September 30 for a credit upon taxes due in the immediately succeeding tax
year. The application must require the certification by the owner that:
(1)   The requirements of §
8-13.2 under which the credit is applied for will be fulfilled throughout the
succeeding tax year; and
(2)   The owner’s property will continue to qualify for a home exemption under
§
8-10.3 throughout such year.
(c)   The director shall determine if the owner qualifies for a tax credit
before December 31 preceding the tax year and, in the event the application is
denied, the director shall notify the applicant in writing on or before the
December 31 date.
(1)   If an application for a tax credit is granted, the director shall apply
the credit to the property tax bill issued pursuant to §
8-3.2, apportioned in two equal parts between the two installments of taxes due
pursuant to the section.
(2)   If an application for a tax credit is denied, the director shall:
(A)   State the basis for denial; and
(B)   Unless the denial is unappealable under subsection (a), inform the
applicant that the director’s decision may be appealed, and the procedure and
deadline for appeal.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 13, § 8-13.3) (Added by Ord. 03-28; Am. Ords. 04-43,
05-026, 06-19, 06-43, 07-20, 07-30, 16-20, 20-35)
§ 8-13.4 Appeal.
   The director shall, pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, establish appeals procedures
for denied tax credit applications.
(Sec. 8-13.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 13, §
8-13.4) (Am. Ord. 03-28)
§ 8-13.5 Penalties.
(a)   Any person who:
(1)   Files a fraudulent application or attests to any false statement with the
intent to defraud the city or evade the payment of real property taxes or any
part thereof; or
(2)   In any manner intentionally deceives or attempts to deceive the city;
is guilty of a violation and subject to a criminal fine of not more than
$2,000, in addition to being responsible for paying any outstanding taxes,
interest, and penalties.
(b)   During the tax year for which a tax credit was granted to an owner of
property pursuant to this article, if the owner fails to notify the city within
30 days that the requirements of §
8-13.2 under which the credit was granted are no longer met, in addition to the
consequences provided in §
8-13.6, the owner will be subject to a fine of $200.
(Sec. 8-13.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 13, §
8-13.5) (Am. Ords. 03-28, 07-20, 16-20)
§ 8-13.6 Revocation of credit.
   During the tax year for which a tax credit is granted to an owner of
property pursuant to this article, if:
(1)   Title to the property is transferred to a new owner by gift, sale,
devise, operation of law, or otherwise, except when title is transferred to a
qualified surviving spouse; or
(2)   The requirements of §
8-13.2 under which the credit was granted are no longer met;
then the tax credit will be revoked and the owner will owe property taxes in
the amount of the tax credit. The additional taxes will be billed and be deemed
delinquent if not paid within 30 days after the date of mailing of the tax
bill, or if the credit is revoked within the tax year for which the credit was
granted, within 30 days after the date of mailing of the tax bill, or on or
before the next installment payment date, if any, for such taxes, whichever is
later.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 13, § 8-13.6) (Added by Ord. 03-28; Am. Ords. 07-20,
16-20)
ARTICLE 14: TAX CREDIT FOR THE INSTALLATION OF AN AUTOMATIC
SPRINKLER SYSTEM
Sections
   
8-14.1   Definitions
   
8-14.2   Automatic sprinkler system tax credit established
   
8-14.3   Administration–Rules
§ 8-14.1 Definitions.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Automatic Sprinkler System. An integrated system of underground and overhead
piping designed in accordance with fire protection engineering standards. The
system includes a suitable water supply. The portion of the system above the
ground is a network of specially sized or hydraulically designed piping
installed in a structure or area, generally overhead, and to which automatic
sprinklers are connected in a systematic pattern. The system is usually
activated by heat from a fire and discharges water over the fire area.
Existing High-rise Residential Building. Any building that has floors used for
human occupancy located more than 75 feet above the highest grade, contains
dwelling units, and which was erected prior to 1993.
(Added by Ord. 18-9)
§ 8-14.2 Automatic sprinkler system tax credit established.
(a)   An owner of residential real property in an existing high-rise
residential building is entitled to a tax credit under this article against the
owner’s real property tax liability if:
(1)   An automatic sprinkler system is either installed throughout the existing
residential high-rise building or throughout the common areas of the existing
residential high-rise building; and
(2)   The owner has been granted an exemption under §
8-10.3.
(b)   The amount of the tax credit is $2,000. If an existing high-rise
residential building with an automatic sprinkler in the common areas is
subsequently improved with an automatic sprinkler system throughout the entire
building, no additional tax credit may be claimed. In no event shall the amount
of the resulting tax be less than the minimum tax as required in §
8-11.1(g).
(c)    The credit will be applied against real property tax liability for the
tax year immediately following approval of the application for the credit. If
the credit under this section exceeds the real property tax liability for the
tax year immediately following approval of the application for the credit, the
excess of the credit over real property tax liability may be claimed as a
credit against the real property tax liability in subsequent years until
exhausted.
(d)   The tax credit under this section, once granted by the director, is not
transferable or assignable.
(Added by Ord. 18-9)
§ 8-14.3 Administration—Rules.
(a)    The director shall determine the eligibility of the owner for the tax
credit upon review and verification that the existing high-rise residential
building has been installed with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance
with applicable building and fire codes.
(b)    The owner shall file an application for the tax credit with the director
no later than 24 months after the installation of the automatic sprinkler
system is completed. The application must be filed on or before September 30th
preceding the tax year in which the credit is claimed.
(c)    In accordance with HRS Chapter 91, the director shall adopt rules having
the force and effect of law for the administration, implementation, and
enforcement of this article.
(Added by Ord. 18-9)
ARTICLE 15: SEVERABILITY
Section
   
8-15.1   Severability
§ 8-15.1 Severability.
   This chapter is declared to be severable. In accordance therewith, if any
portion of this chapter is held invalid for any reason, the validity of any
other portion of this chapter shall not be affected and if the application of
any portion of this chapter to any person, property, or circumstance is held
invalid, the application hereof to any other person, property, or circumstance
shall not be affected.
(Sec. 8-13.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.); Sec. 8-14.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983
Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 15, § 8-15.1)
ARTICLE 16: TAX CREDIT FOR SEPTIC TANK TO REPLACE HOUSEHOLD CESSPOOL
Sections
   
8-16.1   Definitions
   
8-16.2   Septic tank cesspool replacement tax credit established
   
8-16.3   Administration—Rules
§ 8-16.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Cesspool. A covered lined or partially lined pool, pit, or deep hole in the
ground to receive untreated discharges of sewage and from which the liquids
seep into the surrounding soil through the bottom or sides.
Disposal System. Any seepage pit, effluent irrigation system, soil absorption
system, disposal trench, or other facility used in the disposal of wastewater,
including any wastewater transmission lines, pumps, power, or other equipment
associated with the ultimate disposal of wastewater, provided that the term
shall not include any cesspool or injection well.
Eligible Costs. Costs incurred after February 9, 2005.*
Septic Tank. A watertight settling tank in which settled sludge is in immediate
contact with the sewage flowing through the tank and the organic solids are
decomposed by an anaerobic bacterial action.
Wastewater. Has the same meaning as defined in §
43-1.2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 16, § 8-16.1) (Added by Ord. 05-02)
Editor’s note:
   * “February 9, 2005” is substituted for “the effective date of this
ordinance.”
§ 8-16.2 Septic tank cesspool replacement tax credit established.
(a)   An owner of residential real property in the city whose property uses a
cesspool to dispose of domestic wastewater and who replaces the cesspool with a
septic tank shall be entitled a one-time tax credit under this article against
the owner’s real property tax liability unless:
(1)   A sewer improvement district that would serve the property is planned by
the department of environmental services to be established within 10 years
after the date of application for the tax credit;
(2)   The conversion to a septic tank is required by the State department of
health as a condition of expanding the size of the dwelling/dwellings; or
(3)   The conversion to a septic tank is required by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency.
(b)   The amount of the tax credit shall not exceed 50 percent of the total
cost of the septic tank and disposal system; provided that the tax credit shall
apply only to the actual cost to the owner of the septic tank and disposal
system and their installation, and shall not include the cost of consumer
incentive premiums unrelated to the operation or installation of the septic
tank and disposal system; provided further, that the amount of the resultant
tax shall not be less than the minimum tax required in §
8-11.1(g).
(c)   The credit shall be claimed against real property tax liability for the
tax year immediately following approval of the application for the credit. The
application must be filed only after installation of the septic tank is
completed, the septic tank is operational, and the cesspool is permanently
sealed. The tax credit shall entitle the owner to a credit only for the single
tax year. There shall be no carryover tax credit.
(d)   Allowance of a credit under this article shall not preclude future
mandatory connection to a sewer system as required in §
43-1.5(a).
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 16, § 8-16.2) (Added by Ord. 05-02)
§ 8-16.3 Administration—Rules.
(a)   The director shall determine the eligibility of the owner for the tax
credit upon review and verification that the owner’s cesspool has been sealed
and a septic tank installed and operational.
(b)   The owner shall file an application therefor with the department of
budget and fiscal services after installation of the septic tank is completed,
the septic tank is operational, and the cesspool is permanently sealed.
Application must be filed on or before September 30 preceding the tax year in
which the credit would be provided.
(c)   The director shall adopt rules having the force and effect of law for the
administration, implementation, and enforcement of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 8, Art. 16, § 8-16.3) (Added by Ord. 05-02)
CHAPTER 8A: TAXATION OF TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS
Articles
   
1.   Transient Accommodations Tax
ARTICLE 1: TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS TAX
Sections
   
8A-1.1   Establishment of transient accommodations tax and disposition
   
8A-1.2   Definitions
   
8A-1.3   Imposition of tax
   
8A-1.4   Exemptions
   
8A-1.5   Registration
   
8A-1.6   Return and payments
   
8A-1.7   Annual return
   
8A-1.8   Electronic filing of tax returns
   
8A-1.9   Payment of taxes by electronic funds transfer
   
8A-1.10   Federal assessments
   
8A-1.11   Rent collection by third party
   
8A-1.12   Reconciliation
   
8A-1.13   Assessment of tax for failure to file a return
   
8A-1.14   Overpayment; refunds
   
8A-1.15   Audits, procedure, penalties
   
8A-1.16   Appeals
   
8A-1.17   Disclosure and destruction of returns
   
8A-1.18   Collection by suit
   
8A-1.19   Certain amounts held in trust; liability of key individuals
   
8A-1.20   Penalty and interest
   
8A-1.21   Application of tax
   
8A-1.22   Director
   
8A-1.23   Administrative rules
§ 8A-1.1 Establishment of transient accommodations tax and disposition.
   Pursuant to §§ 6 and 7 of Act 1, Session Laws of Hawaii 2021, First Special
Session, there is hereby established a 3 percent transient accommodations tax
on all gross rental, gross rental proceeds, and fair market rental value that
is taxable under HRS Chapter 237D on property in the city, which will be levied
and collected by the director of budget and fiscal services; provided that
moneys collected must be deposited as follows:
(1)   Into the general fund as follows:
(A)   For two years commencing on December 14, 2021, 58.33 percent of all
transient accommodations taxes collected pursuant to this chapter; and
(B)   Beginning two years after December 14, 2021 and thereafter, 41.66 percent
of all transient accommodations taxes collected pursuant to this chapter;
(2)   Into the transit fund as follows:
(A)   For two years commencing on December 14, 2021, 33.33 percent of all
transient accommodations taxes collected pursuant to this chapter; and
(B)   Beginning two years after December 14, 2021 and thereafter, 50 percent of
all transient accommodations taxes collected pursuant to this chapter; and
(3)   Into a special account in the general fund to be appropriately named by
the department of budget and fiscal services, 8.34 percent of all transient
accommodations taxes collected pursuant to this chapter; provided that the
funds in the special account must:
(A)   Be used to mitigate the impacts of visitors on public facilities and
natural resources, including the restoration, operations, and maintenance of
beaches and parks; and
(B)   Supplement, and not supplant, any funds regularly appropriated for the
purposes specified in paragraph (A).
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.2 Definitions.
   The terms used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, shall
have the meanings given to those terms in HRS Chapter 237D, as applicable to
properties situated in the city; provided that references to "director" mean
the director of budget and fiscal services of the city, or the director's duly
authorized designee.
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.3 Imposition of tax.
(a)   Each month, a tax on the gross rental or gross rental proceeds derived
from furnishing transient accommodations is levied and must be assessed and
collected.
(b)   Every transient accommodations broker, travel agency, and tour packager
who arranges transient accommodations at noncommissioned negotiated contract
rates and every operator must pay to the city the tax imposed.
(c)   Every plan manager is liable for and must pay to the city the transient
accommodations tax imposed under this chapter. Every resort time share vacation
plan must be represented by a plan manager who is subject to this chapter.
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.4 Exemptions.
(a)   The exemptions in HRS § 237D-3 are also exemptions to this chapter.
(b)   The tax imposed by this chapter does not apply to gross rental, gross
rental proceeds, and fair market rental value received as payments under
written contracts if the written contract:
(1)   Was entered into prior to December 14, 2021; and
(2)   Does not provide for the passing on of increased rates of taxes.
The county transient accommodations tax is imposed on the gross rental, gross
rental proceeds, and fair market rental value from all contracts entered into
on or after December 14, 2021, regardless of whether the contract allows for
the passing on of any tax or any tax increases.
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.5 Registration.
   All operators, plan managers, transient accommodations brokers, travel
agencies, or tour packagers within the city must hold a State registration in
accordance with HRS §§ 237D-4 and 237D-4.5. Failure to obtain a registration
under this section is considered an additional city civil violation punishable
by up to $1,000 per violation under authority of HRS § 46-1.5(24)(a).
Violations are appealable to the director consistent with HRS Chapter 91 within
30 days from the date of the notice of the violation.
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.6 Return and payments.
(a)   On or before the 20th day of each calendar month, every operator taxable
or plan manager liable under this chapter during the preceding calendar month
must file a sworn return with the director in the form the director prescribes
together with a remittance for the amount of the tax.
(b)   Notwithstanding subsection (a), the director, for good cause, may permit
a taxpayer to file and make payments on the taxpayer's return required under
this section:
(1)   On a quarterly basis during the calendar or fiscal year, on or before the
20th day of the calendar month after the close of each quarter. For calendar
year taxpayers, the return and payment must be made on or before April 20th,
July 20th, October 20th, and January 20th or, for fiscal year taxpayers, on or
before the 20th day of the fourth month, seventh month, and tenth month
following the beginning of the fiscal year and on or before the 20th day of the
month following the close of the fiscal year. This subdivision applies only if
the director is satisfied that the quarterly payment of the tax will not unduly
jeopardize the collection of the taxes due and the taxpayer's total tax
liability for the calendar or fiscal year under this chapter will not exceed
$4,000; or
(2)   On a semiannual basis during the calendar or fiscal year, the return and
payment to be made by or before the 20th day of the calendar month after the
close of each six-month period. For calendar year taxpayers, on July 20th and
January 20th or, for fiscal year taxpayers, on or before the 20th day of the
seventh month following the beginning of the fiscal year and on or before the
20th day of the month following the close of the fiscal year. This subsection
applies only if the director is satisfied that the semiannual payment of the
tax will not unduly jeopardize the collection of the taxes due and the
taxpayer's total tax liability for the calendar or fiscal year under this
chapter will not exceed $2,000.
The director, for good cause, may permit a taxpayer to make monthly payments
based on the taxpayer's estimated quarterly or semiannual liability. However,
the taxpayer must file a reconciliation return at the end of each quarter or at
the end of each six-month period during the calendar or fiscal year, as
required in this section.
(c)   If a taxpayer filing the taxpayer's return on a quarterly or semiannual
basis, as provided in this section, becomes delinquent in either the filing of
the taxpayer's return or the payment of the taxes due, or if the liability of a
taxpayer, who is permitted by the director to make semiannual payments of the
tax, exceeds $2,000 in transient accommodations taxes during the calendar year,
or if the liability of a taxpayer, who is permitted by the director to make
quarterly payments of the tax, exceeds $4,000 in transient accommodations taxes
during the calendar year, or if the director determines that any such quarterly
or semiannual filing of return would unduly jeopardize the proper
administration of this chapter, including the assessment or collection of the
transient accommodations tax, the director, at any time, may require the
monthly payment of the tax, in which case the taxpayer must then file the
taxpayer's return and make payments as provided in subsection (a).
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.7 Annual return.
   On or before the twentieth day of the fourth month following the close of
the taxable year, every person who has become liable for the payment of the
taxes under this chapter during the preceding taxable year must file with the
director a copy of the return filed with the State as required under HRS §
237D-7 and must transmit with the return a remittance covering the residue of
the tax due, if any.
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.8 Electronic filing of tax returns.
(a)   A person whose tax liability under this chapter for the tax year exceeds
$4,000 shall file any tax return required under this chapter by electronic
means.
(b)   The director may grant an exemption to the electronic filing requirement
for good cause.
(c)   The date of filing shall be the date the tax return is transmitted to the
director. The director may determine alternative methods for the signing,
subscribing, or verifying of a tax return that shall have the same validity and
consequences as the actual signing by the taxpayer. A filing under this section
shall be treated in the same manner as a filing subject to the penalties under
§
8A-1.20.
(d)   If a person who is required under subsection (a) to electronically file
any tax return fails to file using an approved method, unless it is shown that
the failure is due to reasonable cause and not to neglect, the person is liable
for a penalty of 2 percent of the amount of the tax required to be shown on the
return.
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.9 Payment of taxes by electronic funds transfer.
(a)   A person whose tax liability under this chapter for the tax year exceeds
$50,000 shall remit taxes by one of the means of electronic funds transfer
approved by the director.
(b)   The director may grant an exemption to the electronic payment requirement
for good cause.
(c)   If a person who is required under subsection (a) to remit taxes by one of
the means of electronic funds transfer approved by the director fails to remit
the taxes using an approved method on or before the date prescribed therefor,
unless it is shown that the failure is due to reasonable cause and not to
neglect, there is added to the tax required to be so remitted a penalty of 2
percent of the amount of the tax. The penalty under this subsection is in
addition to any penalty set forth in §
8A-1.20.
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.10 Federal assessments.
(a)   Any person required to report under HRS § 237D-7.5, must also
respectively make reflective adjustments and report to the director.
(b)   Any return or amended return required by this section must be filed with
the director within 90 days after the change, correction, adjustment, or
recomputation is finally determined or an amended return is filed with the
Internal Revenue Service. The return or amended return must be accompanied by a
copy of the document issued by the United States notifying the taxpayer of the
change, correction, adjustment, or recomputation.
(c)   The statutory period for the assessment of any deficiency or the
determination of any refund attributable to the report required by this section
shall not expire before the expiration of one year from the date the director
is notified by the taxpayer or the Internal Revenue Service, whichever is
earlier, of such a report as provided in subsection (a). Before the expiration
of this one-year period, the director and the taxpayer may agree, in writing,
to the extension of this period. The period so agreed upon may be further
extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the
period previously agreed upon.
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.11 Rent collection by third party.
(a)   Every person authorized under an agreement by the owner of transient
accommodations located within the city to collect rent on behalf of such owner
is subject to this section.
(b)   Every written rental collection agreement, in addition to the
requirements of HRS § 237D-8.5, must also include in bold print and ten-point
type size:
"HONOLULU TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS TAXES MUST BE PAID ON THE GROSS RENTS
COLLECTED BY ANY PERSON RENTING TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS IN THE CITY AND COUNTY
OF HONOLULU"
Every person entering into an oral rental collection agreement must furnish the
director a copy of the information furnished to the State as required under HRS
§ 237D-8.5, and must give the owner of the property a copy of the notice
required by this subsection. The statement required by this subsection may be
combined with the statement-required language under HRS § 237D-8.5, by adding
in bold print and in 10-point type size to the front of the statement in HRS §
237-30.5 the following in parentheses:
"HAWAI‘I (INCLUDING HONOLULU ADDED) TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS TAXES AND"
Every person authorized to collect rent for another person must file a copy of
the first page of the rental collection agreement with the director within 30
days after entering into the agreement, or must file a copy of United States
Internal Revenue Service Form 1099, the property owner's social security or
federal identification number, and, if available, the general excise tax
license and transient accommodations tax registration numbers of the owner of
such property being rented with the director at the same time as such forms
must be filed with the Internal Revenue Service for the applicable tax year.
The person also must notify the owner that such information is being furnished
and give the owner a copy of the notice.
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.12 Reconciliation.
(a)   On or before the 20th day of the fourth month following the close of the
taxable year, every person who has become liable for the payment of taxes under
this chapter during the preceding taxable year and every person who has
furnished transient accommodations that were exempt, for any portion of the
taxable year, from the tax imposed under this chapter, must file a copy with
the director of the reconciliation for transient accommodations as prescribed
by HRS § 237D-8.6.
(b)   On or before the 20th day of the fourth month following the close of the
taxable year, every plan manager who has become liable for the payment of taxes
under this chapter during the preceding taxable year must file with the
director a copy of the reconciliation filed with the State as prescribed by HRS
§ 237D-8.6, indicating the period of time that the owner of a resort time share
vacation unit was subject to the general excise tax or the tax under HRS §
237D-2(a).
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.13 Assessment of tax for failure to file a return.
(a)   If any operator or plan manager fails to make a return as required by
this chapter, the director must estimate the tax liability of the operator or
plan manager from any information the director obtains, and according to the
estimate, assess the taxes, interest, and penalty due to the city from the
operator or plan manager, give notice of the assessment to the operator or plan
manager, and make demand upon the operator or plan manager for payment. The
assessment is presumed correct unless, upon an appeal duly taken, the contrary
is proved by the person assessed. The burden of proof on appeal to disprove the
correctness of assessment is on the person assessed.
(b)   After a return is filed under this chapter, the director must cause the
return to be examined and may conduct further audits or investigations as the
director considers necessary. If the director determines that there is a
deficiency in the payment of any tax due under this chapter, the director must
assess the taxes and interest due the city, give notice of the assessment to
the persons liable, and make demand upon the persons for payment.
(c)   The director shall first give notice to the taxpayer of the proposed
assessment, and the taxpayer shall thereupon have an opportunity within 30 days
to confer with the director. After the expiration of 30 days from the
notification, the director shall assess the gross rental, gross rental
proceeds, or fair market rental value or any portion thereof which the director
believes has not theretofore been assessed, and shall give notice to the
taxpayer of the amount of the tax, and the amount thereof shall be paid within
20 days after the date the notice was mailed, properly addressed to the
taxpayer at the taxpayer's last known address or place of business. No
preliminary notice shall be necessary where the amount of the tax is calculated
by the director from gross rental, gross rental proceeds, or fair market rental
value reported by the taxpayer as subject to the tax; in such cases, the tax
shall be due and payable on the 10th day after the date the statement was
mailed.
(d)   Except as provided by this section, the amount of taxes imposed by this
chapter must be assessed or levied within three years after the annual return
was filed, or within three years of the due date prescribed for the filing of
the return, whichever is later. Without an assessment, no proceeding in court
for the collection of any of the taxes may be commenced after the expiration of
the period. Where the assessment of the tax imposed by this chapter has
occurred within the applicable period of limitation, the tax may be collected
by levy or by a proceeding in court under HRS Chapter 231, if the levy is made
or the proceeding was begun within 15 years after the assessment of the tax.
Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary in this section, the
limitation on collection after assessment in this section must be suspended for
the period:
(1)   The taxpayer agrees to suspend the period;
(2)   The assets of the taxpayer are in control or custody of a court in any
proceeding before any court of the United States or any state, and for six
months after the court is no longer in control or custody;
(3)   An offer in compromise under HRS § 231-3(10), is pending; and
(4)   During which the taxpayer is outside the city if the period of absence is
for a continuous period of at least six months. However, if at the time of the
taxpayer's return to the city the period of limitations on collection after
assessment would expire before the expiration of six months from the date of
the taxpayer's return, the period does not expire before the expiration of the
six months.
(e)   In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax, or
of a failure to file the annual return, the tax may be assessed or levied at
any time. The burden of proof with respect to the issues of falsity or fraud
and intent to evade tax rests with the city.
(f)   Where, before the expiration of the period prescribed in subsection (c),
the director and the taxpayer have consented in writing to the assessment or
levy of the tax after the date fixed by subsection (c), the tax may be assessed
or levied at any time prior to the expiration of the period agreed upon. The
period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made
before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon.
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.14 Overpayment; refunds.
(a)   Upon application by a taxpayer, if the director determines that any tax,
interest, or penalty has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or
illegally collected or computed, the tax, interest, or penalty will be credited
by the director on any taxes then due under this chapter. The director shall
refund the balance to the taxpayer or the taxpayer's successors,
administrators, executors, or assigns in accordance with this section.
(b)   No credit or refund will be allowed for any tax imposed by this chapter,
unless a claim for such credit or refund is filed as follows:
(1)   If an annual return is timely filed, or is filed within three years after
the date prescribed for filing the annual return, then the credit or refund
shall be claimed within three years after the date the annual return was filed
or the date prescribed for filing the annual return, whichever is later.
(2)   If an annual return is not filed, or is filed more than three years after
the date prescribed for filing the annual return, a claim for credit or refund
shall be filed within:
(A)   Three years after the payment of the tax; or
(B)   Three years after the date prescribed for the filing of the annual
return; whichever is later.
Subdivisions (1) and (2) are mutually exclusive.
(c)   All refunds shall be paid upon a voucher in the form prescribed by the
director. If the taxpayer is delinquent in the payment of any tax due to the
city, the department shall withhold the amount of the delinquent taxes,
together with penalties and interest thereon, from the amount of the refund.
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.15 Audits, procedure, penalties.
(a)   For the purpose of verification or audit of a return made by the
taxpayer, or where there are reasonable grounds to believe that any return made
is so deficient as not to form the basis of a satisfactory assessment of the
tax, or for the purpose of making an assessment where no return has been made,
the director may examine all account books, bank books, bank statements,
records, vouchers, taxpayer's copies of federal and state tax returns, and any
and all other documents and evidence having any relevancy to the determination
of the gross rental, gross rental proceeds, or fair market rental value as
required to be returned under this chapter and may summon or require the
attendance of the person by or for whom the return, if any, has been made or
whose tax is being assessed, and any employee of the person, and may summon or
require the attendance of any person having knowledge in the premises, naming
the time and place in the summons, and may require the production of any books,
statements, or other evidence open to examination, and may take testimony in
reference to any matter relevant to the gross rental, gross rental proceeds, or
fair market rental value for the period under consideration, with power to
require that the person so called and appearing shall be interrogated under
oath and to administer the oath.
(b)   If the director determines that any gross rental, gross rental proceeds,
or fair market rental value liable to the tax have not been assessed, the
director may assess the same as provided in §
8A-1.13.
(c)   Any individual knowingly giving false testimony under oath at any hearing
before the director shall be guilty of perjury and shall be punished as
provided by law.
(d)   Any person refusing or neglecting to obey any summons issued by the
director, and any individual appearing and refusing to testify under oath,
shall be fined $50 for the first offense and $100 for each succeeding offense.
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.16 Appeals.
   Any person aggrieved by any assessment of the tax or liability imposed by
this chapter may appeal from the assessment to the tax appeal court within 30
days from the date the notice of assessment was mailed.
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.17 Disclosure and destruction of returns.
(a)   All tax returns and return information required to be filed under this
chapter, and the report of any investigation of the return or of the subject
matter of the return, is confidential. It is unlawful for any person or any
officer or employee of the city, including the city auditor or the city
auditor's duly authorized designee, to intentionally make known information
imparted by any tax return or return information filed in accordance with this
chapter, or any report of any investigation of the return or of the subject
matter of the return, or to wilfully permit any return, return information, or
report so made, or any copy, to be seen or examined by any person. For tax
purposes, only the taxpayer, the taxpayer's authorized agent, or persons with a
material interest in the return, return information, or report may examine
them. Unless otherwise provided by law, persons with a material interest in the
return, return information, or report include:
(1)   Trustees;
(2)   Partners;
(3)   Persons named in a board resolution or a one percent shareholder in the
case of a corporate return;
(4)   The person authorized to act for a corporation in dissolution;
(5)   The shareholder of an S corporation;
(6)   The personal representative, trustee, heir, or beneficiary of an estate
or trust in the case of the estate's or decedent's return;
(7)   The committee, trustee, or guardian of any person in subsections (a)(1)
through (6) who is incompetent;
(8)   The trustee in bankruptcy or receiver, and the attorney-in-fact of any
person in subsections (a)(1) through (7);
(9)   Persons duly authorized by the State in connection with their official
duties;
(10)   Any duly accredited tax official of the United States, any state or
territory of the United States, or any county of this State;
(11)   The multi-state tax commission or its authorized representative; and
(12)   Members of a limited liability company.
Any person who violates this subsection will be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Nothing in this subsection prohibits the publication of statistics that are
classified to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and
the items of the reports or returns.
(b)   The director may destroy any of the monthly, quarterly, or semiannual
returns filed under §§
8A-1.6 and
8A-1.7 upon the expiration of three years after the end of the calendar or
fiscal year in which the taxes so returned accrued.
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.18 Collection by suit.
   The director may collect taxes due and unpaid under this chapter, together
with all accrued penalties, by filing suit or other appropriate proceeding in
the first circuit court. After delinquency has continued for 60 days, or if any
person required to register under this chapter fails to do so for a period of
60 days after the first date when the person was required to register, the
director may proceed in the first circuit court to obtain an injunction
restraining the further furnishing of transient accommodations or the operation
of the resort time share vacation plan until full payment has been made of all
taxes and penalties and interest due under this chapter, or until such
registration is secured, or both, as the circumstances of the case may require.
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.19 Certain amounts held in trust; liability of key individuals.
(a)   There shall be personal liability for the taxes imposed under this
chapter as provided in this section for the following amounts of gross rental,
gross rental proceeds, or fair market rental value:
(1)   Any amount collected as a recovery of the taxpayer's liability under this
chapter, where the amount is passed on as the tax owed by the taxpayer under
this chapter for the transaction and is separately stated or accounted for in a
receipt, contract, invoice, billing, or other evidence of the business
activity; or
(2)   An amount equal to the tax liability under this chapter on a transaction
where a taxpayer does not separately state or account for the amount as a tax
recovery as provided in subsection (a)(1). For purposes of this subdivision,
the amount of the imputed tax liability is the result of multiplying the gross
rental, gross rental proceeds, or fair market rental value received in the
transaction by the tax rate.
The amounts under subdivisions (a)(1) and (2) shall be held in trust for the
benefit of the city and for payment to the city in the manner and at the time
required by this chapter.
(b)   The personal liability under this section applies to any officer, member,
manager, or other person having control or supervision over amounts of gross
rental, gross rental proceeds, or fair market rental value collected to pay the
tax and held in trust under subsection (a), or who is charged with the
responsibility for the filing of returns or the payment of tax on gross rental,
gross rental proceeds, or fair market rental value collected and held in trust
under subsection (a). The person shall be personally liable for any unpaid
taxes and interest and penalties on those taxes, if such officer or other
person wilfully fails to pay or to cause to be paid any taxes due from the
taxpayer pursuant to this chapter.
This subsection does not apply to any officer, manager, or other person having
control or supervision over amounts of gross proceeds or gross income collected
to pay the tax and held in trust under subsection (a), or who is charged with
the responsibility for the filing of returns or the payment of tax on gross
rental, gross rental proceeds, or fair market rental value collected and held
in trust under subsection (a) for a nonprofit organization.
For purposes of this subsection:
Nonprofit Organization. A corporate entity, association, or other duly
chartered entity that is registered with the State and is exempt from the
application of this chapter pursuant to HRS § 237D-3.
Wilfully Fails to Pay or to Cause to Be Paid. Shall be construed in accordance
with judicial interpretations given to similar provisions of the Internal
Revenue Code; consistent therewith, the term "wilfully" shall mean a voluntary,
intentional violation of a known legal duty.
(c)   An officer, member, manager, or other responsible person shall be liable
only for taxes on gross rental, gross rental proceeds, or fair market rental
value collected, plus interest and penalties on those taxes, that became due
during the period the person had control, supervision, responsibility, or a
duty to act for the taxpayer as described in subsection (b).
(d)   Persons liable under subsection (b) are exempt from liability when
nonpayment of the tax on gross rental, gross rental proceeds, or fair market
rental value held in trust is for good cause as determined by the director.
(e)   The voluntary or involuntary dissolution of the taxpayer or the
withdrawal or surrender of its right to engage in business in this state will
not discharge the liability hereby imposed.
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.20 Penalty and interest.
(a)   The following penalties and interest must be added to and become a part
of the tax:
(1)   For underpayments.
(A)    If any part of any underpayment is due to negligence or intentional
disregard but without intent to defraud, there must be added to the tax an
amount up to 25 percent of the underpayment as determined by the director; and
(B)   If any part of any underpayment of tax required to be shown on a return
is due to fraud, there must be added to the tax an amount up to 50 percent of
the underpayment as determined by the director.
(2)   For delinquent payments.
(A)   If any amount of tax is not paid on or before the last date prescribed
for payment, interest on such amount at the rate of two-thirds of 1 percent a
month or fraction of a month must be paid for the period beginning with the
first calendar day after the date prescribed for payment;
(B)   Interest prescribed under this paragraph on any tax must be paid upon
notice and demand, and must be assessed, collected, and paid in the same manner
as taxes;
(C)   No interest under this paragraph can be imposed on interest provided by
this paragraph; and
(D)   If any portion of a tax is satisfied by credit of any overpayment, then
no interest may be imposed under this paragraph on the portion of the tax so
satisfied for any period during which, if the credit had not been made,
interest would have been allowable with respect to the overpayment.
(3)   Failure to file tax return. In case of failure to file any tax return
required to be filed on the date prescribed therefor (determined with regard to
any extension of time for filing), unless it is shown that the failure is due
to reasonable cause and not due to neglect, there is added to the amount
required to be shown as tax on the return 5 percent of the amount of the tax if
the failure is for not more than one month, with an additional 5 percent for
each additional month or fraction thereof that the failure continues, not
exceeding 25 percent in the aggregate. For the purposes of this subdivision,
the amount of tax required to be shown on the return is reduced by the amount
of any part of the tax which is paid on or before the date prescribed for
payment of the tax and by the amount of any credit against the tax which may be
claimed upon the return.
(4)   Failure to pay tax after filing timely returns. If a return is filed on
or before the date prescribed therefor and the amount shown as tax on the
return is not completely paid within 60 days of the prescribed filing date,
there shall be added to the unpaid tax an amount of up to 20 percent as
determined by the director.
(b)   No taxpayer is exempt from any penalty or interest by reason of having
contested the tax, except to the extent the tax is adjudged to be excessive or
contrary to law.
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.21 Application of tax.
(a)   The tax imposed by this chapter is in addition to any other taxes imposed
by any other laws of the State or city. To determine if the tax under this
chapter is to be levied, assessed, and collected upon transient accommodations,
the following presumptions control:
(1)   If a person lets a transient accommodation for less than 180 consecutive
days, it must be presumed that the accommodation furnished is for a transient
purpose; and
(2)   If a person lets a transient accommodation for 180 days or more, there is
no presumption as to the purpose for which the accommodation is furnished. The
burden of proving to the director that an accommodation is not being furnished
for a transient purpose rests with the operator of the accommodation. If the
director is satisfied that an accommodation is not furnished for a transient
purpose, then the director must not levy any tax under this chapter.
(b)   Except as otherwise provided, this chapter applies to a transient
accommodations broker, travel agency, or tour packager who enters into an
agreement to furnish transient accommodations at noncommissioned negotiated
contract rates in the same manner as it applies to an operator.
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.22 Director.
   The director has all the rights and powers of the director of taxation under
HRS Chapter 237D. The director is authorized to enter into an agreement with
the director of taxation, or other state agency, for the collection of the
taxes authorized by this chapter. The director is further authorized to
delegate any authority provided in this chapter. If any section in this chapter
conflicts with this authority to enter into an agreement for the collection of
taxes, that section is void. The director must appropriately notify taxpayers
of any void section.
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
§ 8A-1.23 Administrative rules.
   The director is authorized to adopt administrative rules pursuant to HRS
Chapter 91 for the purposes of implementing, administering, and enforcing this
chapter. The director is further authorized to prescribe forms in conformity
with this chapter. Such forms and rules will have the force and effect of law.
(Added by Ord. 21-33)
TITLE III: MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
9.   BOTANICAL GARDENS
      
10.   PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES
      
11.   CHILD CARE
      
12.   ANIMALS AND FOWL
      
13.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS, MALLS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
      
14.   PUBLIC WORKS INFRASTRUCTURE
CHAPTER 9: BOTANICAL GARDENS
Articles
   
1.   General Provisions
   
2.   Use of Botanical Gardens
   
3.   Fees and Charges
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
9-1.1   Definitions
§ 9-1.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Botanical Garden. An area developed for the recreational and educational
appreciation of specific types of plants and plant communities, and includes
Foster Botanical Garden, Liliuokalani Botanical Garden, Wahiawa Botanical
Garden, Koko Crater Botanical Garden, and the Hoomaluhia Botanical Garden.
Disc Golf. The sport in which a person attempts to throw a disc from at least
nine tee areas into at least nine pole hole baskets in the fewest number of
throws.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10A, Art. 1, § 10A-1.1) (Added by Ord. 05-022)
ARTICLE 2: USE OF BOTANICAL GARDENS
Sections
   
9-2.1   Exclusive use of portions of botanical gardens
   
9-2.2   Regulations of botanical gardens
§ 9-2.1 Exclusive use of portions of botanical gardens.
(a)   Subject to the applicable restrictions in the underlying conveyance
document, the director of parks and recreation may allow, by permit, the
exclusive use of a portion of a botanical garden for:
(1)   Weddings;
(2)   Disc golf; and
(3)   Any other recreational, cultural, or ceremonial activity permitted by
rule adopted by the department of parks and recreation pursuant to HRS Chapter
91.
(b)   The director may allow a portion of a botanical garden to be used
exclusively and on a temporary basis for disc golf; provided that the director:
(1)   Finds that the playing of disc golf will not endanger any plants in the
collection of the botanical garden;
(2)   Shall issue a permit for the use of a botanical garden for this purpose,
which shall include conditions designed to avoid damage to the plants in the
garden; and
(3)   Shall determine the times and duration that the playing of disc golf will
be allowed, which shall be included in the permit.
(c)   The director may allow a portion of a botanical garden to be used
exclusively and on a temporary basis for weddings; provided that the director:
(1)   Shall issue a permit for the use of a botanical garden for a wedding,
which permit shall include conditions designed to avoid damage to the plants in
the garden; and
(2)   Shall determine the times and duration that weddings will be allowed in
the botanical garden, which shall be included in the permit.
(d)   The director shall establish a fee structure for the use of a portion of
a botanical garden for disc golf, weddings, and any other activity permitted by
rule.
(e)   The director shall establish procedures to notify the public when a
portion of a botanical garden will be subject to use under this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10A, Art. 2, § 10A-2.1) (Added by Ord. 05-022)
§ 9-2.2 Regulations of botanical gardens.
   The city’s botanical gardens shall be subject to the same regulations and
penalties applicable to parks as provided in
Chapter 10, except where such regulations would conflict with the permitted use
of botanical gardens as provided in this chapter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10A, Art. 2, § 10A-2.2) (Added by Ord. 05-022)
ARTICLE 3: FEES AND CHARGES
Sections
   
9-3.1   Admission fees for the Foster Botanical Garden
   
9-3.2   Students—School staff—Chaperones
   
9-3.3   Community service groups
§ 9-3.1 Admission fees for the Foster Botanical Garden.
(a)   The following daily admission fees shall be assessed for the Foster
Botanical Garden:
(1)   Child five years of age and under: free. Child must be accompanied by a
person 18 years old or older;
(2)   Annual family pass holder as specified in subsection (b): free;
(3)   Child six to 12 years of age: $1 per person;
(4)   Resident of Hawaii, 13 years of age and older: $3 per person;
(5)   Nonresident of Hawaii, 13 years of age and older: $5 per person;
(6)   Member of the Friends of the Honolulu Botanical Garden: free; and
(7)   The director of parks and recreation is authorized to set reduced rates
for persons participating in structured educational tours, group purchases, and
promotional packages and persons with promotional coupons. The director is also
authorized to allow entry of any person into the Foster Botanical Garden as
part of a promotional offer or package made available by the city.
(b)   An annual family pass may be purchased for $25 each. An annual family
pass holder is the person or persons named on the pass who is or are entitled
to free unlimited admission, during operating hours, to the Foster Botanical
Garden for the period specified in the pass.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10A, Art. 3, § 10A-3.1) (Added by Ord. 05-22)
§ 9-3.2 Students—School staff—Chaperones.
   The following shall be admitted free of charge to Foster Botanical Garden;
provided that the visit is for educational purposes and the teacher, school
staff or group leader has scheduled the class visit at least one week before
the requested date, and furnished a firm count of adult supervisors who fall
under subdivision (5):
(1)   Students at public schools operated by the State department of education
(DOE) and private schools licensed by the DOE, except for private trade,
vocational, or technical schools;
(2)   Children who are exempted from compulsory education under State DOE
regulations and procedures with current, approved DOE Form 4140;
(3)   Children of child care centers (with current certificate of approval or
approved form from the State department of human services) or in after school
care programs of the city or the State of Hawaii;
(4)   State of Hawaii university and college students with school
identification cards; and
(5)   Adult supervisors when they accompany Hawaii students in the following
categories:
(A)   Students five years old and younger: teachers, school staff, or adult
chaperones;
(B)   Students six years old and older: teachers or school staff only; and
(C)   “Special education” students requiring monitors or health-care
attendants: as required for children’s supervision and care.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10A, Art. 3, § 10A-3.2) (Added by Ord. 05-22)
§ 9-3.3 Community service groups.
(a)   The persons referred to in subsections (b) and (c) shall be admitted free
of charge to Foster Botanical Garden; provided that their visit is for
educational purposes and a group leader has scheduled the visit at least one
week before the requested date and has furnished a firm count of the adult
attendants or group leaders needed to accompany and supervise the group.
(b)   Clients of Hawaii-based public institutions and public or private
clinics, hospitals and health care facilities that serve persons on account of
their disability, illness, or senior citizen status, and the attendants needed
to accompany and assist the group’s members. Group leaders are required to
present identification for themselves upon entry.
(c)   Clients or participants in Hawaii-based public, nonprofit or governmental
community service groups, such as “Summer Fun,” YWCA/YMCA, scout groups, etc.,
who are 18 years old and younger, and the staff attendants or group leaders
needed to accompany and supervise the group.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10A, Art. 3, § 10A-3.3) (Added by Ord. 05-22)
CHAPTER 10: PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES
Articles
   
1.   Use of Public Parks, Playgrounds, Beaches, and Other Public Areas
   
2.   Fees and Charges for Use of Parks and Recreational Facilities
   
3.   Fees for Use of Parks and Recreational Facilities for Commercial
Activities
   
4.   Fees for Use of Municipal Golf Courses
   
5.   Commercial Windsurfing
   
6.   Cultural Sites in Public Parks
   
7.   Policy on Fees for Organized Recreational Programs
   
8.   Summer Fun Activities
   
9.   Professional Sports Activity at Hans L’Orange Baseball Facility
   
10.   Rental of Surfboard Lockers on Kuhio Beach
   
11.   Reserved
   
12.   After-School Programs
ARTICLE 1: USE OF PUBLIC PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, BEACHES,
AND OTHER PUBLIC AREAS
Sections
   
10-1.1   Definitions
   
10-1.2   Park rules
   
10-1.3   Permits*
   
10-1.4   Rules pertaining to street trees, hedges, and shrubs
   
10-1.5   Public beaches
   
10-1.6   Violation—Penalty
   
10-1.7   Animals in public parks
   
10-1.8   Community recreational gardening program
Editor’s note:
   * Permits issued on or before February 9, 2017, allowing recreational stops
by commercial tour companies to take place at Waimanalo Beach Park, Kaiona
Beach Park, Kaupo Beach Park, Bellows Field Beach Park, Makapuu Beach Park, and
Waimanalo Bay Beach Park, will continue to be valid until the permit expires.
§ 10-1.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Camp or Camping. The use and occupation of a public park as a temporary or
permanent dwelling place or sleeping place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
5:00 a.m.
Commercial Activity. A use or purpose designed for profit, which includes but
is not limited to:
(1)   The exchange or buying and selling of commodities;
(2)   The providing of services relating to or connected with trade, traffic,
or commerce in general;
(3)   Any activity performed by the commercial operator or its employees or
agents in connection with the delivery of such commodities or services; and
(4)   The soliciting of business, including the display or distribution of
notices, business cards, or advertisements for commercial promotional purposes.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following are not considered commercial
activities:
(5)   The use of land for utilities;
(6)   The use of the premises and facilities for official canoe regattas;
(7)   The use of the premises and facilities at Hūnānāniho and Waimānalo Beach
Park for music festivals, country fairs, farmer’s markets, organized youth
sports for students ages pre-school through high school, and educational events
that are for students ages pre-school through high school and conducted or
offered by educational institutions recognized by the State of Hawai‘i
department of education; and
(8)   All activities and programs conducted by the department of parks and
recreation and any vendors needed to conduct these activities and programs.
Director. The director of parks and recreation or the director’s designated
representative.
Dwelling Place. A place used for human habitation as an overnight
accommodation, lodging, or shelter on either a temporary or permanent basis.
Expressive Activities. Speech or conduct, the principal object of which is the
expression, dissemination, or communication by verbal, visual, literary, or
auditory means of political, religious, philosophical, or ideological opinions,
views, or ideas and for which no fee is charged or required as a condition of
participation in or attendance at such activity. Expressive activity generally
would not include sports events such as marathons, fundraising events, beauty
contests, commercial events, cultural celebrations, or other events the
principal purpose of which is entertainment.
Human Habitation. The act of using, occupying, or inhabiting a place of lodging
or shelter on a permanent or temporary basis as a place of residence or
sojourn.
Off-Leash Park. A public park designated by the director of parks and
recreation where dogs, and no other animal, shall be allowed to be off-leash.
Public Park. Any park, park roadway, playground, athletic field, beach, beach
right-of-way, tennis court, golf course, swimming pool, or other recreation
area or facility under the control, maintenance, and management of the
department of parks and recreation.
   Public park does not include a public thoroughfare defined as a “mall” under
§
13-1.1, unless the public thoroughfare has been:
(1)   Accepted, dedicated, or named by the council expressly as a public park
or “park”;
(2)   Placed under the control, maintenance, and management of and classified
expressly as a public park or “park” by the department of parks and recreation;
or
(3)   Constructed or situated within a larger specific recreation area or
facility listed in the preceding sentence.
Recreational Stops. The use of city beach parks by commercial tour companies
for activities that may include but are not limited to sightseeing, spectating,
picture taking, beach combing, swimming, guided tours, and eating of prepared
picnic lunches.
Shopping Cart. A metal or plastic handcart on three or more wheels provided by
a wholesale or retail establishment such as a supermarket.
Sleeping Place. A place used by a person for the purpose of sleeping, where the
person is asleep inside a tent, sleeping bag, or some form of temporary shelter
or is asleep atop of or covered by materials such as a cot, mat, bedroll,
bedding, sheet, blanket, pillow, bag, cardboard, or newspapers.
Tent. A collapsible structure consisting of sheets of canvas, fabric, or other
material attached to or draped over a frame of poles or a supporting rope that
has more than one wall.
Traverse. To travel continuously in a direction across or through.
Wall. An upright, vertical, or slanted structure, partition, or divider serving
to enclose, divide, support, or protect.
(Sec. 13-14.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 1, § 10-1.1) (Am.
Ords. 01-43, 02-51, 08-22, 10-4, 10-5, 12-2, 12-26, 13-12, 17-3; 22-3)
§ 10-1.2 Park rules.
(a)   Within the limits of any public park, it is unlawful for any person to:
(1)   Willfully or intentionally destroy, damage, or injure any property;
(2)   Climb onto any tree, except those designated for climbing, or to climb
onto any wall, fence, shelter, building, statue, monument, or other structure,
excluding play apparatus;
(3)   Swim, bathe, wade in, or pollute the water of any ornamental pool or
fountain;
(4)   Kindle, build, maintain, or use any fire, other than in a grill or
brazier;
(5)   Annoy, molest, kill, wound, chase, shoot, or throw missiles at any animal
or bird;
(6)   Distribute, post, or place any commercial handbill or circular, notice,
or other advertising device or matter, except as permitted by the terms of any
agreement relating to the use of park property;
(7)   Use any surfboard or devices or materials with jagged or rough ends and
edges, which are dangerous to surfers, swimmers, or bathers;
(8)   Construct or fabricate surfboards;
(9)   Permit any animal to enter and remain within the confines of any public
park area except as otherwise provided in this article;
(10)   Feed any animal or bird when signs are posted prohibiting such feeding;
(11)   Wash, polish, or repair cars or other vehicles;
(12)   Enter or remain in any public park during the night hours that the park
is closed; provided that signs are posted indicating the hours that the park is
closed, except that a person may traverse a public beach park using the most
direct route during park closure hours for the purpose of reaching the
shoreline;
(13)   Camp at any park not designated as a campground;
(14)   Fail to comply with any sign or notice posted by the City and County of
Honolulu; and
(15)   Use, place, occupy, leave, or in any other manner, situate a shopping
cart.
(b)   Except as authorized by permits, and subject to the terms and conditions
imposed by the department of parks and recreation, it is unlawful for any
person, within the limits of any public park, to:
(1)   Cut or remove any wood, plant, grass, soil, rock, sand, or gravel;
(2)   Sell or offer for sale any services, merchandise, article, or thing;
(3)   Moor, tie up, store, repair, or condition any boat, canoe, raft, or other
vessel;
(4)   Repair or condition any surfboard;
(5)   Park any vehicle except bicycles on grassed areas;
(6)   Amplify music or use battery operated loudspeakers (bullhorns);
(7)   Ride or drive any horse or any other animal;
(8)   Engage in or conduct any activity that creates any sound, noise or music
exceeding 80 dBA sound pressure level taken at a point 10 feet in front of the
source for a cumulative time period of at least five minutes when measured with
a calibrated American National Standard Institute (ANSI) Type I or Type II
sound level meter with weighting set at “A” and response set at “slow” except
any activity that is sponsored by the city or the department of parks and
recreation or authorized by permit issued by the city; and
(9)   Construct, use, place, occupy, leave, or in any other manner, situate any
tent.
(c)   Within the limits of any public park, it is unlawful for any person,
wherever signs are posted prohibiting such activities, to:
(1)   Throw, cast, catch, kick, or strike any baseball, tennis ball, football,
basketball, croquet ball, or other object;
(2)   Ride upon roller skates, skateboards, or bicycles; and
(3)   Engage in kite flying.
(d)   Except in park areas specifically designated for such purposes, it is
unlawful for any person to:
(1)   Throw, cast, roll, or strike any bowling ball or golf ball;
(2)   Engage in model airplane flying;
(3)   Engage in model boat sailing;
(4)   Kindle, build, or maintain any campfire;
(5)   Discharge firearms for target practice only;
(6)   Engage in archery for target practice and tournament only; and
(7)   Launch model rockets.
(e)   In addition to the requirements of subsection (b), the repair or
conditioning of any surfboard shall be performed only by a concessionaire of
the department of parks and recreation who has a surfboard concession. Such
repair work shall be conducted only in an enclosed building or structure,
approved by the department of parks and recreation, the department of planning
and permitting, and the State department of health. The terms and conditions to
be imposed by the department of parks and recreation shall include, together
with the requirements necessary to safeguard the health and safety of the
public, the securing of adequate insurance to protect the city from any
liability resulting from such repair work.
(f)   It is unlawful for any person, other than authorized personnel of the
department of parks and recreation, or a person then golfing on the course, or
such person’s caddy, to gather or pick up golf balls within the boundaries of a
public golf course.
(g)   (1)   Within the limits of any public park, it is unlawful for any
person, where signs are posted prohibiting or restricting such activities, to
operate, park, or stand a motor vehicle in violation of such prohibitions or
restrictions. Such signs may impose any prohibition or restriction upon the
operation, parking or standing of motor vehicles which the director of parks
and recreation shall determine will maximize the enjoyment and use of any park
by park users. Such restrictions may include the installation of parking meters
in parks.
(2)   Parking meter charges and time limits.
(A)   Meters at the Honolulu Zoo parking lot must have a four-hour time limit
at the rate of $1.50 per hour.
(B)   Meters on the mauka side of Kalakaua Avenue between Monsarrat Avenue and
the Paki Avenue-Poni Moi Road-Diamond Head Road intersection must have a four-
hour time limit at the rate of 50 cents per hour and must be in effect between
the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., seven days a week.
(C)   Meters at Kamamalu Neighborhood Park and ‘A‘ala Park must have a three-
hour time limit at the rate of $1.50 per hour.
(3)   Parking meter violations.
(A)   A person may not shall violate §
15-22.11.
(B)   Every hour a vehicle remains parked, stopped, or standing in violation of
§
15-22.11 constitutes a separate violation.
(h)   Commercial activities prohibited at parks.
(1)   Commercial activities, including recreational stops by commercial tour
companies, but excluding commercial filming activities that take place from 1:
00 p.m. on Saturdays through 6:30 a.m. on Mondays, are not allowed at any time
at the following parks:
(A)   Kailua Beach Park; and
(B)   Kalama Beach Park.
(2)   Commercial activities, including recreational stops by commercial tour
companies, but excluding commercial filming activities and shore water events,
are not allowed at any time at the following parks:
(A)   Waiale‘e Beach Park;
(B)   Sunset Beach Park;
(C)   ‘Ehukai Beach Park;
(D)   Pūpūkea Beach Park;
(E)   Waimea Bay Beach Park;
(F)   Hale‘iwa Ali‘i Beach Park;
(G)   Kaiaka Bay Beach Park; and
(H)   The undeveloped portions of Hale‘iwa Beach Park adjacent to Pua‘ena
Point.
(3)   Commercial activities, including recreational stops by commercial tour
companies, but excluding movie or television filming activities permitted under
§§
10-3.2(a)(1) and
10-3.2(a)(2), are not allowed at any time at the following parks:
(A)   Makapu‘u Beach Park;
(B)   Kaupō Beach Park;
(C)   Kaiona Beach Park;
(D)   Waimānalo Beach Park;
(E)   Hūnānāniho; and
(F)   Bellows Field Beach Park.
Except for transportation services for commercial activities allowed under this
subdivision, operators of taxicabs, commercial tour carriers, and other motor
carriers regulated by the State Public Utilities Commission under HRS Chapter
271, who provide transportation services for passengers or property by motor
vehicle, for the purposes of offering, providing, facilitating, participating
in, or engaging in commercial activities, are prohibited from entering the
parks enumerated in this subdivision.
For the purposes of this section, “taxicab” has the same meaning as defined in
§
36-1.1(2).
(4)   Recreational stops by commercial tour companies are not allowed at any
time at Kokololio Beach Park.
(i)   Commercial activities, including recreational stops by commercial tour
companies, but excluding movie or television filming activities permitted under
§§
10-3.2(a)(1) and
10-3.2(a)(2), are not allowed at any time at city-owned or -operated beach
rights-of-way and easements from Makapu‘u Point to Kapoho Point (Castle Point).
Commercial activities, including recreational stops by commercial tour
companies, but excluding commercial filming activities and shore water events,
are not allowed at any time at city-owned or -operated beach rights-of-way and
easements from Sunset Point to Kaiaka Point.
(Sec. 13-14.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 1,
§ 10-1.2) (Am. Ords. 90-6, 94-05, 94-24, 97-26, 01-43, 06-20, 07-17, 09-20, 10-
4, 10-5, 12-2, 12-28, 13-12, 17-3, 19-5, 21-34, 22-3, 22-34 )
§ 10-1.3 Permits.*
(a)   Required. Any person using the recreational and other areas and
facilities under the control, maintenance, management, and operation of the
department of parks and recreation must first obtain a permit from the
department for the following uses:
(1)   Picnic groups, consisting of 50 or more persons.
(2)   Camping.
(3)   Sports activities, including but not limited to professional athletic
contests, tournaments, or demonstration events, and professional surfing
contests conducted by a league, organization, association, group, or
individual.
A sports activity that requires a permit as provided under this section is
subject to the following restrictions, in addition to any other conditions
imposed by the rules adopted by the director:
(A)   Gender equity.  The department of parks and recreation shall not give
preferential treatment to requests for permits for male activities over
requests for permits for female activities. This requirement does not apply if:
(i)   The sports activity is limited to one gender;
(ii)   The rules governing a particular sports activity expressly prohibit the
participation of a particular gender; and
(iii)   Permits are made available on an equal basis for a similar activity
with participants of another gender or to participants of all genders.
(B)   Issuance standards for permits. The department of parks and recreation
shall uniformly treat each application, based upon the facts presented, free
from improper or inappropriate considerations and from unfair discrimination
and shall exercise no other discretion over the issuance of a permit under this
section, except as provided in this section and in the departmental rules.
(C)   Review. Upon the department's refusal to issue a permit, the applicant
for the permit is entitled to request a hearing before the director of parks
and recreation or a hearings officer appointed by the director to be held
within 30 days after the date of the refusal. The hearing will be subject to
HRS Chapter 91. In the review, the department's decision will be upheld in the
absence of a finding of abuse of discretion.
(4)   Recreational activities, including nonprofit fundraising activities,
sponsored by community organizations, associations, groups, or individuals.
(5)   Expressive activities.
(A)   Expressive activities held at Ala Moana Regional Park or in the following
areas of Kapiolani Regional Park require a permit when the expressive activity
involves 150 or more persons:
(i)   The triangle area fronting the Honolulu Zoo bordered by Kapahulu Avenue
and Monsarrat Avenue, but excluding the Honolulu Zoo;
(ii)   The area within Kapiolani Regional Park bordered by Monsarrat Avenue,
Paki Avenue, Poni Moi Road, and Kalakaua Avenue;
(iii)   The Waikiki playground area bordered by Monsarrat Avenue, Leahi Avenue,
and Paki Avenue, generally rectangular in shape;
(iv)   The Leahi area bordered by Leahi Avenue, Noela Street, and Paki Avenue,
generally rectangular in shape; or
(v)   The archery range area bordered by Paki Avenue and Poni Moi Road,
generally rectangular in shape.
(B)   For all other public parks, and areas of Kapiolani Regional Park outside
of the areas specified in § 10-1.3(a)(5)(A), a permit is required when the
expressive activity involves 75 or more persons.
(C)   This subdivision does not apply if the expressive activity is due to a
spontaneous event occasioned by news or affairs coming into public knowledge
within 48 hours of such expressive activity, in which case the organizer must
provide written notice to the city as soon as practicable prior to such
expressive activity.
(6)   Meetings or gatherings or other similar activity other than expressive
activities held by organizations, associations, or groups.
(7)   Nonrecreational, public service activities, meetings, and gatherings
other than expressive activities held by organizations, communities, or groups.
(8)   Right of entry into parks for installation of utilities or construction
work.
(9)   The playing of musical instruments as solo or two or more instruments
that fall within the standards described in paragraphs (A), (B), and (C):
(A)   Musical instruments that are limited to two octaves or less, including
but not limited to the following musical instruments:
(i)   Tuba;
(ii)   Tympani;
(iii)   Maracas;
(iv)   Uliuli;
(v)   Castanets;
(vi)   Tambourine; or
(vii)   Percussion instruments in which a human hand or drumsticks are used to
create sounds therefrom.
(B)   Musical instruments that when played do not exceed the sound pressure
level established in §
10-1.2(b)(8).
(C)   Musical instruments that are used or played continuously without a
regular hourly break of 30 minutes, or for more than six hours within a day.
(D)   The use or the playing of a musical instrument that requires a permit as
provided under this section is subject to the following restrictions, in
addition to any other conditions imposed by the rules adopted by the director;
provided that the restrictions do not apply to the playing of musical
instruments in conjunction with expressive activities:
(i)   Issuance standards for permits. The department of parks and recreation
shall uniformly treat each application, based upon the facts presented, free
from improper or inappropriate considerations and from unfair discrimination
and shall exercise no other discretion over the issuance of a permit under this
section, except as provided in this section and in the departmental rules.
(ii)   Judicial review. Upon the department's refusal to issue a permit, the
applicant for such permit is entitled to a review by the circuit court within
30 days after the date of the refusal. In the review, the department's decision
will be upheld in the absence of a judicial finding of abuse of discretion.
(iii)   Restrictions. The use or the playing of a musical instrument that
requires a permit as provided hereunder is subject to the following
restrictions, in addition to any other conditions imposed by the rules adopted
by the director:
(aa)   Time: Only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. daily;
(bb)   Place: The playing of such instruments must be restricted to a facility
especially constructed for such purpose, such as the bandstand at Kapiolani
Regional Park or other areas within the park that are clearly designated in the
permit; and
(cc)   Manner: During the hours mentioned in clause (aa) of this subparagraph,
every half-hour of playing period must immediately be followed by a 15-minute
break or every one hour of playing period must immediately be followed by a
half-hour break; provided that at no time may there be any continuous playing
exceeding an hour.
(iv)   Duration of permit. The duration of a permit issued pursuant to this
subdivision cannot exceed one month.
(10)   Hang gliding.
(11)   Commercial activities; provided that the proposed commercial activities
under the permit are consistent with the use of the park under consideration,
subject to reasonable limitations on the size of the groups, and the time and
area within which the event is permitted, and subject to department of parks
and recreation rules and regulations regarding the solicitation of business,
advertising, and commercial promotional activities.
No permits may be issued for commercial activities as prohibited by §§
10-1.2(h) and (i).
(12)   Constructing, utilizing, placing, occupying, or in any other manner,
situating any tent.
(b)   Director to adopt rules. The director shall adopt rules pursuant to HRS
Chapter 91, to govern the use of the areas and facilities that will:
(1)   Ensure maximum permissible use of the areas and facilities by appropriate
distribution of users;
(2)   Ensure proper, orderly, and equitable use of areas and facilities through
scheduling and user controls;
(3)   Ensure protection and preservation of areas and facilities by not
overtaxing facilities;
(4)   Promote the health, safety, and welfare of the users of the areas and
facilities;
(5)   Establish procedures for obtaining permits and revocation thereof; and
(6)   Recommend to the council fee schedules, based upon the cost of
administration for each activity authorized under subsection (a)(11).
(c)   Conditions of permit. Permits shall be issued pursuant to this article
and to the rules adopted by the director, and they shall be subject to the
conditions in this article and to any rules adopted by the director. Any
violation of this article, or of any rules adopted by the director that
implement the provisions, or of any conditions contained in this article, or of
any rules adopted by the director that implement the conditions, or of the
terms or conditions contained in the permit which violation is caused by the
permittee, members of the permittee’s group, officers, employees, or the
permittee’s agents shall constitute ground for revocation of the permit by the
director of parks and recreation. Any permittee whose permit has been revoked
by the director may appeal to the council pursuant to the rules authorized, and
the appeal must be filed by the permittee within 30 days of the mailing of a
notice of the revocation to the last known address of the permittee.
(Sec. 13-14.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 1, § 10-1.3) (Am.
Ords. 96-58, 10-4, 12-2, 12-26, 12-28, 17-3; 20-42; 21-8; 21-34; 22-3)
*Editor’s note:
   *Permits issued on or before February 9, 2017, allowing recreational stops
by commercial tour companies to take place at Waimanalo Beach Park, Kaiona
Beach Park, Kaupo Beach Park, Bellows Field Beach Park, Makapuu Beach Park, and
Waimanalo Bay Beach Park, will continue to be valid until the permit expires.
Editor’s note:
   Any permits allowing recreational stops to take place at Kokololio Beach
Park issued prior to December 21, 2022, will continue to be valid until they
expire.
§ 10-1.4 Rules pertaining to street trees, hedges, and shrubs.
   The director shall adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, relative to the
planting, trimming, and maintenance of all shade trees, hedges, and shrubs
within the public right-of-way on public streets of the city, and relative to
the issuance of permits for the replacement, removal, planting, spraying,
trimming, or pruning of street trees by private citizens.
(Sec. 13-14.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 1, § 10-1.4)
§ 10-1.5 Public beaches.
(a)   No person shall operate, park, or store or otherwise exert control over
any unauthorized motor vehicle on any public beach with the exception of areas
specifically designed to accommodate motor vehicles such as paved roads for
boat launchings.
(b)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Motor Vehicle. Includes automobiles, trucks, dune buggies, motorcycles, mopeds,
motor scooters, or any other vehicles that are mechanically propelled.
Public Beach. Includes all beach areas owned or controlled by city, State, or
United States of America seaward of the highest wash of the waves as evidenced
by the line of vegetation.
Unauthorized Motor Vehicle. Includes all motor vehicles, except vehicles of the
United States Government, the State of Hawaii, the City and County of Honolulu,
or contractors thereof, engaged in the care or maintenance of the beach area;
any vehicles operated by water safety officers and other emergency and law
enforcement vehicles, while carrying out their duties; and any vehicle with a
valid permit issued by the department of parks and recreation for the purposes
specified upon the permit.
(Sec. 13-14.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 1, § 10-1.5)
§ 10-1.6 Violation—Penalty.
(a)   Powers of arrest or citation. Police officers and any other officer so
authorized shall issue a citation for any violation of this article or of any
rule adopted by the director to administer, implement, or enforce this article,
except they may arrest for instances when:
(1)   The alleged violator refuses to provide the officer with such person’s
name and address and any proof thereof as may be reasonably available to the
alleged violator;
(2)   When the alleged violator refuses to cease such person’s illegal activity
after being issued a citation; and
(3)   The alleged violator has previously been issued a citation for the same
offense within a one-year period.
(b)   Citation.
(1)   There shall be provided for use by authorized police officers, a form of
citation for use in citing violators of this article for instances that do not
mandate the physical arrest of such violators. The form and content of such
citation shall be as adopted or prescribed by the administrative judge of the
district court and shall be printed on a form commensurate with the form of
other citations used in modern methods of arrest, so designed to include all
necessary information to make the same valid within the laws and rules of the
State of Hawaii and the City and County of Honolulu.
(2)   In every case when a citation is issued, a copy of the same shall be
given to the violator, or in the case of a parking, standing or stopping
violation, a copy of the same shall be affixed to the vehicle as provided in
paragraph (5).
(3)   Every citation shall be consecutively numbered and each carbon copy shall
bear the number of its respective original.
(4)   Whenever a motor vehicle is in violation of this article, other than a
parking, standing, or stopping provision, any police officer and any other
officer so authorized shall take the name, address, and driver’s license number
of the alleged violator and the license plate number or vehicle identification
number of the motor vehicle involved, and shall issue to such alleged violator
in writing a citation, notifying the alleged violator to answer to the
complaint to be entered against such person at a place and at a time provided
in the citation.
(5)   Whenever any motor vehicle is parked, standing, or stopped in violation
of this article, the police officer and any other officer so authorized finding
such vehicle shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a citation. The citation
shall be addressed to the registered owner of the vehicle, but need not
identify the registered owner by name. The registered owner may be unnamed, so
long as the citation identifies the vehicle by its license plate number or
vehicle identification number. The citation shall instruct the registered owner
to answer to the charge against such registered owner at a time and place
specified in the citation.
The registered owner of a vehicle shall be responsible and accountable for the
illegal parking, standing, or stopping of the vehicle when:
(A)   The registered owner committed the illegal parking, standing, or stopping
of the vehicle; or
(B)   Another person committed the illegal parking, standing, or stopping of
the vehicle, but the registered owner gave the person explicit or implicit
permission to use the vehicle at the time of the violation.
In any proceeding for violation of a parking, standing, or stopping provision
of this article, the license plate number or vehicle identification number of
the parked, standing, or stopped vehicle shall constitute prima facie evidence
that the registered owner of the vehicle was responsible and accountable for
the illegal parking, standing, or stopping of the vehicle.
(6)   If a person cited for violating this article does not appear in response
to a citation, a penal summons shall be issued ordering such person’s
appearance in court.
(c)   Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or
portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions hereof.
(d)   Penalty.
(1)   Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (2), any person convicted of
a violation of this article will be punished by a fine of not more than $500 or
by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(2)   Any person who violates or causes a vehicle to violate the following
sections will be fined not less than $25, but not more than $500:
(A)   Section
10-1.2(a)(11);
(B)   Section
10-1.2(b)(5);
(C)   Section
10-1.2(g);
(D)   Section
10-1.2(h);
(E)   Section
10-1.2(i); or
(F)   Section
10-1.5.
(Sec. 13-14.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 1,
§ 10-1.6) (Am. Ords. 90-77, 01-43, 17-3)
§ 10-1.7 Animals in public parks.
(a)   Persons may bring animals into public parks as provided in this section
in accordance with rules adopted by the director pursuant to HRS Chapter 91.
Such rules may provide for the following:
(1)   Pony rides may be allowed by permit in conjunction with a carnival or
fair;
(2)   Shows, classes, and other events for cats, dogs, and other household pets
may be allowed by permit;
(3)   Persons having custody and control of dogs on a leash may use public
parks or areas therein designated for dogs on a leash by the director in
accordance with subsection (b); and
(4)   Persons having custody and control of unleashed dogs may use an off-leash
park designated by the director in accordance with subsection (b).
For the purposes of this subsection, “household pet” has the same meaning as
defined in §
21-10.1, but excludes “farm animals” and “poultry,” as those terms are defined
in § 7-2.2.
(b)   The director is authorized to designate areas in public parks for use by
persons having custody and control of dogs on a leash and to designate public
parks for use as off-leash parks for dogs. In designating parks as off-leash
parks and in designating parks or areas therein for leashed dogs, the director
shall consider the park’s size, location, and frequency of use by members of
the public, as well as the primary actual or designed use of each park or area
included in the designation. The director shall post signs that notify the
public of such designation that describe or map the park or park areas so
designated. Signs for areas for leashed and off-leash dogs shall further
display the applicable requirements in subsection (c). Parks for off-leash dogs
shall be appropriately fenced to contain the dogs.
(c)   The director shall adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 to hold persons
bringing permitted animals into public parks responsible for the sanitary use
of the park, the protection of shrubbery, trees, turf, and other property, and
the safety, health, and welfare of all park users. The rules shall address the
specific responsibilities associated with bringing a type of animal into a
public park.
(1)   Rules for persons bringing leashed dogs into designated parks or park
areas shall include:
(A)   Requiring the person having custody and control of the dog to restrain
the dog at all times on a leash, cord, chain, or other similar means of
physical restraint of not more than 8 feet in length;
(B)   Requiring all dogs in the park or park areas designated for leashed dogs
to display a valid license tag attached to the dog’s collar;
(C)   Requiring the person having custody and control of the dog to be 18 years
of age or older;
(D)   Requiring the person having custody and control of the dog to carry
equipment for the removal and disposal of dog feces and to clean up and dispose
of feces left by the dog; and
(E)   Allowing, notwithstanding §
10-1.2(a)(9), persons otherwise in compliance with this article and having
custody and control of a dog otherwise in compliance with this subdivision to
traverse a public beach park using the most direct route for the purpose of
reaching the shoreline during either hours when the park is open or hours when
it is closed.
(2)   Rules for persons bringing dogs off-leash into designated off-leash parks
shall include:
(A)   Requiring the person having custody and control of the dog to maintain
voice control over the dog at all times;
(B)   Prohibiting female dogs in estrus from entering the off-leash park;
(C)   Requiring all dogs to display a valid license tag attached to the dog’s
collar;
(D)   Notifying any person entering an off-leash park that the person enters
and remains in the park at the person’s own risk and the city is not liable for
any injury or harm to any person or dog incurred or caused by any other person
or dog entering or remaining in the off-leash park;
(E)   Requiring the person having custody and control of the dog to be 18 years
of age or older; and
(F)   Requiring the person having custody and control of the dog to carry
equipment for the removal and disposal of dog feces and to clean up and dispose
of feces left by the dog.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 1, § 10-1.7) (Added by Ord. 01-43; Am. Ords. 03-29,
13-12, 25-2)
§ 10-1.8 Community recreational gardening program.
(a)   The director shall seek out locations in underserved areas for the siting
of new recreational gardens at developed parks or undeveloped lands under the
jurisdiction of the department for the benefit of the community which is served
by the property. The planning and installation of new recreational gardens must
be conducted in a timely manner in consultation with the benefitting community.
(b)   The implementation of this section is subject to the director's
discretion and must not jeopardize the financial stability of the city.
(Added by Ord. 20-45)
ARTICLE 2: FEES AND CHARGES FOR USE OF PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
Sections
   
10-2.1   Admission fees for the Honolulu Zoo
   
10-2.2   Canoe storage facilities—Policy and special conditions
   
10-2.3   Outrigger canoes—Fees and charges for storage
   
10-2.4   Fees for attendant/custodian services
   
10-2.5   Fees for kitchen usage
   
10-2.6   Fees for processing, rental, and attendant/custodian services
   
10-2.7   Fees for community garden
   
10-2.8   Fees for Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve
   
10-2.9   Fees for use and rental of facilities at Waipio Peninsula Soccer Park,
Central Oahu Regional Park facilities, Hans L’Orange baseball facility,
recreational fields, gymnasiums, and other facilities
   
10-2.10   Fees for camping
   
10-2.11   Fees for permits for recreational stops at Waimanalo Bay Beach Park
§ 10-2.1 Admission fees for the Honolulu Zoo.
(a)   The following daily admission fees will be assessed for the Honolulu Zoo:
(1)   Children two years of age and under: free. Children must be accompanied
by a person 18 years of age or older;
(2)   Resident of Hawaii, three to 12 years of age: $6 per person;
(3)   Resident of Hawaii, 13 years of age and older: $10 per person; and
(4)   Members of the Honolulu Zoological Society: free.
(b)   The director of enterprise services may, by rules adopted in accordance
with HRS Chapter 91, establish fees for admission to the Honolulu Zoo for the
following:
(1)   The United States military;
(2)   Nonresidents of Hawaii, three to 12 years of age; and
(3)   Nonresidents of Hawaii, 13 years of age and older.
(c)   The director of enterprise services may set rates for persons
participating in structured educational tours, group purchases, and promotional
packages and persons with promotional coupons. The director of enterprise
services is also authorized to allow entry of any person to the Honolulu Zoo as
part of a promotional offer or package made available by the city.
(Sec. 27-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 2, §
10-2.1) (Am. Ords. 89-82, 90-33, 95-35, 05-022, 06-36, 09-19, 11-16, 17-23, 23-
11)
§ 10-2.2 Canoe storage facilities—Policy and special conditions.
(a)   Policy. The council finds that Hawaiian outrigger canoe paddling is the
official State team sport and, as such, the city recognizes, supports, and
encourages the sport by permitting the storage of outrigger canoes at city
parks. The council further finds that Olympic canoe and kayak paddling are
Olympic sports and, as such, the city recognizes, supports, and encourages
those sports by permitting the storage of Olympic canoes and kayaks at city
parks.
(b)   Special conditions to be met when providing canoe storage facilities
(halaus) at city parks. The following special conditions shall apply to
establishment of halaus at city parks:
(1)   Halaus may be constructed only at park locations designated by the
department of parks and recreation;
(2)   If not constructed by the department of parks and recreation, the design
of halaus shall be approved by the department;
(3)   No more than 20,000 square feet or 10 percent, whichever is less, of any
park shall be used for halaus, unless approved by the council, and halaus shall
be situated so as not to impede public access and use of the park property;
(4)   The department of parks and recreation shall establish policies to ensure
that halaus shall be operated to provide equal opportunity for use by all canoe
organizations wishing to store their canoes and kayaks; and
(5)   The use of halaus shall be controlled and monitored by the department of
parks and recreation.
(Sec. 27-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 2, §
10-2.5) (Am. Ord. 89-121)
§ 10-2.3 Outrigger canoes—Fees and charges for storage.
(a)   The department of parks and recreation is authorized to issue permits and
set fees and charges for the use of the halaus, including the setting of
nominal fees to cover operating expenses.
(b)   The director shall adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, for the
implementation, administration, and enforcement of this article.
(Sec. 27-4.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 2, §
10-2.6)
§ 10-2.4 Fees for attendant/custodian services.
   Organizations using city recreational facilities outside of the facility’s
posted operational hours shall pay attendant/custodian service fees to the city
of $20 per hour for a custodian or an attendant. For the purposes of this
section, “posted operational hours” means the hours a recreational facility is
open for use by the public as posted on a sign or other notice conspicuously
posted at the facility or on a city website. Fees collected pursuant to this
subsection shall be deposited into a special fund, established by the mayor and
approved by the council, or into a special account of the general fund for the
use of the department of parks and recreation for expenses relating to park
services. No fees shall be collected unless a special account or special fund
is established.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 10-2.7) (Added by Ord. 95-38; Am. Ords. 09-20,
12-9, 20-31, 25-37)
Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to § 10-2.4 in Ord. 25-37 take effect on July 1, 2026, and
are not yet incorporated herein.
§ 10-2.5 Fees for kitchen usage.
   Organizations using kitchen facilities at city recreational facilities for
their exclusive use or for fund-raising purposes shall be assessed a fee of $25
per day or fraction thereof to cover the utility and usage costs.
   For the purposes of this section, a “day” means any 24-hour period of time
that a recreational facility is open for use by an organization.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 10-2.8) (Added by Ord. 95-38)
§ 10-2.6 Fees for processing, rental, and attendant/custodian services.
(a)   Community and nonprofit organizations whose use of city recreational
facilities requires an attendant or custodian, and who use such facilities for
a fund-raising activity, either alone or as part of a recreational or cultural
event, shall be assessed fees according to the number of people projected to
attend the activity, as follows:
 
Number of Persons Permit Processing Fee Rental Attendant/Custodian Fee
Fewer than 300    $15                   $25    $20 per hour for custodian or
                                               attendant
300 through 500   $15                   $50    $20 per hour for custodian or
                                               attendant
More than 500     $15                   $100   $20 per hour for custodian or
                                               attendant
 
(b)   Organizations referred to in subsection (a) who use kitchen facilities in
city recreational facilities shall also be charged the fee provided in §
10-2.5. Organizations who are assessed an attendant or custodian fee under
subsection (a) shall not also be assessed a fee under §
10-2.4.
(c)   For the purposes of this section, “fund-raising activity” shall not
include an activity where incidental services are provided by organizations to
their members for a nominal fee, such as the serving of refreshments, where the
fee is charged to recoup the cost of providing the refreshments or other
incidental services.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 10-2.9) (Added by Ord. 95-38; Am. Ords. 09-20,
20-31)
§ 10-2.7 Fees for community garden.
   Individuals using plots at the city’s community garden sites shall be
assessed a nonrefundable fee of 10 cents per square foot per plot per year.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 10-2.10) (Added by Ord. 95-35; Am. Ord. 96-41)
§ 10-2.8 Fees for Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve.
(a)   The following fees apply for entrance to the Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve:
(1)   For nonresidents of Hawaii, 13 years of age and older, to enter the lower
preserve (beyond the scenic lookout): $25.00 per person.
(2)   For vehicles entering the preserve, the following parking fees apply:
(A)   For vehicles operated by residents of Hawaii: $1.00; and
(B)   For vehicles operated by nonresidents of Hawaii: $3.00;
provided that the parking fees specified in this subdivision must be refunded
for all vehicles departing from the preserve within 15 minutes of their entry.
(3)   For licensed motor carriers entering the preserve, the following fees
apply:
(A)   For motor vehicles that can accommodate 1 to 7 passengers: $10.00;
(B)   For motor vehicles that can accommodate 8 to 25 passengers: $20.00; and
(C)   For motor vehicles that can accommodate 26 or more passengers: $40.00;
provided that the fees specified in this subdivision do not apply to a taxicab
unless the vehicle may also be operated as a licensed motor carrier.
For the purposes of this subdivision, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Common Carrier by Motor Vehicle. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 271-
4, as it may be amended or superseded.
Contract Carrier by Motor Vehicle. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS §
271-4, as it may be amended or superseded.
Licensed Motor Carrier. A motor carrier with a current certificate of public
convenience and necessity or permit issued by the public utilities commission
authorizing the transportation of persons.
Motor Carrier. Includes both a common carrier by motor vehicle and a contract
carrier by motor vehicle.
Motor Vehicle. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 271-4, as it may be
amended or superseded.
Taxicab. Has the same meaning as defined in §
36-1.1(2), as it may be amended or superseded.
(b)   The director may waive the fees in subsection (a) and allow entry of any
person to the Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve as part of an educational or
promotional program or package made available or authorized by the city.
(c)   Customers of a commercial scuba diving and snorkeling permittee and the
permittee shall pay the fees in subsection (a), if applicable.
(d)   Hawaiians entering the Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve to exercise their
traditional and customary rights for subsistence, cultural, and religious
purposes shall be exempt from paying the fees in subsections (a)(1) and (2), or
both; provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as allowing
activities that may be otherwise prohibited by the State law or the
administrative rules of the State department of land and natural resources. For
purposes of this section, “Hawaiian” has the same meaning as defined in HRS §
11-1.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 10-2.11) (Added by Ord. 96-19; Am. Ords. 03-10,
09-20, 20-32; 21-17)
§ 10-2.9 Fees for use and rental of facilities at Waipio Peninsula Soccer Park,
Central Oahu Regional Park Facilities, Hans L’Orange baseball facility,
recreational fields, gymnasiums, and other facilities.
(a)   The director is authorized to issue a permit and charge a fee for the use
and rental of the facilities at Waipio Peninsula Soccer Park, Central Oahu
Regional Park, Hans L’Orange baseball facility, recreational fields,
gymnasiums, and other recreational facilities to help cover operating and
maintenance expenses. The department may require a custodial deposit to serve
as security for the cleaning, repairing, and restoration of any damage
resulting from the use of the field, gymnasium, or facility. Before
establishing the fees, the director shall notify all duly constituted park
advisory organizations concerning the proposed fees.
(b)   Permittees may charge a reasonable admission fee to any person desiring
to attend special events at Waipio Peninsula Soccer Park, Central Oahu Regional
Park, Hans L’Orange baseball facility, recreational fields, gymnasiums, or
other recreational facility; provided however, that the permittee may not
exclude members of the public from entering or remaining on portions of the
park or facility that are not subject to the permit.
For the purposes of this subsection, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Permittee. The promoter, sponsor, exhibitor, league, or other person who
obtains a permit for the purpose of conducting a special event at Waipio
Peninsula Soccer Park, Central Oahu Regional Park, Hans L’Orange baseball
facility, recreational fields, gymnasiums, or other recreational facility.
Special events. Include but are not limited to:
(1)   Athletic practices and events involving:
(A)   Professional teams;
(B)   Collegiate teams;
(C)   National amateur teams;
(D)   For-profit organizations; and
(E)   Teams and organizations using the facilities for tournament play;
(2)   International, national, or regional events; and
(3)   Entertainment events.
(c)   The director shall adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, having the
force and effect of law, for the implementation, administration, and
enforcement of this section, including procedures and criteria for the waiver
of permit fees.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 10-2.12) (Added by Ord. 03-07; Am. Ords. 11-19,
14-24)
§ 10-2.10 Fees for camping.
   The following fees shall be assessed for the use of campsites:
(1)   $10 per day for campsites holding up to 10 people;
(2)   $75 per day for campsites holding up to 60 people;
(3)   $125 per day for campsites holding up to 100 people;
(4)   $187.50 per day for campsites holding up to 150 people; and
(5)   $312.50 per day for campsites holding up to 250 people.
Proceeds from the fees assessed under this section shall be deposited in the
camping revenue account in the general fund and shall be used to improve and
maintain city campsites.
An additional fee of $2 per permit issued shall be assessed to pay for the
administrative costs associated with the issuance of the permit. The moneys
from this fee shall be deposited in the general fund. A permit shall be valid
for one or more consecutive days.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 10-2.13) (Added by Ord. 11-20; Am. Ords. 14-12,
25-37)
Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to § 10-2.10 in Ord. 25-37 take effect on July 1, 2026, and
are not yet incorporated herein.
§ 10-2.11 Fees for permits for recreational stops at Waimanalo Bay Beach Park.
   Permits for recreational stops issued pursuant to §
10-1.3(a)(11) are subject to a monthly fee of $165 per tour van or vehicle.
(Added by Ord. 18-4)
ARTICLE 3: FEES FOR USE OF PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
FOR COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES
Sections
   
10-3.1   Commercial scuba diving and snorkeling
   
10-3.2   Commercial filming activities
§ 10-3.1 Commercial scuba diving and snorkeling.
   Scuba diving and snorkeling activity:
(a)   Annual permit: $900;
(b)   Monthly permit: $75; and
(c)   Daily permit: $10.
(Sec. 27-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 3, § 10-3.1)
§ 10-3.2 Commercial filming activities.
(a)   The fee charged for a commercial filming activity permit shall be as
follows:
 
Activity                                                                        Daily  Monthly Annual
                                                                                Permit Permit  Permit
(1)    Movie or television for (i) nonlocal network and cable television or         No      No
major motion picture studios, or both; or (ii) national advertising             $300   monthly annual
                                                                                       permit  permit
(2)    Movie or television for (i) nonprofit organizations as defined in §         No      No
13-1.1; (ii) local television and local advertising; (iii) public service,      $20    monthly annual
educational, or school productions; or (iv) other movie and television                 permit  permit
productions not described in subdivision (1)
(3)    Still photos/special event videography                                $20    $100    $1,000
 
Provided that the mayor or a city officer or employee designated by the mayor
may reduce any daily permit fee if deemed necessary by the mayor or designee to
assist the proposed filming activity and it is deemed by the mayor or designee
that such activity will feature or promote any one or more of the following:
the State of Hawai‘i, the island of O‘ahu, or the City and County of Honolulu.
Such promotions may be through the production directly or via indirect
promotions related to the production.
“Special event videography” means the production of motion pictures or videos
for private noncommercial use, including motion pictures or videos of weddings,
graduations, or similar events to be used as family mementos.
(b)   The mayor or a city officer or employee designated by the mayor shall
determine which fee applies to a particular commercial filming activity permit.
(Sec. 27-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 3, § 10-3.2) (Am.
Ords. 05-021, 05-039, 12-2; 22-3)
ARTICLE 4: FEES FOR USE OF MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSES
Sections
   
10-4.1   Definitions
   
10-4.2   Green fees
   
10-4.3   Golf cart rental
   
10-4.4   Locker rental
   
10-4.5   Rental—Golf set (clubs and bag)
   
10-4.6   Junior golf tournament fees
   
10-4.7   Golf tournament fees—Collection
   
10-4.8   Golf identification card
   
10-4.9   Surcharge for use of qualifying documents
   
10-4.10   Penalty for misuse of golf identification card or qualifying
documents
§ 10-4.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
City. The City and County of Honolulu.
Junior. Any person 17 years of age or under and attending a recognized
educational institution.
Person Totally Disabled. Any person as defined in and certified according to
HRS § 235-1.
Qualifying Documents. Documents as defined in rules adopted by the department
of enterprise services governing golf course fees.
Senior. Any person 65 years of age or older.
Twilight Hours. The hours after 3:00 p.m. until sunset or darker during the
months October through April, and the hours after 4:00 p.m. until sunset or
darker during the months May through September.
(Sec. 27-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 4, § 10-4.1) (Am.
Ords. 92-76, 93-60, 96-58, 99-62)
§ 10-4.2 Green fees.
   The following green fees shall be assessed per round of golf for use of the
golf course facilities operated by the city:
                                      Senior or
            When Played               Person                      Person w/
Golf Course and         Person w/Golf Totally       Junior w/Golf o Golf
            Effective   Identif. Card Disabled w/   Identif. Card Identif. Card
            Date of Fee               Golf Identif.
                                      Card
                                   Senior or
            When Played  Person w/ Person                      Person w/
Golf Course and          Golf      Totally       Junior w/Golf o Golf
            Effective    Identif.  Disabled w/   Identif. Card Identif. Card
            Date of Fee  Card      Golf Identif.
                                   Card
            18-hole round
            Weekend or
            holiday
            July 1, 2020 $28       $28           $0            $86
            July 1, 2021 $30       $30           $0            $86
            July 1, 2022 $32       $32           $0            $86
            Weekday
            July 1, 2020 $24       $19           $0            $86
            July 1, 2021 $26       $21           $0            $86
            July 1, 2022 $28       $23           $0            $86
            Monthly rate
All Except  (weekdays
Kahuku      only)
            July 1, 2020 None      $951          None          None
            Twilight or 9-hole round
            Weekend or
            holiday
            July 1, 2020 $14       $14           $0            $43
            July 1, 2021 $15       $15           $0            $43
            July 1, 2022 $16       $16           $0            $43
            Weekday
            July 1, 2020 $12       $9.50         $0            $43
            July 1, 2021 $13       $10.50        $0            $43
            July 1, 2022 $14       $11.50        $0            $43
            18-hole round
            Weekend or
            holiday
            July 1, 2020 $22       $20           $0            $60
            July 1, 2021 $24       $22           $0            $60
            July 1, 2022 $26       $24           $0            $60
            Weekday
            July 1, 2020 $20       $16           $0            $60
            July 1, 2021 $22       $18           $0            $60
            July 1, 2022 $24       $20           $0            $60
            Monthly rate
Kahuku      (weekdays
            only)
            July 1, 2020 None      $951          None          None
            Twilight or 9-hole round
            Weekend or
            holiday
            July 1, 2020 $11       $10           $0            $30
            July 1, 2021 $12       $11           $0            $30
            July 1, 2022 $13       $12           $0            $30
            Weekday
            July 1, 2020 $10       $8            $0            $30
            July 1, 2021 $11       $9            $0            $30
            July 1, 2022 $12       $10           $0            $30
1 Ten-round limit per person per month; may not be used for tournament play.
 
(Sec. 27-1.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 4, § 10-4.2) (Am.
Ords. 89-81, 92-76, 93-60, 95-37, 99-62, 09-18, 11-14, 17-29, 18-16, 20-17)
§ 10-4.3 Golf cart rental.
   The following rates for the rental of golf carts at city golf courses shall
be charged by the department of enterprise services.
(a)   Motorized carts.
 
Holes Played When Effective Amount
             July 1, 2018   $22
18           July 1, 2019   $24
             July 1, 2020   $26
             July 1, 2018   $11
9            July 1, 2019   $12
             July 1, 2020   $13
 
(b)   Hand carts. $4 for nine or 18 holes.
(Sec. 27-1.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 4, §
10-4.3) (Am. Ords. 88-122, 89-81, 93-60, 95-37, 99-62, 09-18, 18-16)
§ 10-4.4 Locker rental.
   The fee for the rental of a locker at the municipal golf courses shall be $7
per month.
(Sec. 27-1.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 4, §
10-4.4) (Am. Ords. 89-81, 99-62)
§ 10-4.5 Rental—Golf set (clubs and bag).
   The fee for the rental of a golf set (clubs and bag) at the Kahuku golf
course shall be $12 per set for nine or 18 holes.
(Sec. 27-1.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 4, §
10-4.5) (Am. Ords. 95-37, 99-62)
§ 10-4.6 Junior golf tournament fees.
   Notwithstanding the green fees established for the foregoing courses, fees
for golf tournaments conducted on any of the foregoing golf courses sponsored
by a bona fide junior golf association shall be $3 per round for junior golfers
17 years old and younger.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 4, § 10-4.6) (Added by Ord. 93-60; Am. Ord. 99-62)
§ 10-4.7 Golf tournament fees—Collection.
(a)   Regular tournaments: $7 per golfer.
(b)   Tournaments with a shotgun start: $12 per golfer.
(c)   The fee shall be collected at least two weeks before the scheduled date
and shall be nonrefundable should a cancellation occur due to fault of the
requesting agency. If a cancellation occurs due to inclement weather or actions
on the part of the city, the fee will be refunded in accordance with current
city procedures.
(d)   Once the tournament fee has been collected, the number of golfers
participating in the tournament cannot be changed.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 4, § 10-4.7) (Added by Ord. 93-60; Am. Ord. 99-62)
§ 10-4.8 Golf identification card.
(a)   To qualify for the rates expressly provided in §
10-4.2 for persons with golf identification cards each person must present the
person’s golf identification card at the time of payment of golf fees.
(b)   Verification of Hawaii residency, age, and identity through provision of
appropriate documents shall be required in order for a person to qualify for a
golf identification card.
(c)   A $5 fee will be assessed for the initial golf identification card.
(d)   A $10 fee will be assessed for replacement of a golf identification card.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 4, § 10-4.9) (Added by Ord. 99-62; Am. Ord. 23-10)
§ 10-4.9 Surcharge for use of qualifying documents.
   Persons who present a qualifying document at the time of payment of golf
fees instead of a golf identification card shall be charged green fees
applicable to persons with golf identification cards in §
10-4.2 plus an $8 surcharge.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 4, § 10-4.10) (Added by Ord. 99-62; Am. Ord. 23-10)
§ 10-4.10 Penalty for misuse of golf identification card or qualifying
documents.
   A golf identification card or qualifying document shall, when used for
purposes of this article, only be used by the person to whom the card or
document was issued. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall
be subject to a fine of $100 for the first offense and $200 for each subsequent
offense occurring within 12 months of the first offense.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 4, § 10-4.11) (Added by Ord. 99-62)
ARTICLE 5: COMMERCIAL WINDSURFING
Sections
   
10-5.1   Definitions
   
10-5.2   Regulation of land-based commercial windsurfing activities
   
10-5.3   Enforcement
   
10-5.4   Fees for land-based commercial windsurfing activities
§ 10-5.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Commercial Windsurfing Permittee. Those persons or business organizations who
have a valid permit from the department of parks and recreation to conduct
land-based commercial windsurfing activities at Kailua Beach park.
Holidays. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 8-1.
Kailua Beach Park. The area that includes the parcels with the following tax
map key numbers: 4-3-09, 4-3-10, and 4-3-11, and which are owned or controlled
by the city department of parks and recreation.
Land-Based Commercial Windsurfing Activities. Activities conducted in the
course of a commercial windsurfing business and includes setting up or breaking
down windsurfing equipment, conducting simulated windsurfing instruction and
training on land, and storing or laying windsurfing equipment on the ground.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 5, § 10-5.1) (Added by Ord. 89-69)
§ 10-5.2 Regulation of land-based commercial windsurfing activities.
   The following conditions shall govern commercial windsurfing activities on
the grounds of Kailua Beach park.
(1)   Commercial windsurfing permittees shall not conduct land-based commercial
windsurfing activities in Kailua Beach park on all holidays and during the
hours from 1:00 p.m. on Saturdays to sunrise on Mondays.
(2)   Commercial windsurfing permittees shall be prohibited from conducting
land-based commercial windsurfing activities within Kailua Beach park except in
the area within the park as shown in
Figure 10-5.1. The area is described as follows:
Starting from Point A which is the makai/Kaneohe corner of parcel 4-3-11-21,
extending approximately 100 feet in the Kailua direction along the chain link
fence bordering the makai boundary of the parcel to Point B, then from Point B
extending approximately 150 feet in the makai direction to Point C on Liliwai
Road, then extending approximately 125 feet in the Kaneohe direction along
Liliwai Road to Point D, then from Point D returning a distance of
approximately 90 feet in the mauka direction to Point A.
   The department of parks and recreation shall mark the boundaries of this
area.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 5, § 10-5.2) (Added by Ord. 89-69)
§ 10-5.3 Enforcement.
(a)   Police officers shall issue a citation for any violation under this
article, except that they may arrest any person for a violation under this
article when any of the conditions specified in §
10-1.6(a) exist. When a citation is issued, the citation shall be in the form
and issued in the manner specified in §
10-1.6(b).
(b)   Any commercial windsurfing permittee cited for violating this article
shall be fined $25 for the first offense, $50 for the second offense, and $100
for the third offense within one calendar year. In addition to the fine for the
third offense committed within a year, a commercial windsurfing permittee shall
have the permittee’s permit revoked by the department of parks and recreation.
Upon revocation of the permit, such commercial windsurfing permittee shall not
be eligible for another permit until the expiration of one year from the date
the permit was revoked.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 5, § 10-5.3) (Added by Ord. 89-69)
§ 10-5.4 Fees for land-based commercial windsurfing activities.
(a)   The following fees shall apply to windsurfing activity permits:
(1)   $10 for daily permits;
(2)   $75 for monthly permits; and
(3)   $900 for annual permits.
(b)   The director is authorized to adopt rules to allow for the rebate of the
unused portion of an annual permit fee, on a pro rata basis, should a
commercial windsurfing permittee voluntarily relinquish the permittee’s permit.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 5, § 10-5.4) (Added by Ord. 89-69)
Figure 10-5.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-39.png]
ARTICLE 6: CULTURAL SITES IN PUBLIC PARKS
Sections
   
10-6.1   Definitions
   
10-6.2   Cultural sites in Public Parks Program
§ 10-6.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Cultural Site. Any building, structure, object, area, or site that, because of
its association with cultural practices or beliefs of a living community, is
rooted in the community’s history or important in maintaining the continuing
cultural identity of the community; provided that the cultural site is also
included in a city development plan or recommended by a neighborhood board.
Department. The department of parks and recreation.
Director. The director of parks and recreation.
Person. A human being, a corporation, an unincorporated association, or other
entity.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 6, § 10-6.1) (Added by Ord. 16-5)
§ 10-6.2 Cultural sites in Public Parks Program.
(a)   The director may establish a program for the designation of cultural
sites located in public parks. Any interested person may recommend the
designation of a cultural site to the director for approval.
(b)   The recommendation to the director by an interested person pursuant to
subsection (a) must include the following:
(1)   The name and address of the public park where the proposed cultural site
is located;
(2)   A description of the approximate location where the proposed cultural
site will be located within the public park;
(3)   A name and brief physical description of the proposed cultural site;
(4)   A brief description of the cultural impact of the site on the city or
surrounding communities; and
(5)   Detailed information, such as the size, shape, types of materials to be
used, any maintenance costs, and the total cost, including the labor required,
of installing the marker at the designated cultural site.
(c)   Upon the approval of the designation by the director, the department
shall erect, install, or place a marker, in accordance with subsection (b)(5),
informing the public of the designated cultural site; provided that the
interested person making the recommendation, pursuant to subsection (a), agrees
to reimburse the department for all costs related to the installation and
maintenance of the marker and the marker itself, as determined by the director.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 6, § 10-6.2) (Added by Ord. 16-5)
ARTICLE 7: POLICY ON FEES FOR ORGANIZED RECREATIONAL PROGRAMS
Section
   
10-7.1   Findings and policy
§ 10-7.1 Findings and policy.
(a)   Findings. The council finds with respect to fees charged to participants
in various organized recreational programs sponsored by the department of parks
and recreation that there is a lack of strategic planning by the department
that addresses program offerings and fees systematically. To provide the
optimum level of service to the public, there is a need for the director to
implement a systematic, comprehensive planning approach to establishing fees
for organized recreational programs.
(b)   Policy. It is declared to be the policy of the city that the director,
pursuant to the powers, duties, and functions vested by the charter, conduct an
ongoing comprehensive strategic evaluation of the department’s programs,
facilities, and fees, which evaluation shall include but not be limited to:
(1)   Surveys of the public to determine specific recreational satisfaction
levels, expectations, and needs;
(2)   Assessments of recreational programs offered by the private sector, the
costs to participants and availability of such programs throughout the city,
and a comparative analysis with city programs to align city program offerings
in such a manner as to avoid duplication of private sector programs and to
respond to the demand for city-organized recreational programs where private
sector programs cannot meet service demands in particular areas;
(3)   Evaluation and monitoring of fee policies that correlate with rational
recreational standards and priorities; and
(4)   Identifying and assessing cost-effective methods to maximize the
efficiency of city-organized recreational program promotional efforts.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 7, § 10-7.1) (Added by Ord. 94-68)
ARTICLE 8: SUMMER FUN ACTIVITIES
Sections
   
10-8.1   Definitions
   
10-8.2   Fees for participation in summer fun program
   
10-8.3   Waiver
   
10-8.4   Rules
§ 10-8.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Child. Any person between the ages of five and 15 years.
Department. The department of parks and recreation.
Director. The director of parks and recreation.
Enrichment Program. A program of courses and activities for children, other
than those of the summer fun program, offered by the department in the summer
months or when the public schools are not in session.
Federal Financial Assistance Program. The federal food stamp program, the aid
to families with dependent children (AFDC) program or any federally-funded
program to assist low-income households or families as determined by the
federal government.
Summer Fun Program. A program of recreational activities for children that
include arts and crafts, music and dance, excursions, games, or other
activities offered by the department during the summer months or when the
public schools are not in session.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 8, § 10-8.1) (Added by Ord. 95-44)
§ 10-8.2 Fees for participation in summer fun program.
   The department shall charge a fee of $25 for each child who participates in
a summer fun program. The director may assess a fee, established by rule, for a
child who is registered as a participant in an enrichment program but not in a
summer fun program.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 8, § 10-8.2) (Added by Ord. 95-44)
§ 10-8.3 Waiver.
   The director may, by rule adopted pursuant to §
10-8.4, establish procedures and criteria for the waiver of the fees provided
in §
10-8.2, upon proof at the time of registration that the child to be
participating in the summer fun or enrichment program is from a low-income
household or family. Until the rules relating to waivers have been adopted, the
director may waive the fees upon proof at the time of a child’s registration
that the child to be participating in the summer fun or enrichment program is
from a family or household receiving financial assistance under a federal
financial assistance program as verified by the parent or legal guardian of the
child or by the State department of human services.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 8, § 10-8.3) (Added by Ord. 95-44)
§ 10-8.4 Rules.
   The director is authorized to adopt rules, pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, to
effectuate the purposes of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 8, § 10-8.4) (Added by Ord. 95-44)
ARTICLE 9: PROFESSIONAL SPORTS ACTIVITY AT HANS L’ORANGE
BASEBALL FACILITY
Sections
   
10-9.1   Definitions
   
10-9.2   Regulation of professional sports activity at Hans L’Orange baseball
facility
   
10-9.3   Fee for professional sports activity at Hans L’Orange baseball
facility
   
10-9.4   Indemnification and hold harmless
§ 10-9.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Admission Fee. A fee, charge, or assessment levied by the permittee for the
privilege of observing a professional sports activity from the bleachers or
other permanently constructed seating within Hans L’Orange baseball facility.
Hans L’Orange Baseball Facility. The playing field, bleachers, stands, and
other areas of the facility enclosed by a fence.
Permittee. The promoter, sponsor, exhibitor, league, or other person who
obtains a permit for the purposes of conducting a professional sports activity
at Hans L’Orange baseball facility for which admission fees are charged.
Professional Sports Activity. A game, event, exhibition, or activity of a
recognized sport, the participants in which receive compensation in return for
their participation in the sport.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 9, § 10-9.1) (Added by Ord. 95-51)
§ 10-9.2 Regulation of professional sports activity at Hans L’Orange baseball
facility.
   The following conditions shall govern professional sports activities at the
Hans L’Orange baseball facility.
(a)   Permittees may charge a reasonable admission fee to any person desiring
to enter Hans L’Orange baseball facility for the purpose of observing the
professional sports activity from the bleachers or other permanently
constructed seating.
(b)   Permits for professional sports activities at Hans L’Orange baseball
facility shall have a maximum duration of six hours.
(c)   The department of parks and recreation may, for a period of one year
after August 11, 1995*, waive the permit fees established in §
10-9.3 to offset the actual fair market value of any permanently installed
improvements made to the facility by the permittee. Any improvements proposed
to be made by the permittee shall be approved by the department of parks and
recreation before construction or installation and shall be actually
constructed or installed and duly accepted by the council in order for the
waiver to be applicable. The fair market value of any improvements made shall
be determined by the director of budget and fiscal services.
(d)   The issuance of a permit to conduct professional sports activities at
Hans L’Orange baseball facility shall not include the right to engage in any
other commercial activity or concession in or on parks, facilities, or other
areas controlled by the department of parks and recreation, except by lease,
rental, or concession, as provided for in
Chapter 38.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 9, § 10-9.2) (Added by Ord. 95-51)
Editor’s note:
   * “August 11, 1995” is substituted for “the effective date of this
ordinance.”
§ 10-9.3 Fee for professional sports activity at Hans L’Orange baseball
facility.
   The fee for a permit to conduct professional sports activities at Hans
L’Orange baseball facility shall be:
 
Daily permit $100
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 9, § 10-9.3) (Added by Ord. 95-51)
§ 10-9.4 Indemnification and hold harmless.
   The permittee shall hold the city harmless with respect to, and indemnify
the city against, all liability, loss, damage, cost, and expense, including
attorney fees, arising out of or resulting from the acts or omissions of the
permittee, or the permittee’s employees, officers, agents, or subcontractors
with respect to any professional sports activity conducted or any improvement
constructed or installed at the Hans L’Orange baseball facility.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 9, § 10-9.4) (Added by Ord. 95-51)
ARTICLE 10: RENTAL OF SURFBOARD LOCKERS ON KUHIO BEACH
Sections
   
10-10.1   Purpose
   
10-10.2   Surfboard locker fees and charges for storage
   
10-10.3   Management of the surfboard lockers
§ 10-10.1 Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to establish the rental of surfboard lockers
on Kuhio Beach under the jurisdiction of the department of enterprise services
and to authorize that department to adopt rules pursuant to law for the proper
rental, management, maintenance, and safety of those lockers consistent with
the remainder of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 10, § 10-10.1) (Added by Ord. 06-47)
§ 10-10.2 Surfboard locker fees and charges for storage.
(a)   The department of enterprise services is authorized to set reasonable
fees for the use of surfboard lockers on Kuhio Beach.
(b)   The director of enterprise services shall adopt rules pursuant to HRS
Chapter 91, for the implementation, administration, and enforcement of this
article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 10, § 10-10.2) (Added by Ord. 06-47)
§ 10-10.3 Management of the surfboard lockers.
   The department of enterprise services is authorized to establish a
concession or management agreement, or append this function to an existing
concession or management agreement for administrative purposes.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 10, § 10-10.3) (Added by Ord. 06-47)
ARTICLE 11: RESERVED
ARTICLE 12: AFTER-SCHOOL PROGRAMS
Sections
   
10-12.1   Definitions
   
10-12.2   Fees for participation in after-school programs
§ 10-12.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
After-School Program. A program of activities for children, including but not
limited to child care, held at public school and public park facilities by the
city after regular school hours.
Department. The department of parks and recreation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 12, § 10-12.1) (Added by Ord. 09-27)
§ 10-12.2 Fees for participation in after-school programs.
   The department may charge a fee set by administrative rules for each child
who is registered as a participant in an after-school program. The department
shall adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 to establish the fee, and for the
administration and implementation of this article. Proceeds from the fee
assessed under this section shall be used to defray the cost of running after-
school programs.
(1990 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 12, § 10-12.2) (Added by Ord. 09-27)
CHAPTER 11: CHILD CARE
Articles
   
1.   Child Care
ARTICLE 1: CHILD CARE
Sections
   
11-1.1   Policy
   
11-1.2   Child care coordinator
   
11-1.3   Reserved
   
11-1.4   Terms of agreement—Child care
§ 11-1.1 Policy.
   It is the policy of the city to:
(1)   Acknowledge the importance of affordable and accessible quality child
care on the individual, the family, the workplace, and the community;
(2)   Take a positive and active role in the development and promotion of
cooperative relationships among parents, employers, child care professionals,
employee organizations, businesses, educators, community leaders, and
government officials aimed at increasing the availability of accessible and
affordable quality child care to working families in the city;
(3)   Become a model employer in the delivery of child care services to its
employees;
(4)   Integrate the child care needs of citizens into the city’s land use
planning process;
(5)   Institute procedures to expedite the necessary approvals and permits
required for the construction of child care facilities and for projects that
include the construction of child care facilities;
(6)   Make vacant or underused city properties available to qualified child
care providers;
(7)   Ensure that appropriate city personnel possess the requisite
understanding of and familiarity with applicable legal, regulatory, and
procedural requirements for quality child care programs;
(8)   Use the available resources of federal, State, and private agencies to
enhance the availability of affordable quality child care on Oahu;
(9)   Support federal and State legislation that is consistent with the intent
of this section;
(10)   Encourage all employers on Oahu to address the issue of child care in
their employee policies;
(11)   Encourage all city vendors to adopt a stated child care policy. To the
extent permitted by law, the city shall give vendors with such policies
preference in contracting with the city;
(12)   Support efforts to offer a child care benefit option in any cafeteria
plan, within the meaning of § 125, Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended,
for city employees; and
(13)   Review the activities of the city in promoting the expansion of child
care services in every annual report of the city published by the mayor
pursuant to the charter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 11, Art. 1, § 11-1.1) (Added by Ord. 89-64)
§ 11-1.2 Child care coordinator.
   There is established in the department of community services, for
administrative purposes only, without regard to HRS Chapter 76, a child care
coordinator, whose duties shall be to help implement the policies contained in
§
11-1.1, bring focus and coordination to the city’s activities relating to child
care, and provide a wide range of assistance to public and private entities
interested in expanding child care services on Oahu.
(1990 Code, Ch. 11, Art. 1, § 11-1.2) (Added by Ord. 89-64; Am. Ords. 96-58,
97-17, 14-24)
§ 11-1.3 Reserved.
§ 11-1.4 Terms of agreement—Child care.
   Every contract to lease or rent property of the city for multifamily housing
shall provide in the lease agreement that child care is a permitted use on such
property as long as such use is in accordance with uses permitted in the LUO,
Chapter 21, and the persons comply with the licensing and registration
requirements for child care facilities in HRS Chapter 346.
(1990 Code, Ch. 11, Art. 1, § 11-1.4) (Added by Ord. 91-06)
CHAPTER 12: ANIMALS AND FOWLS
Articles
   
1.   Cockfighting and Related Equipment
   
2.   Animal Nuisances
   
3.   Reserved
   
4.   Regulation of Dogs
   
5.   Public Spay and Neuter Clinic for Dogs and Cats
   
6.   Cat Microchip and Identification Program
   
7.   Regulation of Dangerous Dogs
   
8.   Dog Microchip License and Identification Program
ARTICLE 1: COCKFIGHTING AND RELATED EQUIPMENT
Sections
   
12-1.1   Prohibited
   
12-1.2   Gaffs or slashers prohibited
   
12-1.3   Violation—Penalty
§ 12-1.1 Prohibited.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage or participate in any cockfighting
exhibition.
(Sec. 13-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 1, § 7-1.1) (Am.
Ord. 01-58)
§ 12-1.2 Gaffs or slashers prohibited.
   It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, buy, sell, barter, exchange,
or have in such person’s possession any of the implements commonly known as
gaffs or slashers, or any other sharp instrument designed to be attached in
place of or to the natural spur of a gamecock or other fighting fowl.
(Sec. 13-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 1, § 7-1.2)
§ 12-1.3 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall be punished by a fine of not less
than $250 and not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or
by both.
(Sec. 13-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 1, § 7-1.3) (Am.
Ord. 01-58)
ARTICLE 2: ANIMAL NUISANCES
Sections
   
12-2.1   Purpose
   
12-2.2   Definitions
   
12-2.3   Animal nuisance—Prohibited
   
12-2.4   General requirements
   
12-2.5   Special requirements
   
12-2.6   Complaint forms for private citizens
   
12-2.7   Summons or citation
   
12-2.8   Failure to obey summons or citation
   
12-2.9   Issuance of complaint
   
12-2.10   Penalties
   
12-2.11   Annual report required
   
12-2.12   Severability
§ 12-2.1 Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to establish an owner’s responsibility for
the keeping of animals, farm animals, or poultry on a noncommercial basis and
in a manner that will not endanger or unreasonably interfere with the public
health, welfare, safety, peace, or comfortable enjoyment of life and property.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.1) (Added by Ord. 90-55)
§ 12-2.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Animal Control Contractor. The duly incorporated humane society or organization
formed for the prevention of cruelty to animals that is contracted by the city
to perform animal control services.
Animal Nuisance. For the purposes of this article, includes but is not limited
to any animal, farm animal, or poultry that:
(1)   Makes noise continuously or incessantly, or both, for a period of 10
minutes or intermittently for one-half hour or more to the disturbance of any
person at any time of day or night and regardless of whether the animal, farm
animal, or poultry is physically situated in or upon private property;
(2)   Barks, whines, howls, crows, cries, or makes any other unreasonable noise
as described in §
12-2.4(c) of this article; or
(3)   Notwithstanding the provisions of HRS § 142-75 or any other applicable
law, bites or stings a person.
Animals. Unless provided otherwise, include but are not limited to those
animals that are customary and usual pets such as dogs, cats, rabbits, birds,
honeybees, and other beasts that are maintained on the premises of a dwelling
unit and kept by the resident of the dwelling unit solely for personal
enjoyment and companionship, such as, without limitation, for a hobby, for
legal sporting activities and for guarding of property; excluding aviary game
birds and fish as defined in the Hawaii Revised Statutes.
Enclosure. Any kennel, coop, cage, hutch, hive, or other structure used to care
for, breed, house, or keep animals, farm animals, or poultry.
Farm Animals. Pigs, cows, goats, sheep, horses, camels, and llamas.
Owner. Any person owning, harboring, or keeping animals, farm animals, or
poultry, or having custody thereof, whether temporary or permanent.
Person. Includes corporations, estates, associations, partnerships, and trusts,
as well as one or more individual human beings.
Poultry. Chickens, pigeons, turkeys, geese, ducks, and peafowl not regulated by
State law.
Zoning Lot and Lot Area. Have the same meaning as defined in
Chapter 21.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.2) (Added by Ord. 90-55; Am. Ords. 00-73, 04-
42, 20-1)
§ 12-2.3 Animal nuisance—Prohibited.
   It is unlawful to be the owner of an animal, farm animal or poultry engaged
in animal nuisance as defined in §
12-2.2; provided that it shall not be an animal nuisance for purposes of this
article if, when the animal, farm animal, or poultry is making any noise,
biting, or stinging, a person is trespassing or threatening trespass upon
private property in or upon which the animal, farm animal, or poultry is
situated, or for any other legitimate cause which teased or provoked the
animal, farm animal, or poultry.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.3) (Added by Ord. 90-55)
§ 12-2.4 General requirements.
(a)   Nothing in this article applies to animals, farm animals, or poultry
raised, bred, or kept as a commercial enterprise or for food purposes where
commercial kennels or the keeping of livestock is a permitted use.
(b)   Enclosures for animals, farm animals, and poultry shall meet all
applicable zoning and building code requirements for structures; shall not be
located within any required front, side, or rear yard setback; and shall meet
all other applicable sanitation requirements.
(c)   Noise is unreasonable within the meaning of this article if considering
the nature and the circumstances surrounding the animal nuisance, including the
nature of the location and the time of the day or night, it interferes with
reasonable individual or group activities such as but not limited to
communication, work, rest, recreation, or sleep; or the failure to heed the
admonition of a police officer or a special officer of the animal control
contractor that the noise is unreasonable and should be stopped or reduced.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.4) (Added by Ord. 90-55; Am. Ords. 00-73, 02-
54)
§ 12-2.5 Special requirements.
(a)   Farm animals. Enclosures for farm animals shall not be located within 300
feet of any property line.
(b)   Honeybees. There shall be no more than eight honeybee hives per zoning
lot and the keeping of honeybees shall be in accordance with the following:
(1)   Colonies shall be maintained in movable frame hives, constructed to meet
the specifications for “beehives” set by the American Beekeepers Federation;
(2)   Hives shall be properly shaded from adjacent night lighting on adjoining
properties; and
(3)   Hives shall not be located within 25 feet of any property line, public
street, sidewalk, or alley, except:
(A)   When situated behind a solid fence or hedge at least 6 feet in height,
parallel to the property line, and extending at least 15 feet beyond the hive
in both directions; or
(B)   When located at least 8 feet or more above adjacent ground level.
(c)   Dogs. The number, four months of age or older, shall not exceed 10 per
household.
(d)   Chickens and peafowl. The number of chickens or peafowl shall not exceed
two per household.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.5) (Added by Ord. 90-55; Am. Ord. 04-42)
§ 12-2.6 Complaint forms for private citizens.
   The animal control contractor, in consultation with the Honolulu police
department, shall develop a complaint form with respect to the keeping of
animals, farm animals, or poultry. The form may be obtained by private citizens
from the animal control contractor or the department of customer services.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.6) (Added by Ord. 90-55; Am. Ord. 00-73)
§ 12-2.7 Summons or citation.
   Any authorized police officer, or any officer of the animal control
contractor who has been deputized by the chief of police as a special officer
for the purpose of enforcing this article, may issue a summons or citation to
an alleged violator of this article. Procedures with respect to the design,
form, content, numbering, and disposition of copies of the summons or citation
shall be in all respects the same as those specified in §
12-4.6, relating to summonses in connection with stray dogs. The summons or
citation shall instruct such person to report to the violations bureau of the
respective district courts of the City and County of Honolulu. Each such person
may, within seven days after the receipt of such summons, appear at such
violations bureau and post a bail bond, in such amounts as may be set by the
administrative judge of the district courts, for appearance on the date as may
be set out for such person to appear before the district court. Upon failure to
appear upon such date, the bail bond shall be deemed forfeited.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.7) (Added by Ord. 90-55; Am. Ord. 00-73)
§ 12-2.8 Failure to obey summons or citation.
   It is unlawful for any person to fail to appear at the place and within the
time specified in the summons issued to such person by an officer for any
violation of this article, regardless of the disposition of the charge for
which such person was originally cited.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.8) (Added by Ord. 90-55)
§ 12-2.9 Issuance of complaint.
   In the event any person fails to comply with a summons given such person or
if any person fails or refuses to deposit bail as required and within the time
permitted, the violations bureau shall have a complaint entered against such
person and secure the issuance of a warrant for such person’s arrest.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.9) (Added by Ord. 90-55)
§ 12-2.10 Penalties.
(a)   Any owner who keeps or permits an enclosure or animal, farm animal, or
poultry to remain on the owner’s premises in violation of this article shall be
deemed to commit an offense under this article. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
an enforcing officer may, in the officer’s discretion, issue a warning letter
to the owner of a dog that is believed by the officer to be an animal nuisance
under §
12-2.2(1) or (2) in lieu of citing the owner for a first offense under those
provisions. As used in this subsection, “first offense” means an offense that
does not occur within two years of the occurrence of a previous offense
involving the same provision.
(b)   An owner convicted of an offense shall be sentenced as follows:
(1)   A fine of $50 if the offense did not occur within two years of the
occurrence of a previous offense involving the same provision;
(2)   A fine of $100 if the offense occurred within two years of the occurrence
of one previous offense involving the same provision; or
(3)   A fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment not
exceeding 30 days, or both, if the offense occurred within two years of the
occurrence of two or more previous offenses involving the same provision. In
lieu of a term of imprisonment, the court may order the defendant to serve a
period of probation of not more than six months in accordance with the
procedures, terms, and conditions provided in HRS Chapter 706, Part II.
The fines provided for in this section shall be imposed without the possibility
of suspension.
As part of the sentence for any offense, the court also may order the owner to
attend a training program conducted or designated by the animal control
contractor or train an animal, farm animal, or poultry in a manner recommended
by the contractor to stop the animal nuisance that caused the offense. The cost
of attending any training program conducted or designated by the animal control
contractor shall be paid for by the owner.
(c)   For the purposes of this section:
(1)   “Provision” means a prohibition or requirement under: §§
12-2.3, 12-2.4(b), 12-2.5(a), 12-2.5(b), 12-2.5(c), or 12-2.5(d);
(2)   An offense shall be deemed to have occurred on the date of the summons or
citation identifying the offense; and
(3)   A person who commits an offense within two years of the occurrence of a
previous offense involving the same provision shall be subject to the
escalating penalty of subsection (b)(2) or (b)(3), even if the enclosures or
animals involved in the offenses differed.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.10) (Added by Ord. 90-55; Am. Ord. 00-73)
§ 12-2.11 Annual report required.
   The animal control contractor shall render a full report of its activities
and operations relating to the enforcement of this article to the mayor and the
council within one month after the end of each fiscal year.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.11) (Added by Ord. 90-55; Am. Ord. 00-73)
§ 12-2.12 Severability.
   If this article is held for any reason invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
provisions of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.12) (Added by Ord. 90-55)
ARTICLE 3: RESERVED
ARTICLE 4: REGULATION OF DOGS
Sections
   
12-4.1   Definitions
   
12-4.2   Strays prohibited
   
12-4.3   Impounding
   
12-4.4   Applicability
   
12-4.5   Enforcement
   
12-4.6   Summons
   
12-4.7   Failure to obey summons
   
12-4.8   Issuance of complaint
   
12-4.9   Violation—Penalty
   
12-4.10   Disposition of fines and forfeitures
   
12-4.11   Severability
   
12-4.12   Procedures for release by the animal control contractor
§ 12-4.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Animal Control Contractor. The duly incorporated humane society or organization
formed for the prevention of cruelty to animals that is contracted by the city
to perform animal control services.
Handler. Any owner with a disability having custody of a service dog.
Microchip. A device implanted under the skin of an animal containing contact
information for the owner of the animal.
Off-Leash Park. A public park designated by the director of parks and
recreation where dogs, and no other animal, shall be allowed to be off-leash.
Owner. Every person owning, harboring, or keeping a dog or having custody
thereof.
Service Dog. Any dog that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks
for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including a physical,
sensory, psychiatric, intellectual, or other mental disability. The work or
tasks performed by the service dog must be directly related to the handler’s
disability.
Stray or Stray Dog. Any dog:
(1)   On the premises of a person other than the owner of the dog, without the
consent of an occupant of such premises; or
(2)   On a public street, on public or private school grounds, or in any other
public place, except when under the control of the owner by leash, cord, chain,
or other similar means of physical restraint; provided that such leash, cord,
chain or other means is not more than 8 feet in length; and provided further,
that this provision shall not be construed to permit that which is prohibited
by any other law.
(Sec. 13-23.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.1) (Am.
Ords. 00-68, 01-43, 11-1, 20-1)
§ 12-4.2 Strays prohibited.
   It is unlawful for the owner of any dog to permit the dog to become a stray.
(Sec. 13-23.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.2) (Am.
Ords. 00-68, 20-1)
§ 12-4.3 Impounding.
(a)   Any dog, while being a stray, will be seized and impounded by the animal
control contractor or any other officer authorized by law and confined for:
(1)   Not less than 48 hours for a dog determined not to have a microchip
implanted or a visible city issued dog license tag for the then current year,
during which time the owner of the dog may redeem the dog upon payment to the
animal control contractor of:
(A)   The fee to implant a microchip; and
(B)   The daily impoundment fee of $10 for each full day, or fraction thereof,
that the dog has been held and confined;
(2)   Not less than five days for a dog determined to have a microchip
implanted, during which time the owner of the dog may redeem the dog upon
payment to the animal control contractor of the daily impoundment fee of $10
for each full day, or fraction thereof, that the dog has been held and
confined; or
(3)   Not less than nine days for a dog that has a visible city issued dog
license tag for the then current year, during which time the owner of the dog
may redeem the dog upon payment to the animal control contractor of:
(A)   The fee to implant a microchip, if necessary; and
(B)   The daily impoundment fee of $10 for each full day, or fraction thereof,
that the dog has been held and confined.
(b)   In addition to the fees specified in subsection (a), an unsterilized dog,
while being a stray, that is impounded by the animal control contractor at
least three times within a 12 month period, must be spayed or neutered by the
animal control contractor before the owner may redeem the dog, unless a
licensed veterinarian certifies that the medical condition of the dog
disqualifies the dog from being spayed or neutered.
(c)   In addition to the fees specified in subsection (a), a sterilized dog
that is impounded by the animal control contractor for being a stray at least
three times within a 12 month period, may be redeemed by its owner upon payment
of a $30 fee.
(d)   If an impounded dog is redeemed by its owner within 24 hours of physical
possession of the dog by the animal control contractor, the animal control
contractor will waive any impoundment fees.
(e)   A special officer of the animal control contractor shall be authorized to
enforce this article if deputized by the chief of police to do so.
(f)   The animal control contractor shall spay or neuter any impounded dog
before the dog is adopted, unless a licensed veterinarian certifies that the
medical condition of the dog disqualifies the dog from being spayed or
neutered, or that being spayed or neutered would otherwise be detrimental to
the health of the dog
(Sec. 13-23.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.3) (Am.
Ords. 00-68, 07-33, 20-1)
§ 12-4.4 Applicability.
   This article does not apply to:
(1)   Microchipped dogs functioning as service dogs under control of their
handlers. A service dog under control of its handler must have a harness,
leash, or other tether, unless either the handler is unable because of a
disability to use a harness, leash, or other tether, or use of a harness,
leash, or other tether would interfere with the service dog’s safe, effective
performance of work or tasks, in which case the service dog must otherwise be
under the handler’s control (e.g., voice control, signals, or other effective
means);
(2)   Microchipped dogs trained and used by the Honolulu police department or
another law enforcement agency in law enforcement work, while such dogs are
engaged in the performance of such work;
(3)   Microchipped hunting dogs when accompanied by their owner on public or
private hunting or shooting grounds, or both;
(4)   Microchipped obedience trial, tracking, and show dogs accompanied by
their owner and being trained or in competition in public parks or school
grounds, provided permission is first obtained from the proper park or school
authorities for this use; or
(5)   Microchipped dogs when accompanied by persons18 years of age or older
having custody and control of the dogs and located in a public park or in an
area in a public park designated by a sign that the public park or area has
been designated by the director of parks and recreation for use by dogs and
persons having custody and control of the dogs pursuant to §
10-1.7.
(Sec. 13-23.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.4) (Am.
Ords. 01-43, 11-1, 20-1)
§ 12-4.5 Enforcement.
   For any violation of this article or of HRS Chapter 143, it is the duty of
any police officer and any other officer authorized to seize and impound any
dog running at large within the meaning of this article to issue a summons to
the owner or other person charged with the responsibility of complying with
this article or with HRS Chapter 143. The summons shall instruct such owner or
person to report at the violations bureau of the respective district courts of
the City and County of Honolulu. Each such owner or person may, within seven
days after the receipt of such summons, appear at such violations bureau and
post a bail bond, in such amounts as may be set by the administrative judge of
the district courts, for appearance on the date as may be set for such person
to appear before the district court. Upon failure to appear upon such date, the
bail bond shall be deemed forfeited.
(Sec. 13-23.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.5)
§ 12-4.6 Summons.
(a)   There shall be provided for use by officers authorized to enforce laws
relating to the regulation and control of dogs, a form of summons for use in
citing violators of this article or of HRS Chapter 143. The summons shall be
printed in a form commensurate with the form of other summonses used in modern
methods of arrest, so designed to include all necessary information to make the
same valid and legal within the laws and regulations of the State of Hawaii and
the City and County of Honolulu. The form and content of such summons shall be
as adopted or prescribed by the administrative judge of the district courts.
(b)   In every case when a summons is issued, the original of the same shall be
given to the violator; provided that the administrative judge of the district
courts may prescribe the giving to the violator of a carbon copy of the
summons, and provide for the disposition of the original and any other copies.
(c)   Every summons shall be consecutively numbered and each carbon copy shall
bear the number of its respective original.
(Sec. 13-23.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.6)
§ 12-4.7 Failure to obey summons.
   It is unlawful for any person to fail to appear at the place and within the
time specified in the summons issued to such person by an officer for any
violation of this article, regardless of the disposition of the charge for
which such person was originally cited.
(Sec. 13-23.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.7)
§ 12-4.8 Issuance of complaint.
   In the event any person fails to comply with a summons given to such person
or if any person fails or refuses to deposit bail as required and within the
time permitted, the violations bureau shall have a complaint entered against
such person and secure the issuance of a warrant for such person’s arrest.
(Sec. 13-23.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.8)
§ 12-4.9 Violation—Penalty.
(a)   The owner of a dog that has become a stray or any other person convicted
of a violation of this article shall be punished for the offense as follows:
(1)   A fine of $50 if the offense did not occur within two years of the
occurrence of a previous offense under this article;
(2)   A fine of $100 if the offense occurred within two years of the occurrence
of one previous offense under this article; or
(3)   A fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment not
exceeding 30 days, or both, if the offense occurred within two years of the
occurrence of two or more previous offenses under this article or if the person
convicted has a previous conviction under §
12-7.2 involving the same dog.
(b)   For the purposes of this section:
(1)   An offense shall be deemed to have occurred on the date of the summons or
citation identifying the offense; and
(2)   A person who commits an offense within two years of the occurrence of a
previous offense shall be subject to the escalating fine of subsection (a),
even if the dogs involved in the offenses differed.
(Sec. 13-23.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.9) (Am.
Ords. 00-68, 05-007)
§ 12-4.10 Disposition of fines and forfeitures.
   All fines and forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture
of bail of any person charged with a violation of this article shall be paid
into the city treasury and deposited in the general fund of the city.
(Sec. 13-23.10, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.10)
§ 12-4.11 Severability.
   If any provision of this article is held for any reason invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining provisions of this article.
(Sec. 13-23.11, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.11)
§ 12-4.12 Procedures for release by the animal control contractor.
(a)   The animal control contractor shall do the following for each dog in its
custody:
(1)   Adopt out the dog;
(2)   Return the dog to its owner;
(3)   Place the dog in foster care;
(4)   Transfer the dog to another animal shelter or animal welfare group; or
(5)   Euthanize the dog if permitted under subsection (b).
(b)   A dog may be euthanized after the mandatory confinement period as
required under §
12-4.3, if applicable; provided that the animal control contractor has
determined that:
(1)   The dog is suffering from an injury, terminal illness, or other health
problem that severely affects the dog’s or another animal’s quality of life;
(2)   The dog exhibits unsocial or dangerous behavior that would preclude
adoption;
(3)   The dog exhibits behavior that is likely to result in bodily injury or
death to another animal or human being; or
(4)   The owner of the dog has relinquished custody of the dog to the animal
control contractor and has requested that the animal control contractor
euthanize the dog.
(Added by Ord. 20-1)
ARTICLE 5: PUBLIC SPAY AND NEUTER CLINIC FOR DOGS AND CATS
Section
   
12-5.1   Authority for clinic and fees
   
12-5.2   Administrative rules
§ 12-5.1 Authority for clinic and fees.
   The city is authorized and empowered to establish a clinic, through a fee-
for-service contract, at which members of the public may have dogs and cats
spayed or neutered in a humane manner.
(Sec. 13-39.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 5, §
7-5.1) (Am. Ords. 92-72, 95-34, 03-14, 10-1, 24-31)
§ 12-5.2 Administrative rules.
   The director of customer services shall adopt administrative rules pursuant
to HRS Chapter 91 for the purposes of implementing, administering, and
enforcing this article, including but not limited to setting the fees for spay
and neuter services.
(Added by Ord. 24-31)
Editor's note:
   *This ordinance takes effect on July 1, 2025; provided that § 12-5.1, as it
read on the day prior to July 1, 2025, shall remain in effect until such time
that the Director of Customer Services has adopted rules pursuant to § 12-5.2,
and such rules have taken effect.
ARTICLE 6: CAT MICROCHIP AND IDENTIFICATION PROGRAM
Sections
   
12-6.1   Definitions
   
12-6.2   Identification required
   
12-6.3   Owner—Exception
   
12-6.4   Removal of cat identification
   
12-6.5   Cats released to the animal control contractor
   
12-6.6   Sterilization of cats
   
12-6.7   Enforcement
   
12-6.8   Penalty
   
12-6.9   Microchip identification
   
12-6.10   Procedures for release by the animal control contractor
§ 12-6.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Animal Control Contractor. The duly incorporated humane society or organization
formed for the prevention of cruelty to animals that is contracted by the city
to perform animal control services.
At Large. Any of the following:
(1)   On the premises of a person other than an owner of the cat, without the
consent of an occupant or owner of such premises; or
(2)   On a public street, on public or private school grounds, or in any other
public place, except when under the control of an owner by leash, cord, chain,
or other similar means of physical restraint that is not more than 8 feet in
length.
Identification. Any of the following:
(1)   A collar or tag worn by a cat, which includes the current name, address,
and telephone number of the owner; and
(2)   An implanted microchip registering the cat owner’s current contact
information with a microchip registration company.
Impounded Cat. Any cat released to or under the custody of or control of the
animal control contractor.
Microchip. A device implanted under the skin of an animal containing contact
information for the owner of the animal.
Person. Includes corporations, estates, associations, partnerships and trusts,
and one or more individual human beings.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 6, § 7-6.1) (Added by Ord. 95-21; Am. Ords. 02-54, 20-
1)
§ 12-6.2 Identification required.
(a)   It is unlawful for any person to be an owner of a cat over four months of
age, unless the person maintains identification for the cat.
(b)   This section does not apply to:
(1)   A cat owner who has resided in the city for less than 30 consecutive
days;
(2)   A cat owner who does not reside in the city and is staying in the city
for less than 30 days;
(3)   A cat owner who submits proof to the animal control contractor that an
active registered microchip has already been implanted in the cat;
(4)   A cat in quarantine; or
(5)   A cat that is brought into the city for the exclusive purpose of entering
the cat into a cat show or cat exhibition and is not allowed to be at large.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 6, § 7-6.2) (Added by Ords. 95-21, 20-1)
§ 12-6.3 Owner—Exception.
   “Owner” means any person owning, harboring, or keeping, or providing care or
sustenance for a cat, whether registered or not, or having custody of a cat,
whether temporarily or permanently. This definition shall not apply to any
person who has notified the animal control contractor of the cat at large that
the person has taken into possession and:
(a)   Who is or will be transporting the cat to the animal control contractor;
or
(b)   Who has made arrangements with the animal control contractor to have the
cat picked up by the animal control contractor.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 6, § 7-6.3) (Added by Ord. 95-21; Am. Ord. 02-54)
§ 12-6.4 Removal of cat identification.
   It shall be unlawful for any person other than an officer of or a person
authorized by the animal control contractor to remove any identification from
any cat not owned by the person.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 6, § 7-6.4) (Added by Ord. 95-21; Am. Ord. 02-54)
§ 12-6.5 Cats released to the animal control contractor.
(a)   Any person who takes into the person’s possession any cat at large shall
immediately notify the animal control contractor and shall release the cat to
the animal control contractor upon request.
(b)   In the case of any cat with identification that is released to the animal
control contractor, the animal control contractor shall make a reasonable
attempt to notify the owner by telephone, and shall send written notice to the
owner. The cat must be held by the animal control contractor for not less than
five days, after which time the animal control contractor may return the cat to
the person who had released the cat to the animal control contractor, offer the
cat for adoption, or euthanize the cat, if the cat has not been recovered by
the owner before the five days have elapsed. An owner wishing to recover the
cat shall pay a fee to implant a microchip, if needed, and a daily impoundment
fee of $10 to the animal control contractor for each full day, or fraction
thereof, that the cat is held by the animal control contractor.
(c)   In the case of any cat without identification that is released to the
animal control contractor, the animal control contractor shall hold the cat for
not less than 48 hours, after which time the animal control contractor may
return the cat to the person who had released the cat to the animal control
contractor, offer the cat for adoption, or euthanize the cat, if the cat has
not been recovered by a person claiming ownership before the 48 hours have
elapsed. If a person claiming ownership seeks to recover the cat, the person
shall pay a fee to implant a microchip, if needed, and a daily impoundment fee
of $10 to the animal control contractor for each full day, or fraction thereof,
that the cat is held by the animal control contractor.
(d)   Any cat released to the animal control contractor with a notched ear,
thereby indicating that the cat is a sterilized feral cat, must be held by the
animal control contractor for not less than five days, after which time the
animal control contractor may return the cat to the person who had released the
cat to the animal control contractor, offer the cat for adoption, or euthanize
the cat, if the cat has not been recovered by a person claiming ownership
before the five days have elapsed. If a person claiming ownership seeks to
recover the cat, the person shall pay a fee to implant a microchip, if needed,
and a daily impoundment fee of $10 to the animal control contractor for each
full day, or fraction thereof, that the cat is held by the animal control
contractor.
(e)   If a cat is redeemed by its owner within 24 hours of physical possession
of the cat by the animal control contractor, the animal control contractor will
waive any impoundment fees.
(f)   If a cat released to the animal control contractor is not recovered by
the owner, the person who had released the cat to the animal control contractor
shall have the right of first refusal for permanent custody and ownership of
the cat for a period of 24 hours after being contacted by the animal control
contractor; provided that the person must pay to the animal control contractor:
(1)   A fee to implant a microchip in the cat, if needed; and
(2)   Any fees associated with the spaying or neutering of the cat, if needed.
(g)   The animal control contractor shall spay or neuter any impounded cat
before a cat is adopted, unless a licensed veterinarian certifies that the
medical condition of the cat disqualifies the cat from being spayed or
neutered, or that being spayed or neutered would otherwise be detrimental to
the health of the cat.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 6, § 7-6.5) (Added by Ord. 95-21; Am. Ords. 02-54, 07-
33, 20-1)
§ 12-6.6 Sterilization of cats.
   It is unlawful for a cat owner to allow a cat over the age of six months to
be at large, unless the cat has been sterilized by a veterinarian.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 6, § 7-6.6) (Added by Ord. 95-21)
§ 12-6.7 Enforcement.
(a)   The animal control contractor may enforce this article.
(b)   An impounded cat for which identification is not maintained by an owner
may not be released by the animal control contractor to a person claiming
ownership of the cat until the owner complies with the identification
requirements of this article.
(c)   If an impounded cat, with or without identification, has not been
sterilized, the person claiming ownership may be cited by an officer of the
animal control contractor for a violation of §
12-6.6. The penalty for violating §
12-6.6 shall be waived upon proof of sterilization of the cat by a licensed
veterinarian furnished to the animal control contractor within 30 days after
the date the citation was issued.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 6, § 7-6.7) (Added by Ord. 95-21; Am. Ords. 02-54, 20-
1)
§ 12-6.8 Penalty.
   Any person found guilty of violating this article shall be fined not more
than $100.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 6, § 7-6.8) (Added by Ord. 95-21)
§ 12-6.9 Microchip identification.
(a)   An owner shall have a microchip implanted in the owner’s cat and the
owner must register the microchip number and the owner’s contact information
with a microchip registration company.
(b)   When the contact information of the owner of a cat changes, the owner
shall provide the new contact information to the applicable microchip
registration company no later than 30 days after the change of owner contact
information occurs.
(c)   When the owner of a cat changes:
(1)   The former owner must inform the new owner which microchip registration
company the cat’s microchip is registered with; and
(2)   The new owner shall provide a microchip registration company with the new
owner’s contact information no later than 30 days after the change of ownership
occurs.
(d)   The animal control contractor or a nonprofit animal rescue organization
shall implant a microchip in all cats in its custody that do not have a
microchip.
(Added by Ord. 20-1)
§ 12-6.10 Procedures for release by the animal control contractor.
(a)   The animal control contractor shall do the following for each cat in its
custody:
(1)   Adopt out the cat;
(2)   Return the cat to its owner;
(3)   Place the cat in foster care;
(4)   Transfer the cat to another animal shelter or animal welfare group; or
(5)   Euthanize the cat if permitted under subsection (b).
(b)   A cat may be euthanized after the mandatory confinement period as
required under §
12-6.5, if applicable; provided that the animal control contractor has
determined that:
(1)   The cat is suffering from an injury, terminal illness, or other health
problem that severely affects the cat’s or another animal’s quality of life;
(2)   The cat exhibits unsocial or feral behavior that would preclude adoption;
(3)   The cat exhibits behavior that is likely to result in bodily injury or
death to another animal or human being; or
(4)   The owner of the cat has relinquished custody of the cat to the animal
control contractor and has requested that the animal control contractor
euthanize the cat.
(Added by Ord. 20-1)
ARTICLE 7: REGULATION OF DANGEROUS DOGS
Sections
   
12-7.1   Definitions
   
12-7.2   Prohibited acts—Conditions on owner—Penalties
   
12-7.3   Citation and summons—Seizure—Relinquishment of ownership
   
12-7.4   Inspection
   
12-7.5   Exemption
   
12-7.6   Civil action not precluded
   
12-7.7   Severability
   
12-7.8   Mandatory reporting of dog bites
§ 12-7.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Animal. Any “animal,” “farm animal,” or “poultry” as those terms are defined in
§
12-2.2.
Attack. Aggressive physical contact with a person or animal initiated by the
dog that may include but is not limited to the dog jumping on, leaping at or
biting a person or animal.
Bodily Injury. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 707-700.
City Animal Control Service. The animal control services provider contracted by
the city to seize and impound dogs.
Dangerous Dog. Any dog that, without provocation, attacks a person or animal. A
dog’s breed shall not be considered in determining whether it is dangerous.
Enforcement Officer. Any person authorized and designated to enforce this
article.
Microchip. Has the same meaning as defined in §
12-4.1.
Negligently. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 702-206.
Owner. Any person owning, harboring, or keeping a dog; provided that, if the
owner is a minor under the age of 18 years, the parents, guardian, or other
person having the care, custody, or control of the minor shall be rebuttably
presumed to be the owner. The person whose current contact information is
registered with a microchip registration company shall rebuttably be presumed
to be the owner of the dog for purposes of this article.
Provocation. The attack by a dog upon a person or animal was precipitated under
the following circumstances:
(1)   The dog was protecting or defending its owner or a member of its owner’s
household from an attack or assault;
(2)   The person attacked was committing a crime or offense while on the
property of the owner of the dog;
(3)   The person attacked was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the
dog or at any time in the past had teased, tormented, abused, or assaulted the
dog;
(4)   The dog was attacked or menaced by the animal or the animal was on the
property of the owner of the dog;
(5)   The dog was responding to pain or injury inflicted by the attacked person
or animal;
(6)   The dog was protecting itself, its kennels, or its offspring from the
attacked person or animal;
(7)   The person or animal attacked was disturbing the dog’s natural functions,
such as sleeping or eating, while the dog was on its owner’s property; or
(8)   The dog was responding to a command or encouragement to attack the person
or animal.
Serious Injury to a Domestic Animal. Physical injury to the animal involving a
broken bone, a laceration requiring multiple stitches, a concussion, or a
tearing or rupture of an organ.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 7, § 7-7.1) (Added by Ord. 00-72; Am. Ords. 02-05, 20-
1)
§ 12-7.2 Prohibited acts—Conditions on owner—Penalties.
(a)   A dog owner commits the offense of negligent failure to control a
dangerous dog, if the owner negligently fails to take reasonable measures to
prevent the dog from attacking, without provocation, a person or animal and
such attack results in:
(1)   The maiming or causing of serious injury to or the destruction of an
animal; or
(2)   Bodily injury to a person other than the owner.
A person convicted under this subsection shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor
for a first offense and a misdemeanor for a subsequent offense and sentenced in
accordance with subsections (c), (d), and (e).
(b)   For the purposes of this section, “reasonable measures to prevent the dog
from attacking” shall include but not be limited to:
(1)   Measures required to be taken under
Article 4 of this chapter to prevent the dog from becoming a stray; and
(2)   Any conditions imposed by the court for the training of the dog or owner
or for the supervision, confinement, or restraint of the dog for a previous
conviction under this section.
(c)   A dog owner convicted under subsection (a) shall be sentenced to the
following without possibility of suspension of sentence:
(1)   A fine of not less than $500 nor more than $2,000; except that if the
offense occurred within five years of a previous conviction under this section,
a fine of not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,000;
(2)   A period of imprisonment of up to 30 days, or in lieu of imprisonment, a
period of probation of not more than six months in accordance with the
procedures, terms, and conditions provided in HRS Chapter 706, Part II; except
that if the offense occurred within five years of a previous conviction under
this section, a period of imprisonment of up to six months, or in lieu of
imprisonment, a period of probation of not more than one year;
(3)   Restitution to any individual who has suffered bodily injury or property
damage as a result of an attack by the dog where the individual suffers
financial losses or medical expenses due to the attack. For the purposes of
this subsection, medical expenses may include the costs of necessary counseling
or rehabilitative services; and
(4)   Payment of all expenses for the boarding and retention of the dog if
seized and impounded pursuant to §
12-7.3(a).
(d)   Unless the dog has been or is ordered to be humanely destroyed, the dog
owner shall also be sentenced to the following mandatory provisions, in
addition to the provisions of subsection (c):
(1)   The owner shall provide the owner’s name, address, and telephone number
to the city animal control service;
(2)   The owner shall provide the location at which the dog is currently kept,
if such location is not the owner’s address;
(3)   The owner shall promptly notify the appropriate animal control service
of:
(A)   Any changes in the ownership of the dog or the location of the dog along
with the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of new owners or the new
address at which the dog is located;
(B)   Any further instances of an attack by the dog upon a person or an animal;
(C)   Any claims made or lawsuits brought as a result of further instances of
an attack by the dog; or
(D)   The death of the dog; and
(4)   When outside the owner’s premises, the dog must be attended and kept on a
leash no longer than 6 feet in length and under the control of a person 18
years of age or older.
(e)   In addition to subsections (c) and (d), the dog owner may also be
sentenced to any of the following terms or conditions:
(1)   When indoors, the dog be under the control of a person 18 years of age or
older;
(2)   When outdoors on the owner’s premises and unattended, the dog be kept
within a locked fenced or walled area from which it cannot escape;
(3)   When outdoors on the owner’s premises and unattended, the dog be confined
to an escape-proof kennel;
(4)   When outdoors on the owner’s premises, the dog be attended and kept
within a fenced or walled area from which it cannot escape;
(5)   When outdoors on the owner’s premises, the dog be attended and kept on a
leash no longer than 6 feet in length;
(6)   When outdoors on the owner’s premises, the dog be kept under the control
of a person 18 years of age or older;
(7)   When outdoors outside the owner’s premises, the dog be attended and
muzzled with a muzzle that prevents the dog from biting any person or animal
but does not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or
respiration;
(8)   A sign or signs be placed in a location or locations directed by the
court advising the public of the presence and dangerousness of the dog;
(9)   The owner and dog, at the owner’s expense, attend training sessions
conducted by an animal behaviorist, a licensed veterinarian, or other
recognized expert in the field;
(10)   The dog be neutered or spayed at the owner’s expense, unless the
neutering or spaying of the dog is medically contraindicated;
(11)   The owner procure liability insurance or post bond of not less than
$50,000, or for a higher amount if the court finds a higher amount appropriate
to cover the medical or veterinary costs, or both, resulting from potential
future actions of the dog;
(12)   The dog be humanely destroyed; or
(13)   Any other condition the court deems necessary to restrain or control the
dog.
For the purposes of this subsection, an “escape-proof kennel” means a kennel
that allows the dog to stand normally and without restriction, which is at
least 2.5 times the length of the dog, and which protects the dog from the
elements. Fencing or wall materials required under this section shall not have
openings with a diameter of more than 2 inches, and in the case of wooden
fences, the gaps therein shall not be more than 2 inches. Any gates within such
kennel or structure shall be lockable and of such design as to prevent the
entry of children or the escape of the dog, and when the dog is confined to
such kennel or area and unattended, such locks shall be kept locked. The kennel
may be required to have double exterior walls to prevent the insertion of
fingers, hands, or other objects.
(f)   Upon full investigation and finding of probable cause, an enforcement
officer shall either arrest or issue a summons and citation to the owner for
violation of subsection (a).
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 7, § 7-7.2) (Added by Ord. 02-05; Am. Ords. 05-07, 20-
1)
§ 12-7.3 Citation and summons—Seizure—Relinquishment of ownership.
(a)   Upon full investigation and finding of probable cause to believe that
there has been a violation of §
12-7.2(a), an enforcement officer shall either arrest or issue a summons and
citation to the owner pursuant to §
12-7.2, and may, in addition, have the dog seized and impounded if the dog is
posing an imminent threat to human beings or to other animals. At the owner’s
request, such impoundment may be at the premises of a licensed veterinarian or
at a commercial kennel of the owner’s choosing. All expenses of the boarding
and retention of the dog shall be borne by the owner.
The owner is prohibited from selling or transferring the ownership or physical
custody of the dog before the time stated in the summons, and the citation
shall notify the owner of this prohibition. This prohibition shall not apply
when an owner transfers ownership of the dog to the city animal control
service.
If a dog is seized and impounded pursuant to this section, the citation shall
notify the owner that if the owner does not appear at the time and place stated
in the summons, the dog shall be subject to relinquishment pursuant to
subsection (b).
Any person who refuses to surrender a dog that is subject to relinquishment
pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and fined not
less than $50 nor more than $1,000, imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
(b)   If the owner of a dog seized and impounded pursuant to this section fails
to appear in court as required, ownership of the dog shall be deemed
relinquished and the court may order disposition of the dog as it deems
appropriate.
(c)   Notwithstanding any relinquishment of ownership of the dog pursuant to
subsection (b) or voluntary relinquishment of ownership of the dog, the owner
shall still be responsible for all expenses of boarding the dog and any fees
and penalties that may be imposed by the court.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 7, § 7-7.3) (Added by Ord. 00-72; Am. Ords. 02-05, 05-
07)
§ 12-7.4 Inspection.
   Upon presentation of proper credentials, any enforcement officer may enter
at reasonable times any building, structure, or premises in the city for the
purpose of determining and enforcing compliance with this article or of any
court order issued under this article; provided that such entry shall be made
in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the person in
possession; and provided further, that an order of a court authorizing such
entry shall be obtained in the event such entry is denied or resisted.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 7, § 7-7.4) (Added by Ord. 00-72; Ren. by Ord. 02-05)
§ 12-7.5 Exemption.
   This article shall not apply to dogs owned by any law enforcement agency and
used in the performance of law enforcement work.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 7, § 7-7.5) (Added by Ord. 00-72; Ren. by Ord. 02-05)
§ 12-7.6 Civil action not precluded.
   Nothing contained in this article shall preclude any person injured by a dog
from bringing a civil action against the owner of such dog pursuant to State
law.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 7, § 7-7.6) (Added by Ord. 00-72; Ren. by Ord. 02-05)
§ 12-7.7 Severability.
   If this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is
held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications
of the article which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or
applications, and to this end the provisions of this article are severable.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 7, § 7-7.7) (Added by Ord. 00-72; Ren. by Ord. 02-05)
§ 12-7.8 Mandatory reporting of dog bites.
(a)   All incidents of serious bodily injury from a dog bite shall be reported
to the Honolulu police department by:
(1)   Any licensed, registered, or certified medical service provider regarding
their treatment of a person, as permitted under the regulations implementing
the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, specifically, 45 CFR §
164.512(f)(1); and
(2)   Any veterinarian, regarding their treatment of an animal.
(b)   “Serious bodily injury” means a serious physical injury to a person
involving a broken bone, a concussion, a laceration that extends down to the
level of muscle or bone, or a tearing or rupture of an organ.
(c)   The police department shall forward each reported incident to the animal
control contractor for investigation, and the animal control contractor shall
make a determination whether the dog involved is a dangerous dog, prepare a
report, and maintain a file of all reports.
(d)   Anyone participating in good faith in the disclosure of any information
pertaining to incidents of serious bodily injury from a dog bite shall be
immune from any liability, civil or criminal, that might otherwise be incurred,
imposed, or result from such action.
(1990 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 7, § 7-7.8) (Added by Ord. 07-2)
ARTICLE 8: DOG MICROCHIP LICENSE AND IDENTIFICATION PROGRAM
Sections
   
12-8.1   Definitions
   
12-8.2   Microchip licensing for dogs
   
12-8.3   Microchip identification
   
12-8.4   Applicability
   
12-8.5   Enforcement
   
12-8.6   Violation–Penalty
§ 12-8.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Animal Control Contractor. Has the same meaning as defined in §
12-4.1.
Microchip. Has the same meaning as defined in §
12-4.1.
Owner. Any person owning, harboring, or keeping, a dog; providing care or
sustenance for a dog; or having custody of a dog, whether temporarily or
permanently. The term does not apply to any person who has taken a stray dog
into possession simply for purposes of notifying the animal control contractor
of the stray dog and:
(1)   Who is or will be transporting the stray dog to the animal control
contractor; or
(2)   Who has made arrangements with the animal control contractor to have the
stray dog picked up by the animal control contractor.
Stray or Stray Dog. Has the same meaning as defined in §
12-4.1.
(Added by Ord. 20-1)
§ 12-8.2 Microchip licensing for dogs.
   A microchip implanted in a dog pursuant to this article will serve as the
license for the dog.
(Added by Ord. 20-1)
§ 12-8.3 Microchip identification.
(a)   An owner shall have a microchip implanted in the owner’s dog and the
owner shall register the microchip number and the owner’s contact information
with a microchip registration company.
(b)   When the contact information of the owner of a dog changes, the owner
shall provide the new contact information to the applicable microchip
registration company no later than 30 days after the change of owner contact
information occurs.
(c)   When the owner of a dog changes:
(1)   The former owner must inform the new owner which microchip registration
company the dog’s microchip is registered with; and
(2)   The new owner shall provide the microchip registration company with the
new owner’s contact information no later than 30 days after the change of
ownership occurs.
(d)   The animal control contractor or a nonprofit animal rescue organization
shall implant a microchip in all stray dogs in its custody that do not have a
microchip.
(Added by Ord. 20-1)
§ 12-8.4 Applicability.
   This article does not apply to:
(1)   An owner who has resided in the city for less than 30 consecutive days;
(2)   An owner who does not reside in the city and is staying in the city for
less than 30 consecutive days;
(3)   An owner who submits proof to the animal control contractor that an
active registered microchip has already been implanted in the dog;
(4)   A dog that is less than three months of age which is not a stray;
(5)   A dog in quarantine; or
(6)   A dog that is brought into the city for the exclusive purpose of entering
a dog show or dog exhibition and is not allowed to be a stray.
(Added by Ord. 20-1)
§ 12-8.5 Enforcement.
   The animal control contractor may enforce this article.
(Added by Ord. 20-1)
§ 12-8.6 Violation–Penalty.
   Any person violating this article is subject to a fine of not more than
$100.
(Added by Ord. 20-1)
CHAPTER 13: STREETS, SIDEWALKS, MALLS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
Editor’s note:
   * Chapter 13, Article 11, was redesignated as Chapter 13, Article 11A, by
Ord. 02-10, such designation to be effective from the date of approval of Ord.
02-10 (March 28, 2002) to June 30, 2002. On July 1, 2002, Chapter 13, Article
11A, was repealed.
Articles
   
1.   General Provisions
   
2.   Lei Selling
   
3.   Reserved
   
4.   Litter Control
   
5.   Use of Streets and Sidewalks by Solicitors and Canvassers
   
6.   Peddler’s License
   
6A.   Peddling by Merchant of a Store on Chinatown Sidewalk or Mall, College
Walk Mall, Sun Yat Sen Mall, and Historic Moiliili Sidewalk
   
7.   Handbilling in the Waikiki Special Design District
   
8.   Structures on, Above, or Below a Public Sidewalk
   
9.   Procedure on Arrest
   
10.   Use of Malls
   
11.   Publication Dispensing Racks in Waikiki
   
12.   Reserved
   
13.   Use of Animals in Solicitations in the Waikiki Special District
   
14.   Unlawful Signs Within Street Rights-of-Way and Public Malls
   
15.   Sitting or Lying on Public Sidewalks in the Waikiki Special District
   
15A.   Sitting or Lying on Public Sidewalks Outside of the Waikiki Special
District
   
15B.   Sitting or Lying on Public Malls in the Downtown and Chinatown Areas
   
16.   Nuisances on Public Sidewalks
   
17.   Aggressive Panhandling
   
18.   Use of Sidewalk for Pedestrian Use
   
19.   Stored Property
   
20.   Creating, Causing, or Maintaining Obstructions on Public Sidewalks
Prohibited
   
21.   Illegal Lodging on a Public Sidewalk or Other Public Place
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections
   
13-1.1   Definitions
   
13-1.2   Purpose
§ 13-1.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future. Words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words
used in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
Animal. Includes every living creature.
Chief of Police. The chief of police of the city or the chief’s authorized
representative.
Chinatown. The area of the Chinatown special district as described in §
21-9.60-2.
College Walk Mall. The portion of College Walk established as a pedestrian mall
under §
15-25.1(c).
Curbside Teller. Any structure that encroaches in whole or in part over or on a
public sidewalk and is used to assist patrons of financial institutions to
deposit funds or otherwise transact business with these institutions.
Director of Budget and Fiscal Services. The director of budget and fiscal
services of the city or the director’s authorized representative.
Garbage. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
Litter. “Garbage,” “refuse,” and “rubbish” as defined in this section and all
other waste material, which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends
to create a danger to public health, safety, and welfare.
Mall. Any public thoroughfare, other than a sidewalk as defined in this
section, which is under the control or jurisdiction of the city and intended
exclusively or primarily for the use of pedestrians.
Mobility Device. A wheelchair, crutch, cane, walker, or device that functions
similarly to allow an injured or disabled person increased mobility for
sidewalk travel.
Newspaper of General Circulation. A newspaper of a State, county, or city,
published for the dissemination of local or telegraphic news and intelligence
of a general character, having a subscription list of paying subscribers, and
established, printed, and published at regular intervals in such State or city,
and reaching all classes of the public.
Newsstand. Any appliance, structure, instrument, or stand used for the vending
or distribution of newspapers.
Nonprofit Organization. A nonprofit corporation qualifying as such under HRS
Chapter 414D or any other society, association, corporation, or other
organization engaged in religious, charitable, educational, scientific,
literary, or other benevolent purposes whose charter or other enabling act
contains provisions to the effect that such organization is not organized for
profit; none of its stock or any part of its assets, income or earnings will be
issued or distributed to its members, directors, or officers, except for
services actually rendered to the organization; and upon dissolution, its
assets shall be distributed to another nonprofit corporation, society,
association, or organization engaged in one or more of the benevolent purposes
listed herein.
Park. Has the same meaning as “public park” as defined in §
10-1.1.
Peddle or Peddling. The sale or offer for sale, the renting or offer for rent,
or the display for sale or rent of any goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs,
or other kinds of property or services. The term shall include but not be
limited to the solicitation of orders or making of referrals on a public place
for the future sale, delivery, or performance of property or services in a
place other than a public place as part of a scheme to evade
Article 6.
Pedestrian. A person who is on foot or assisted by a mobility device and able
to move immediately to accommodate other sidewalk users.
Pedestrian Use Zone. The portion of the width of a sidewalk that extends toward
the street up to 8 feet from the adjacent private or public property line
bordering the sidewalk opposite the curb; provided that the pedestrian use zone
also constitutes the portion of the width of a replacement sidewalk that is up
to 8 feet from the replacement sidewalk’s edge furthest from the street.
Person. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 1-19.
Private Premises. Any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, designed
or used either wholly or in part for private residential or commercial
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps,
vestibule, or mailbox, belonging or appurtenant to, such dwelling, house,
building, or other structure.
Public Place. Any and all:
(1)   Publicly owned or maintained streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, or
other ways open to the general public;
(2)   Publicly owned or maintained parks, beaches, squares, spaces, grounds,
malls, buildings, or other places open to the general public; or
(3)   Privately owned or maintained streets, sidewalks, boulevards, and alleys
open to the general public.
Refuse. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, including animal body
wastes, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes.
Replacement Sidewalk. A pedestrian passageway that crosses private property
pursuant to a public easement, usually resulting from obstructions on public
land that require pedestrians to pass across adjacent private property.
Rubbish. Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar
materials.
Sidewalk. That portion of a street between a curb line or the pavement of a
roadway, and the adjacent private or public property line, whichever the case
may be, intended for the use of pedestrians, including any setback areas
acquired by the city for road widening purposes.
Stored Personal Property. Any and all tangible personal property, including
items, goods, materials, merchandise, furniture, equipment, fixtures,
structures, clothing, and household items:
(1)   That has been placed on public property for more than 24 hours whether
attended or unattended; or
(2)   That remains in a park after park closure hours
without authorization by statute, ordinance, permit, regulation, or other
authorization by the city or State. The term shall not include any vehicle as
defined in HRS § 291C-1, any vessel as defined in HRS § 200-23, or any property
subject to HRS Chapter 523A.
Street. The entire width between the property lines of every way publicly owned
and maintained when part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel or any private street, highway, or thoroughfare, which, for
more than five years, has been continuously used by the general public.
Sun Yat Sen Mall. The portion of River Street established as a pedestrian mall
under §
15-25.1(c).
Urban Zone. Includes the Ala Moana/Kakaako, Downtown, Kalihi, McCully/Moiliili/
Makiki, and Waikiki districts, as described in §
13-18.2 and includes the sidewalks on both sides of the streets, avenues,
boulevards, highways, roads and drives within those districts and those marked
as the district boundaries.
Vehicle. Every device in, upon, or by which, any person or property is, or may
be, transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Sec. 26-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 1, § 29-1.1) (Am.
Ords. 96-58, 02-51, 03-26, 10-26, 11-29, 25-22)
§ 13-1.2 Purpose.
   The intent and purpose of this chapter is to promote the public welfare by
regulating the use of all public sidewalks and malls.
(Sec. 26-1.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 1, § 29-1.2)
ARTICLE 2: LEI SELLING
Sections
   
13-2.1   Regulations
   
13-2.2   Violation—Penalty
§ 13-2.1 Regulations.
(a)   No person, under the age of 15 years, shall sell lei upon streets,
alleys, sidewalks, malls, and other public places, including entrances at
piers.
(b)   No person, while engaged in the business of selling lei upon streets,
alleys, sidewalks, malls, and at entrances to piers, shall obstruct traffic, or
wilfully or negligently hold, touch, push, jostle, molest, or in any manner,
disturb any person, customer, or another lei seller.
(c)   All persons engaged in selling lei at piers shall form not more than two
straight single lines in the front of the pier, one line extending to the right
and the other to the left from the main entrance, and the lines shall run
parallel to and within 3 feet of the front wall of the pier as follows:
The positions in the lines shall be occupied by the lei sellers in the order of
their arrival, the person first arriving being entitled to stand at the head of
one line and the person arriving next, at the head of the other line; provided
that no person shall occupy the head position of any line more than one day
within a period of 30 days, unless such person’s turn arrives sooner by
rotation. The “head” of a line shall be that position which is nearest to the
main entrance to the pier.
(d)   No lei seller arriving late shall break into a line or usurp the position
of another.
(Sec. 26-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 2, § 29-2.1)
§ 13-2.2 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a
fine not exceeding $25.
(Sec. 26-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 2, § 29-2.2)
ARTICLE 3: RESERVED
ARTICLE 4: LITTER CONTROL
Sections
   
13-4.1   Definitions
   
13-4.2   Enforcement authority
   
13-4.3   Responsibilities—Requirements
   
13-4.4   Prohibited activities
   
13-4.5   Cost of litter removal
   
13-4.6   Enforcement
   
13-4.7   Violation—Penalty
§ 13-4.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Enforcement Officer. Any individual designated by the department of planning
and permitting, the department of transportation services, or the department of
parks and recreation to issue citations to enforce this article, and any police
officer of the Honolulu police department.
Inspector. Any individual designated by the department of planning and
permitting to issue notices of violation to enforce this article.
Litter. Rubbish, waste material, garbage, trash, offal, or any debris of
whatever kind or description, whether or not it is of value, and includes
improperly discarded paper, metal, plastic, glass, or solid waste. Litter also
includes “refuse” as defined in §
13-1.1. Litter may include derelict vehicles.
Littering. The wilful or negligent throwing, dropping, placing, dumping or
depositing of any litter, or the directing or otherwise causing of any such
act, in any place on land or water, other than in public or private receptacles
or designated disposal sites.
(Sec. 26-11.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 4,
§ 29-4.1) (Am. Ords. 02-37, 25-8)
§ 13-4.2 Enforcement authority.
(a)   Any enforcement officer is authorized to:
(1)   Issue a written citation pursuant to §
13-4.6(a) if such enforcement officer witnesses a violation, receives a report
from a private citizen witnessing a violation or has probable cause to believe
that a person has violated this article;
(2)   Investigate any litter and household garbage found thrown, deposited, or
dumped on a street, roadside, alley, or highway to find any personal
identification contained therein; and
(3)   Issue a written citation pursuant to §
13-4.6(a) for violations of this article.
(b)   Any inspector is authorized to:
(1)   Investigate any litter and household garbage found thrown, deposited, or
dumped on private property, and any notice, poster, or other paper or device,
posted, affixed, or displayed on any lamppost, public utility pole or shade
tree, or upon any public structure or building; and
(2)   Issue a notice of violation pursuant to §
13-4.6(b) or remove and dispose of any notice, poster, or other paper or device
posted, affixed or displayed in apparent violation of §
13-4.4(a)(7).
(c)   Any person who witnesses the throwing, dropping, placing, dumping, or
depositing of litter in violation of this chapter, including the throwing of
litter from a vehicle, may report the date, time of day, and location of the
littering and, in the case of littering from a vehicle, the license number of
the vehicle, to any enforcement officer. The license number, as recorded, shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the littering reported to have been done
from a vehicle was done by the person to whom the vehicle is registered.
(d)   In the case of a notice, poster, or other paper or device displayed in
violation of §
13-4.4(a)(7), which advertises an event, establishment, or business, the device
displayed shall constitute prima facie evidence in a civil proceeding that it
is being displayed by any person owning the establishment or business or
organizing the event.
(Sec. 26-11.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 4,
§ 29-4.2) (Am. Ord. 02-37)
§ 13-4.3 Responsibilities—Requirements.
(a)   It shall be the responsibility of:
(1)   Owners and persons in control of any private property to maintain the
premises free from litter at all times; provided that this section shall not
prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection;
(2)   Persons owning or occupying property to keep the sidewalk area abutting
the property line free of litter; and
(3)   (A)   The operators of all disposal facilities and private disposal
facilities, as defined in
Chapter 42, to maintain a record of all waste that is deposited at each
facility other than by city-operated refuse vehicles and by householders
depositing their own refuse; and
(B)   The record shall contain the name and address of each person depositing
waste material, the license number of the vehicle transporting the waste, the
approximate time of the deposit, and a brief description and the approximate
volume of the waste. The record shall be made available to any enforcement
officer of the city for inspection, upon reasonable request.
(b)   The Honolulu police department shall arrange to patrol or conduct
surveillance activities at locations that are reported to be frequent illegal
dumping areas for litter.
(c)   All complaints of alleged litter violations shall be investigated by the
city. Enforcement officers shall, wherever practicable, inspect any litter
found on any street, highway, alley, or public place, and any traceable
ownership shall be subject to this article.
(d)   The director of parks and recreation shall coordinate city agencies in
antilitter efforts and cooperate with the State to accomplish coordination of
antilitter campaigns.
(Sec. 26-11.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 4,
§ 29-4.3) (Am. Ord. 02-37)
§ 13-4.4 Prohibited activities.
(a)   No person shall:
(1)   Throw or deposit litter on any street or sidewalk and in any park or
other public or private property within the city, except in public or private
receptacles, and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park, street,
sidewalk, or other public or private property. Where public or private
receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of;
(2)   Sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other public place within
the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public
or private sidewalk or driveway;
(3)   While a driver or passenger in a vehicle, throw or deposit litter upon
any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property;
(4)   Drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city, unless such
vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents, or litter
from being blown or deposited from the vehicle upon any street, sidewalk,
alley, or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any truck or
other vehicle within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or
deposit in any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public place, litter of any
kind. If litter is unavoidably dropped or tracked onto a street, sidewalk,
alley, or other public place, it shall be the duty of the driver of the vehicle
to have the litter removed as quickly as possible;
(5)   Throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay, or any
other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city;
(6)   Throw out, drop, or deposit within the city any litter, handbill, or any
other object from an aircraft;
(7)   Post, affix, or display any notice, poster, or other paper or device,
calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public
utility pole, or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except
as may be authorized by law;
(8)   Throw or deposit litter on any occupied, open, or vacant private property
within the city, whether or not owned by such person, except that the owner or
person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for litter collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk, alley, or other public place or upon any private property;
(9)   Permit an animal owned by such person or while in the person’s custody to
excrete any solid waste in any public place or on any private premises not the
property of such owner; provided that nothing herein shall affect the duty of
the property owner or occupier to keep the premises free of litter, and
provided further, that no violation shall occur if the owner of the offending
animal promptly and voluntarily removes the animal waste; or
(10)   Dump or dispose of any litter, refuse, or other solid waste upon any
public or private premises, including any watercourse or drainage facility
whether publicly or privately owned within the city, except upon municipal
disposal sites or private disposal sites established under
Chapter 21.
(b)   No person shall dispose of any derelict vehicle, as defined in HRS § 290-
8, on any public roadway, alley, street, trail, bridge, highway, or other
public property, or on private property, without the authorization of the owner
or occupant.
(c)   No person shall abandon scrap iron, lumber, or similar materials upon any
public street, road, highway, or other public thoroughfare, or any part
thereof.
(d)   Any person who, by oneself or through any agent or independent
contractor, posts, affixes or displays a notice, poster, or other paper or
device in violation of subsection (a)(7), or any person who knowingly causes
such to be posted, affixed, or displayed, to advertise the person’s products,
merchandise, services, or events, by oneself or through any agent or
independent contractor, shall be displaying such notice, poster, or other paper
or device.
(Sec. 26-11.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 4,
§ 29-4.4) (Am. Ords. 96-58, 02-37)
§ 13-4.5 Cost of litter removal.
(a)   Any person responsible for littering shall be liable to the city for the
cost of removing such litter. The bill for the cost of removal shall be issued
by the department of environmental services or the department of parks and
recreation and shall state the amount to be charged by the city. The cost of
removal shall be the actual cost incurred by the city, plus any administrative
expenses associated with the removal; provided that the amount to be charged
shall not be less than $5. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
constitute a waiver of the city’s right to issue a citation pursuant to §
13-4.6(a), including in instances where the person littering refuses to remove
the litter or refuses to pay the city for the city’s removal of the litter.
(b)   In the case of litter on open or vacant private property in the city, the
director of planning and permitting is authorized to notify the owner of the
property or the agent of such owner to properly dispose of the litter. Such
notice shall be given by certified mail, addressed to the owner at the owner’s
last known address and a copy thereof shall be posted on the property. The
notice shall describe the work to be done and shall state that if the work is
not commenced within 30 calendar days after the notice is given and diligently
prosecuted to completion without interruption, the director of planning and
permitting shall so notify the director of the department of environmental
services and the director of the department of environmental services shall
enter upon the property and cause the removal of the litter thereon, and the
cost thereof shall be a lien on the property. The director of the department of
environmental services shall observe the following procedures:
(1)   Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner or agent so notified
to properly dispose of litter within 30 days after receipt of written notice,
or within 30 days after the date of such notice in the event the same is
returned to the city because of an inability to make delivery thereof, provided
the same is properly addressed to the last known address of such owner or
agent, the director of the department of environmental services is authorized
and empowered to dispose of such litter or to order its disposal by the city.
The director of the department of environmental services and the director’s
authorized representatives, including any contractor with whom the director
contracts under this section and assistants, employees, or agents of such
contractor are authorized to enter upon the property for the purpose of
removing the litter thereon. Before the director of the department of
environmental services or the director’s authorized representative or
contractor arrives, any property owner may remove the litter thereon at the
owner’s expense.
(2)   When the city has effected the removal of such litter or has paid for its
removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of 8
percent per year, shall be charged to the owner of such property who shall be
billed therefor by mail. The bill shall apprise the owner that failure to pay
the bill will result in a lien being placed upon the property. Interest at the
rate of 8 percent per year shall accrue on any unpaid balance from the 31st
calendar day after the bill has been mailed to the owner.
(3)   Where the full amount due the city is not paid by such owner within 30
calendar days after the bill has been mailed for payment, the director of the
department of environmental services shall cause to be recorded with the city
director of budget and fiscal services a statement showing the cost and expense
incurred for the work, the date the work was done, and the location of the
property on which the work was done, and file the same with the director of
budget and fiscal services, who shall refer the collection of the unpaid
balance to the corporation counsel.
(4)   Any work done by the city under this subsection is deemed to be done
pursuant to a quasi-contract or constructive contract between the city and the
owner. Based on the foregoing contractual relationship, if the owner fails to
pay the amount duly noted on the statement filed by the director of the
department of environmental services, the corporation counsel may proceed to
file a mechanic’s and materialman’s lien pursuant to HRS Chapter 507, Part II,
or any other appropriate lien procedures.
(5)   The director of the department of environmental services shall cause to
be kept in the department a permanent record containing:
(A)   A description of each parcel of the property for which a notice to remove
litter has been given under this subsection;
(B)   The name of the owner, if known;
(C)   The date on which such notice was mailed and posted;
(D)   The charges incurred by the city in removing the litter and all
incidental expenses in connection therewith; and
(E)   A brief summary of the work performed. Each such entry shall be made as
soon as possible after completion of such act.
(c)   All moneys collected under this section shall be deposited into the solid
waste special fund.
(Sec. 26-11.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 4,
§ 29-4.5) (Am. Ords. 88-78, 02-37, 25-37)
Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to § 13-4.5 in Ord. 25-37 take effect on January 1, 2026,
and are not yet incorporated herein.
§ 13-4.6 Enforcement.
(a)   Any person charged with violating §
13-4.4(a) shall be served with a citation and an order to appear before the
district court. Any person charged with a first violation may, within seven
days of the issuance of the citation, appear at the district court and post a
bail bond in the amount of the minimum fine imposed for the offense charged, as
determined by the court, for appearance at the next succeeding session of the
court. Upon failure to appear at such succeeding session, the bail bond shall
be deemed forfeited. The failure of such violator to make such appearance or
payment within seven days shall render such person subject to charges and to
the penalties prescribed in §
13-4.7.
(b)   Any person violating §
13-4.3(a)(1) or (a)(2) or violating §
13-4.4(a)(7), shall be issued a notice of violation by the director of planning
and permitting or the director’s designee mandating the removal of the litter
or posted, affixed, or displayed material. Failure to remove such litter or
material will subject the owners or persons in control of private property to
the penalties prescribed in §
13-4.7. A notice of violation must be served upon responsible persons either
personally or by certified mail. However, if the whereabouts of such persons
are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the director or the
director’s designee in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the director or
the director’s designee provides an affidavit to that effect, then a notice of
violation may be served by publishing the same once each week for two
consecutive weeks in a daily or weekly publication in the city pursuant to HRS
§ 1-28.5.
(Sec. 26-11.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 4,
§ 29-4.7) (Am. Ords. 02-37, 15-20)
§ 13-4.7 Violation—Penalty.
(a)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, any person found guilty of
violating this article or any rule adopted pursuant to this article shall be
guilty of a violation. The person shall be ordered to pay the city for the cost
of litter removal and shall pay a criminal fine of not more than $500 for each
offense, or ordered to pick up and remove litter from a public place, as
provided by HRS § 339-8, or both.
(b)   For violations of §
13-4.3(a)(1) or (2) and violations of §
13-4.4(a)(7), in lieu of or in addition to the penalties prescribed in
subsection (a), if the director of planning and permitting determines that any
person, firm, or corporation is not complying with a notice of violation, the
director of planning and permitting may have the party responsible for the
violation served, by certified mail or delivery, with an order pursuant to this
subsection.
(1)   Contents of the order.
(A)   The order may require the party responsible for the violation to do any
or all of the following:
(i)   Correct the violation within the time specified in the order;
(ii)   Pay a civil fine not to exceed $500 in the manner, at the place and
before the date specified in the order; and
(iii)   Pay a civil fine not to exceed $500 per day for each day in which the
violation persists, in the manner and at the time and place specified in the
order.
(B)   The order shall advise the party responsible for the violation that the
civil fine, if unpaid within the prescribed time period, can be added to
specified fees, taxes, or charges collected by the city.
(C)   The order shall advise the party responsible for the violation that the
order shall become final 30 calendar days after the date of its delivery. The
order shall also advise the party responsible for the violation that the order
may be appealed to the building board of appeals.
(2)   Service of notice of order. A notice of order must be served upon
responsible persons either personally or by certified mail. However, if the
whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by
the director of planning and permitting in the exercise of reasonable
diligence, and the director of planning and permitting provides an affidavit to
that effect, then a notice of order may be served by publishing the same once
each week for two consecutive weeks in a daily or weekly publication in the
city pursuant to HRS § 1-28.5.
(3)   Effect of order—right to appeal. The order issued by the director of
planning and permitting under this subsection shall become final 30 calendar
days after the date of the delivery of the order. The party responsible for the
violation may appeal the order to the building board of appeals. The appeal
must be received in writing by the building board of appeals on or before the
date the order becomes final. However, an appeal to the building board of
appeals shall not stay any provision of the order except the imposition of a
civil fine. No civil fine shall be imposed once an order has been appealed
until a hearing has been held pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, and a decision
upholding the fine has been rendered.
(4)   Judicial enforcement of order. The director of planning and permitting
may institute a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction for the
enforcement of any order issued pursuant to this section. Where the civil
action has been instituted to enforce the civil fine imposed by the order, the
director of planning and permitting need only show that the notice of violation
and order were served, that a civil fine was imposed, the amount of the civil
fine imposed, and that the fine imposed has not been paid.
(c)   Any person violating §
13-4.4(b) or (c) shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and shall be ordered to
pay the city for the cost of litter removal.
(Sec. 26-11.8, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 4,
§ 29-4.8) (Am. Ords. 97-13, 02-37, 15-20)
ARTICLE 5: USE OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS BY SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
Sections
   
13-5.1   Use unlawful for certain business purposes
   
13-5.2   Violation—Penalty
§ 13-5.1 Use unlawful for certain business purposes.
(a)   It is unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser to engage in business on
any public street, sidewalk, or mall where such person’s operation tends to, or
does impede or inconvenience the public or any person in the lawful use of such
street, sidewalk, or mall.
(b)   “Solicitor or canvasser,” as used in this article, means any person,
traveling by foot, or any other type of conveyance, or by wagon, automobile,
motor truck, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares,
merchandise, or other personal property for future delivery, or for services to
be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such person carries or
exhibits any samples or collects advance payments on sales. The term shall also
include any person who, for oneself or for another, hires, leases, uses, or
occupies any building, structure, tent, room, shop, vehicle, or any other place
for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future
delivery.
(Sec. 26-5.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 5, § 29-5.1)
§ 13-5.2 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall upon conviction be punished by a
fine not exceeding $100 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or by both.
(Sec. 26-5.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 5, § 29-5.2)
ARTICLE 6: PEDDLER’S LICENSE
Sections
   
13-6.1   Annual fee
   
13-6.2   Regulation affecting peddling
   
13-6.3   Deceptive sales and commercial schemes prohibited
   
13-6.4   Violation—Penalty—Summons or citation—Arrest
§ 13-6.1 Annual fee.
   The annual fee for a peddler’s license shall be $27.50, provided that the
fee is waived for all peddlers of newspapers of general circulation, and no
license shall be required of the following:
(1)   Any person peddling fresh fish, fresh fruit, fresh lei, fresh flowers, or
fresh vegetables;
(2)   Any merchant of a store allowed to peddle on a portion of a sidewalk or
mall under
Article 6A; or
(3)   Any person who has reached the age of 60 years.
(Sec. 26-6.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 6, § 29-6.1) (Am.
Ords. 92-73, 03-26, 25-37)
Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to § 13-6.1 in Ord. 25-37 take effect on January 1, 2026,
and are not yet incorporated herein.
§ 13-6.2 Regulation affecting peddling.
(a)   It is unlawful for any person to peddle on a public place without a
peddler’s license issued by the city, except as otherwise provided by §
13-6.1.
(b)   It is unlawful for any person, whether exempt or licensed under §
13-6.1, to peddle on a public place, unless such person is also duly licensed
under HRS § 237-9 to engage in and conduct such business as required by HRS §
237-9.
(c)   Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) or any other ordinance to the
contrary, and except as specifically provided in this section, it is unlawful
for any person to peddle on a public place in the following areas, even if such
person is exempt or licensed under §
13-6.1:
(1)   On the Pali Highway from the intersection of Nuuanu Pali Drive to Castle
Junction, including the Pali Lookout (improved observation area at the summit)
and access road thereto;
(2)   Makapuu Lookout (parking area overlooking Makapuu Beach) on Kalanianaole
Highway;
(3)   On Diamond Head Road from Poni Moi Road to Kulamanu Place;
(4)   Tantalus Drive from Aaliamanu Place to Ualakaa Park;
(5)   Waimea Bay beginning at Maunawai to the Kupupolo Heiau on Kamehameha
Highway;
(6)   Within 300 feet of the easterly end of Naupaka Street on Laie Point;
(7)   Waikiki Peninsula upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, malls,
parks, beaches, and other public places in Waikiki commencing at the entrance
to the Ala Wai Canal, thence along the Ala Wai Canal to Kapahulu Avenue, thence
along the Diamond Head property line of Kapahulu Avenue to the ocean, thence
along the ocean back to the entrance of the Ala Wai Canal;
(8)   Fort Street and Union Street Malls—the length and width of those areas in
downtown Honolulu designated as the Fort Street Mall and the Union Street Mall;
(9)   Chinatown and the length and width of College Walk Mall and Sun Yat Sen
Mall; except as allowed under
Article 6A or
Article 10;
(10)   In any school zone as defined in §
15-2.21 while school is in session; provided that this subdivision shall not
apply to any authorized participant in a city-sponsored market program, or in
any school-sponsored function, or to home door-to-door salespersons,
solicitors, or canvassers, as defined in §
13-5.1(b). For the purpose of this subdivision, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
School. Any public or private elementary, intermediate, or high school; and
School Is in Session. One hour before the start of classes and up until one
hour after the last scheduled class ends;
(11)   Halona Scenic Lookout (parking area overlooking the Blowhole) on
Kalanianaole Highway;
(12)   The grounds of City Hall and the Honolulu Municipal Building, as defined
in §
38-11.1 and including the public sidewalks abutting King Street, Alapai Street,
Beretania Street, and Punchbowl Street. This subdivision shall not preclude use
of the grounds by any concessionaire, licensee, lessee, or permittee of the
city, or by any peddler participating in the city-sponsored people’s open
market program; and
(13)   Within any public park or beach owned and operated by the city, except
pursuant to a concession, permit or license issued by the city.
This subsection shall not apply to the sale or offer for sale of newspapers of
general circulation and to duly authorized concessions in public places. For
purposes of this section, “newspaper of general circulation” means a
publication published at regular intervals, primarily for the dissemination of
news, intelligence, and opinions on recent events or newsworthy items of a
general character, and reaching all classes of the public.
(d)   Subsection (c) shall not be construed as prohibiting the sale or offer
for sale, rent, or offer for rent, or display for sale or rent on the public
streets, sidewalks, malls, or public places of goods, wares, merchandise,
foodstuffs, refreshments, or other kinds of property or services within the
area authorized by a parade or street usage permit within the time specified in
the permit and subject to the terms and conditions of the permit, as authorized
by the holders of the permit.
(Sec. 26-6.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 6, §
29-6.2) (Am. Ords. 88-36, 88-91, 92-73, 96-53, 96-58, 99-05, 03-26)
§ 13-6.3 Deceptive sales and commercial schemes prohibited.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in an unfair, deceptive, fraudulent,
or misleading act, practice, or representation while promoting any goods,
products, services, or property of any kind, upon streets, alleys, sidewalks,
parks, beaches, and other public places.
(Sec. 26-6.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 6, § 29-6.3)
§ 13-6.4 Violation—Penalty—Summons or citation—Arrest.
(a)   Penalty. Any person violating this article shall upon conviction be
punished as follows:
(1)   By a fine of $100 if the violation did not occur within two years of the
occurrence of a previous violation of this article;
(2)   By a fine of $250 if the violation occurred within two years of the
occurrence of one previous violation of this article; or
(3)   By a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment not
exceeding 30 days, or both if the violation occurred within two years of the
occurrence of two or more previous violations of this article.
(b)   Summons or citation. An authorized police officer shall issue to an
alleged violator a summons or citation in accordance with Article 9; provided
that the police officer may physically arrest an alleged violator in lieu of
issuing a summons or citation.
(Sec. 26-6.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 6, § 29-6.4) (Am.
Ords. 01-45, 03-26)
ARTICLE 6A: PEDDLING BY MERCHANT OF A STORE ON A CHINATOWN SIDEWALK
OR MALL, COLLEGE WALK MALL, SUN YAT SEN MALL, AND HISTORIC MOILIILI SIDEWALK
Sections
   
13-6A.1   Definitions
   
13-6A.2   Peddling by merchant of a store on a portion of a Chinatown sidewalk
or mall, the College Walk Mall, the Sun Yat Sen Mall, or Historic Moiliili
sidewalk
   
13-6A.3   Other restrictions and conditions for peddling on a portion of a
sidewalk or mall
   
13-6A.4   Adoption of rules
   
13-6A.5   Violation—Summons or Citation—Arrest
   
13-6A.6   Penalty
   
13-6A.7   Article additional to Articles 8 and 10 with respect to use of mall
§ 13-6A.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Chinatown Mall. Any of the following:
(1)   The Kekaulike Mall, designated for this article as the area of Kekaulike
Street, including the abutting sidewalks, between Hotel Street and King Street;
or
(2)   Any other mall that may be established or designated by ordinance within
Chinatown.
Historic Moiliili. The area along both sides of South King Street between Old
Stadium Park and Church Lane.
Mall. When used generally in this article, means the College Walk Mall, Sun Yat
Sen Mall, or a Chinatown mall.
Merchant of a Store. The person actually operating a store, whether or not the
person is the owner of the store or real property housing or underlying the
store.
Portion of a Sidewalk or Mall Usable by a Merchant for Peddling. The portion of
a Chinatown sidewalk or mall, the College Walk Mall, the Sun Yat Sen Mall, or
Historic Moiliili sidewalk upon which a merchant may peddle in accordance with
§
13-6A.2. If the portion is limited by the designated city department pursuant
to that section, the phrase means only the limited portion.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 6A, § 29-6A.1) (Added by Ord. 03-26; Am. Ord. 12-33)
§ 13-6A.2 Peddling by merchant of a store on a portion of a Chinatown sidewalk
or mall, the College Walk Mall, the Sun Yat Sen Mall, or Historic Moiliili
Sidewalk.
(a)   Except when prohibited under subsection (b):
(1)   A merchant of a store at ground level in Chinatown may peddle on a
portion of the sidewalk or mall abutting the store as provided by this article;
(2)   A merchant of a store that abuts College Walk Mall or Sun Yat Sen Mall at
ground level may peddle on a portion of the mall abutting the store as provided
by this article; and
(3)   A merchant of a store that abuts a Historic Moiliili sidewalk at ground
level may peddle on the portion of the sidewalk abutting the store as provided
by this article.
   Except when limited to a lesser area pursuant to subsection (b), a merchant
may peddle:
(A)   On any portion of the sidewalk within 18 inches perpendicular from the
merchant’s storefront wall; or
(B)   On any portion of the mall within 48 inches perpendicular from the
merchant’s storefront wall.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a merchant of a store that abuts a Historic
Moiliili sidewalk may peddle on any portion of the sidewalk within 48 inches
perpendicular from the merchant’s storefront wall except when limited to a
lesser area pursuant to subsection (b). In no instance, however, shall the
merchant peddle on any portion of a sidewalk or mall that extends laterally
past the length of the merchant’s storefront.
(b)   (1)   The city executive department designated by the mayor shall
prohibit a merchant from peddling on any portion of a sidewalk or mall if the
department determines that the peddling will result in any of the following:
(A)   The material impedance or obstruction of pedestrian traffic on the
sidewalk or mall;
(B)   A violation of the federal Americans with Disabilities Act;
(C)   The jeopardy of the public safety;
(D)   An inconsistency with the objectives of the Chinatown special district as
set forth under §
21-9.60 et seq.; or
(E)   The obstruction of a mailbox, fire hydrant, curbside teller, newsstand,
or other structure permitted under
Article 8.
(2)   Alternatively, the designated city department may limit a merchant to
peddling on a portion of a sidewalk or mall less than the 18 inches or 48
inches specified under subsection (a) if the department determines that the
limitation is necessary to prevent any of the occurrences listed under
subsection (b)(1)(A) through (E). If imposing the limitation, the designated
city department shall notify the merchant of the limited portion of the
sidewalk or mall upon which the merchant may peddle.
(c)   No merchant of a store or other person shall violate a prohibition or
limitation set by this section or the designated city department concerning the
portion of a sidewalk or mall usable or not for peddling.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 6A, § 29-6A.2) (Added by Ord. 03-26; Am. Ords. 12-33,
25-22)
§ 13-6A.3 Other restrictions and conditions for peddling on a portion of a
sidewalk or mall.
(a)   A merchant of a store may peddle on a portion of an abutting sidewalk or
mall only goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, refreshments, or other kinds
of property or services of the same or a similar character as available in the
merchant’s store; provided that a merchant shall not peddle any liquor as
defined in HRS § 281-1 on a sidewalk or mall.
(b)   (1)   A merchant of a store shall not place any empty box, trash can, or
debris on the portion of a sidewalk usable by the merchant for peddling. This
prohibition shall not apply to the portion of a mall usable by a merchant for
peddling.
(2)   A merchant of a store shall be subject to Article 4 with respect to
littering on the portion of a sidewalk or mall usable by the merchant for
peddling.
(c)   A merchant of a store shall not install any permanent structure on the
portion of a sidewalk or mall usable by the merchant for peddling.
(d)   A merchant of a store or other person on behalf of such a merchant may
stand beyond the portion of a sidewalk usable by the merchant for peddling when
the merchant or person peddles goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, or other
kinds of property that are displayed on the sidewalk by the merchant.
This subsection shall not apply:
(1)   When a merchant is prohibited under §
13-6A.2(b)(1) from peddling on any portion of a sidewalk abutting the
merchant’s store; or
(2)   To a merchant of a store abutting a mall or a person peddling on the mall
on behalf of the merchant. Such a merchant or person shall stand and peddle
only on the portion of the mall usable by the merchant for peddling.
(e)   A merchant of a store shall not cook, cut, trim, or otherwise prepare
food for sale or consumption on the portion of a sidewalk or mall usable by the
merchant for peddling.
A merchant who uses a portion of a sidewalk or mall to peddle food shall comply
with all relevant State laws and rules relating to food preparation, sale, and
sanitation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 6A, § 29-6A.3) (Added by Ord. 03-26)
§ 13-6A.4 Adoption of rules.
   The city executive department designated by the mayor may adopt rules to
implement this article, including rules relating to the hours during which
peddling on a sidewalk or mall is allowed. The rules shall be adopted in
accordance with HRS Chapter 91.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 6A, § 29-6A.4) (Added by Ord. 03-26)
§ 13-6A.5 Violation—Summons or citation—Arrest.
(a)   No person shall violate this article or any rule adopted pursuant to this
article.
(b)   An authorized police officer shall issue to an alleged violator a summons
or citation in accordance with
Article 9; provided that the police officer may physically arrest an alleged
violator in lieu of issuing a summons or citation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 6A, § 29-6A.5) (Added by Ord. 03-26)
§ 13-6A.6 Penalty.
   Any person violating this article or rule adopted pursuant to this article
shall upon conviction be punished as follows:
(1)   By a fine of $100 if the violation did not occur within two years of the
occurrence of a previous violation of this article;
(2)   By a fine of $250 if the violation occurred within two years of the
occurrence of one previous violation of this article; or
(3)   By a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment not
exceeding 30 days, or both if the violation occurred within two years of the
occurrence of two or more previous violations of this article.
   For the purposes of this section, a “violation of this article” includes a
violation of a rule adopted pursuant to this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 6A, § 29-6A.6) (Added by Ord. 03-26)
§ 13-6A.7 Article additional to Articles 8 and 10 with respect to use of mall.
   The use of a mall as authorized by this article shall be additional to the
uses of a mall authorized under
Article 8 and
Article 10.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 6A, § 29-6A.7) (Added by Ord. 03-26)
ARTICLE 7: HANDBILLING IN THE WAIKIKI SPECIAL DESIGN DISTRICT
Sections
   
13-7.1   Purpose and intent
   
13-7.2   Definitions
   
13-7.3   Application
   
13-7.4   Areas in which handbilling is permitted
   
13-7.5   Penalty, summons, or citation
   
13-7.6   Prohibited activity
§ 13-7.1 Purpose and intent.
(a)   The council finds that reasonable regulation of handbilling activities
upon certain public streets, sidewalks, alleys, and other public places within
Waikiki is a matter of compelling interest to the city. The council finds a
compelling need in this district to ensure the safety and welfare of both
motorists and pedestrians.
(b)   The Waikiki district is the heart of the city’s tourist industry and a
major business, entertainment, and recreation area for visitors and residents
alike. In 1986, there were approximately 5.6 million visitors to the State. The
visitor industry is an essential component of the economic vitality of the area
and the State. On an average, there were approximately 66,000 visitors in the
Waikiki district each day. In addition to this, the resident population of the
Waikiki district is approximately 23,000 people. As a result, travel through
the district is hindered by heavy pedestrian and vehicular traffic and
congestion at all times of the day. Pedestrian traffic counts on the sidewalk
at critical spots along Kalakaua Avenue alone during peak hours reach over
3,900 pedestrians per hour, an extraordinarily high volume. Daily pedestrian
traffic on the mauka side of the street at the International Market Place in
both directions during peak tourist season is estimated at 39,600. Peak season
daily pedestrian traffic on both sides of the street exceeds 65,000. Similar
extraordinarily high pedestrian traffic is also found on the sidewalks along
Kuhio Avenue and sections of Lewers Street. The city’s interest in open and
attractive sidewalks extends throughout the Waikiki special district.
(c)   Handbilling activities conducted at or close to intersections,
crosswalks, bus stops, and driveways impede the flow of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, leading to erratic, evasive maneuvers and posing the hazard
of diverting the attentions of and endangering drivers, pedestrians, and those
alighting from buses. Further, handbillers who obstruct the paths of
pedestrians or who, without the consent of the pedestrians, thrust handbills in
their faces or touch their persons or property, create hazardous situations,
such as pedestrians stepping into busy streets or colliding with other
pedestrians to avoid unwanted contacts with handbillers. This danger is
minimized when handbillers are prohibited from engaging in handbilling in or in
close proximity to such safety sensitive areas as driveways, crosswalks, bus
stops, and intersections. Accordingly, this article is designed to protect the
safety of the public and to restrict handbilling activities in only those areas
creating the greatest hazards to pedestrian and motorist safety.
(d)   The provisions of this article are declared to be necessary for the
accomplishment of the following purposes:
(1)   To ensure that persons desiring to engage in handbilling activities in
Waikiki are given a reasonable opportunity to do so;
(2)   To ensure the safe, unrestricted, free and orderly flow of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic on the most hazardous portions of sidewalks in Waikiki; and
(3)   To protect the visitor industry in the State, the heart of which is the
Waikiki peninsula, by protecting the safety of our visitors.
(e)   The provisions of this article are not intended to cover the dispensing
of written materials by newsracks or peddling activities covered by
Article 6.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 7, § 29-7.1) (Added by Ord. 88-83; Am. Ord. 98-12)
§ 13-7.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Department. The department of budget and fiscal services of the City and County
of Honolulu.
Director. The director of budget and fiscal services of the City and County of
Honolulu.
Handbilling. The distribution by an individual of any printed or written matter
or other informative material. The term handbilling shall not include
distribution of any printed or written matter by means of a “dispensing rack,”
as defined in §
13-11.2(a), any other structure or enclosure constructed by or under the
direction of the city for purposes of dispensing printed or written material,
or a newsstand permitted under §
13-8.2, and shall not include the sale or offer for sale or rent or offer for
rent of any printed or written material or any other informative material.
Informative Material. Any photograph, map, diagram, rendering, drawing,
painting, graph, photocopy, print, relief, engraving, embossed material, punch
card, audio tape, video tape, computer tape, record, compact or laser disc,
computer diskette, or any other material intended to convey information
audibly, visually, or by touch, whether in language, code or otherwise, which
has no purpose apart from the conveyance of the information, depiction, or
sound conveyed, but does not include money or any negotiable instrument.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 7, § 29-7.2) (Added by Ord. 88-83; Am. Ords. 98-12,
00-02)
§ 13-7.3 Application.
   This article applies to Kalakaua and Kuhio Avenues between Kalaimoku Street
and Kapahulu Avenue, and Lewers Street between Kalakaua Avenue and Kalia Road,
and the sidewalks thereof.
   This article also applies to the appropriate public sidewalk areas of
streets intersecting the portions of Kalakaua Avenue, Kuhio Avenue, and Lewers
Street listed above.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 7, § 29-7.3) (Added by Ord. 88-83; Am. Ord. 00-02)
§ 13-7.4 Areas in which handbilling is permitted.
(a)   Handbilling is permitted on all public sidewalks to which this article
applies, except:
(1)   In any area where clear pedestrian passage on the public sidewalk is less
than 4 feet wide;
(2)   On the portion of a public sidewalk adjacent to any area designated as a
bus stop or within 10 feet of either end of the bus stop. In areas where the
length of the bus stop is not clearly identified, the front of the bus stop
begins at the bus stop sign and extends 50 feet back from the bus stop sign;
(3)   Within a midblock crosswalk area;
(4)   On the portion of a public sidewalk crossed by a public or private
driveway or within 10 feet of either side of the driveway; or
(5)   Within any street corner area.
(b)   For the purposes of this section:
(1)   Midblock Crosswalk Area. The sidewalk area that falls between the two
lines 15 feet beyond each side of a marked midblock crosswalk (as defined by
the crosswalk lines delineated on the street pavement) and perpendicular to the
curb. (See examples of midblock crosswalk areas in Attachment “A,”
Figures 13-7A.1,
13-7A.5, and
13-7A.7.)
(2)   Street corner areas.
(A)   At street corners other than those subject to paragraph (B) or (C),
“street corner area” means the sidewalk area at the intersection of two
streets, circumscribed by the curbs, the property lines abutting the sidewalk
area, and the following lines:
(i)   The line including the point along the curb of one street either: 10 feet
beyond the far side of a marked corner crosswalk and perpendicular to the curb;
or, where there is no marked corner crosswalk, 25 feet from the curb line of
the intersecting street and parallel to the curb line; and
(ii)   The line including the point along the curb of the intersecting street
either: 10 feet beyond the far side of a marked corner crosswalk and
perpendicular to the curb; or, where there is no marked crosswalk, 25 feet from
the curb line of the first street and parallel to the curb line.
   (See street corner areas marked diagonally on Attachment “A,”
Figures 13-7A.2,
13-7A.3, and
13-7A.4.)
(B)   Except as provided in paragraph (C), for street corners at a “T”
intersection, at the two corners created on the stem street side of the
crossbar street, the street corner area provision of this subdivision shall
apply, and on the side of the crossbar street opposite the stem street, the
midblock crosswalk area provisions of subdivision (1) shall apply. (See areas
marked diagonally on Attachment “A,”
Figures 13-7A.5,
13-7A.6, and
13-7A.7.)
   For purposes of this definition, a “T” intersection is an intersection where
one street, designated the “stem” street, terminates at another street,
designated the “crossbar” street.
(C)   At the ewa side of the crosswalk crossing Beach Walk at its intersection
with Kalakaua Avenue and at the ewa side of the ewa crosswalk crossing Saratoga
Road at its intersection with Kalakaua Avenue, the “street corner area” shall
be determined by application of the midblock crosswalk area provision of
subdivision (1). Additionally, with respect to the intersection of Kalakaua
Avenue and Saratoga Road, the area where handbilling is prohibited shall
include the entire traffic island at that intersection.
(3)   For crosswalks that are delineated by two roughly parallel lines defining
portions of the perimeter of the crosswalk, including crosswalks at
intersections where pedestrians are permitted to cross in all directions at the
same time (“Barnes Walks”), distances shall be measured from the point where
the outer edges of the roughly parallel lines intersect the curb; provided that
if they do not intersect the curb, distances shall be measured from the point
where the outer edges of the roughly parallel lines would intersect the curb if
they were extended to intersect the curb. (See Attachment “A,”
Figures 13-7A.8  and
13-7A.9 .) For those crosswalks that are not delineated by roughly parallel
perimeter lines, and which are defined by a series of roughly parallel
rectangular blocks within the crosswalk itself, distances shall be measured
from the points where the curb intersects the lines projected through the
midpoints of the widths of the two full-length rectangular blocks nearest to
the curb line. (See Attachment “A,”
Figure 13-7A.10 .) For purposes of this subdivision: the “width” of a
rectangular block shall be the shorter side of the block, the side roughly
perpendicular to the nearest curb line; and a “full length” rectangular block
is a block at least 80 percent of the length of the longest rectangular block
in the crosswalk.
(4)   “Corner crosswalk” means a crosswalk, any portion of which is within 25
feet of the closest street corner. The measurement rule of subdivision (3)
shall not apply to this definition.
(5)   “Curb line” means the line of a curb before its becoming curved at a
street corner.
(6)   “Far side” of a marked corner crosswalk is the side of the crosswalk
further from the closest street corner.
(7)   “Midblock crosswalk” means any crosswalk other than a corner crosswalk.
(c)   The figures in Attachment A are intended to illustrate the application of
the regulations to midblock crosswalk areas and to street corner areas;
however, the figures are not intended to represent every crosswalk or street
corner in the area regulated by this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 7, § 29-7.4) (Added by Ord. 88-83; Am. Ords. 98-12,
00-02)
§ 13-7.5 Penalty, summons, or citation.
(a)   Penalty. Any person conducting handbilling in violation of this article
shall be subject to a fine of $25 for each offense.
(b)   Summons or citation.
(1)   There shall be provided for use by authorized police officers, or
authorized special police officers, a form of summons or citation for use in
citing any violation of this article that does not mandate the physical arrest
of the violator. The form and content of such summons or citation shall be as
adopted or prescribed by the administrative judge of the district court and
shall be printed on a form commensurate with the form of other summonses or
citations used in modern methods of arrest, so designed as to include all
necessary information to make the same valid within the laws and regulations of
the State and city. The summons or citation shall instruct such person to
report to the violations bureau of the district court for the district of
Honolulu. Each such violator may, within seven days after receipt of such
summons, appear at such violations bureau and post a bail bond in such amounts
as may be set by the administrative judge of the district court for appearance
on the date as may be set out for such person to appear before the district
court. Upon failure to appear on such date, the bail bond shall be deemed
forfeited. Bail forfeiture by mail shall be permitted.
(2)   In every case when a citation is issued, the original of the same shall
be given to the violator; provided that the administrative judge of the
district court may prescribe the giving to the violator of a carbon copy of the
citation and provide for the disposition of the original and any other copies.
(3)   Every citation shall be consecutively numbered, and each carbon copy
shall bear the number of its respective original.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 7, § 29-7.5) (Added by Ord. 88-83)
§ 13-7.6 Prohibited activity.
   Individuals distributing handbills shall be prohibited from depositing any
handbills upon any public place or upon any structure or landscaping on any
public place at any time.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 7, § 29-7.6) (Added by Ord. 98-12)
   Attachment “A”
   Figure 13-7A.1: Midblock Crosswalk Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-41.png]
* Crosswalks are generally delineated by either two parallel lines or a series
of parallel rectangular blocks.
   Figure 13-7A.2: Street Corner Area With Two Marked Crosswalks
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-43.png]
   Figure 13-7A.3: Street Corner Area Without Marked Crosswalk
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-45.png]
   Figure 13-7A.4: Street Corner Area With One Marked Crosswalk
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-47.png]
   Figure 13-7A.5: “T” Intersection With Crosswalks
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-49.png]
   Figure 13-7A.6: “T” Intersection Without Crosswalks
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-51.png]
   Figure 13-7A.7: Barnes Walk Crosswalk
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-53.png]
   Figure 13-7A.8: Crosswalk Delineated by Roughly Parallel Lines Intersecting
the Sidewalk
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-55.png]
   Figure 13-7A.9: Crosswalk Delineated by Roughly Parallel Lines Not
Intersecting the Sidewalk
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-57.png]
   Figure 13-7A.10: Crosswalk Delineated by a Series of Roughly Parallel
Rectangular Blocks Lines Not Intersecting the Sidewalk
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-59.png]
ARTICLE 8: STRUCTURES ON, ABOVE, OR BELOW A PUBLIC SIDEWALK
Sections
   
13-8.1   Permit required
   
13-8.2   Newsstands—Permit application—Fees—Conditions
   
13-8.3   Reserved
   
13-8.4   Curbside tellers
   
13-8.5   Reserved
   
13-8.6   Public convenience and necessity
   
13-8.7   Nonwaiver of other requirements
   
13-8.8   Payment of fees
   
13-8.9   Revocation of permits
   
13-8.10   Unlawful to erect gasoline pumps on sidewalks—Penalty
   
13-8.11   Violation—Penalty
§ 13-8.1 Permit required.
   A person may not establish, construct, maintain, keep, or operate a
newsstand, curbside teller, or any other structure or appliance on, above, or
below a public sidewalk or mall without a permit as provided herein, or as may
be provided by law.
(Sec. 26-8.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 8, § 29-8.1) (Am.
Ord. 25-22)
§ 13-8.2 Newsstands—Permit application—Fees—Conditions.
(a)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall issue permits
authorizing newsstands on public sidewalks in accordance with the provisions
and conditions contained herein.
(b)   Each permit shall be valid for the period that fees are assessed and
paid.
(c)   A fee of $15 per year for each newsstand covered by the permit, or added
by an amendment thereto, shall be charged and collected by the director of
budget and fiscal services at the time of the issuance, reissuance, or
amendment of the permit. Only one permit shall be issued to each applicant
listing location and size of each newsstand. Decals bearing a number and the
expiration date marked thereon shall be issued for each newsstand after payment
of the permit fee. After receipt of the decal, the applicant shall affix the
decal in plain sight on the front of the newsstand. The use of the decal is
subject to the following conditions:
(1)   Upon loss, defacement, or destruction of a decal, the applicant shall
submit an application for a new decal giving such information as shall be
required by the director of budget and fiscal services;
(2)   Upon filing of such application, the director of budget and fiscal
services shall issue a new decal and charge the applicant a fee of $1 therefor;
and
(3)   If the director of budget and fiscal services finds that an applicant’s
newsstand does not have the decal affixed thereto, the director shall order the
removal of such stand until such time an application for a permit is filed and
a decal, issued therefor, is affixed to such stand.
(d)   The permit shall be nontransferable.
(e)   Upon the breach of any condition or violation of this article, the
director of budget and fiscal services shall suspend the permit until the
breach of condition or violation is corrected.
(f)   A written application shall be filed with the director of budget and
fiscal services that shall include:
(1)   The name of the applicant and the name under which the business is
conducted;
(2)   The address and telephone number of the applicant;
(3)   The total number of newsstands and location of each newsstand to be
covered by the permit;
(4)   An authorization for the chief of police to remove and impound any
newsstand located in violation of this article and agreement to hold the city,
its officers, and employees free from any claim for damages or losses resulting
from the removal or impounding of such newsstand;
(5)   The signature of the applicant or of a person authorized to execute
instruments on behalf of the applicant; and
(6)   The application shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance or a
copy of a public liability insurance policy issued by a carrier to be approved
by the director of budget and fiscal services, and naming specifically the
applicant, the city, the State, and such other parties designated by the
applicant as assureds, and generally the owners, lessees, and occupants of
property abutting the public sidewalk where each newsstand is located as
assured, covering any claim or liability for damages, injuries or deaths,
resulting from the placement, condition, or use of the newsstands or in any way
connected with such newsstands. The policy shall also include automatic
coverage for newsstands added or relocated after the application is filed. The
minimum amount of coverage under such policy shall be $100,000 for injuries or
death to any one person, $300,000 for injuries or deaths involving two or more
persons arising from any one occurrence, and $10,000 property damage for each
occurrence. The policy shall be kept in force during the entire period of the
permit. Neither the applicant nor the carrier shall cancel the policy, except
upon 30 days prior written notice to the director of budget and fiscal
services.
(g)   Hazardous newsstands.
(1)   The chief of police shall send written notice to the permittee whenever
the chief of police determines that the condition or location of a newsstand
constitutes a hazard to the public.
(2)   Within 24 hours of receipt of such notice, the permittee shall remove or
correct the condition of the newsstand. The chief of police shall send written
notice to the director of budget and fiscal services at the end of such period
stating what action, if any, the permittee has taken. If the permittee has
failed to take the necessary action, the chief of police shall remove and
impound the newsstand and shall so notify the permittee. Any impounded
newsstand may be recovered by the permittee upon the payment of $5 to cover the
cost of removal. Failure of the permittee to pay such charge and claim such
newsstand within 30 days after notification of the removal shall be deemed an
authorization by the permittee to destroy or otherwise dispose of such
newsstand.
(3)   Upon receipt of notification that the permittee has failed to remove or
correct the condition of the newsstand, the director of budget and fiscal
services shall suspend the permit and notify the council of such suspension.
(h)   Conditions of permit. The permit shall be issued subject to the following
conditions.
(1)   The permittee shall maintain a current public liability insurance policy,
required by this section, at all times during the effective period of the
permit.
(2)   The permittee shall not add any newsstand after the filing of the
application, without amending the permit to specify the number of additional
newsstands.
(3)   The permittee shall not install any newsstand that exceeds the following
dimensions in its normal operating position: 22 inches in width, 50 inches in
height, and 24 inches in depth. The width of the unit may be increased by 5
inches to accommodate the coin box only.
(4)   No newsstand shall be permanently attached or affixed to a public
sidewalk or mall.
(5)   The permittee shall give written notice to the director of customer
services whenever a newsstand is permanently removed without replacement.
(Sec. 26-8.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 8, § 29-8.2) (Am.
Ords. 05-38, 25-37)
Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to § 13-8.2 in Ord. 25-37 take effect on January 1, 2026.
§ 13-8.3 Reserved.
§ 13-8.4 Curbside tellers.
(a)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall issue permits
authorizing curbside tellers on, above, or below public sidewalks and malls in
accordance with the provisions and conditions contained herein.
(b)   Each permit is valid for the period that fees are assessed and paid.
(c)   The permit is nontransferable, except to the mortgagee of a duly recorded
mortgage or to a purchaser at a foreclosure sale conducted pursuant to the
terms and conditions of the mortgage. The transferee has all of the rights
granted by the permit and is subject to all of the requirements contained
herein.
(d)   Upon the breach of any condition or violation of this article, the
director of budget and fiscal services shall suspend the permit until the
breach of condition or violation is corrected.
(e)   The permittee shall surrender the permit to the director of budget and
fiscal services upon the removal of all curbside tellers authorized by the
permit.
(f)   A written application must be filed with the director of budget and
fiscal services that includes;
(1)   The name of the applicant and the name under which the business is
conducted;
(2)   The address and telephone number of the applicant;
(3)   The total number of curbside tellers to be covered by the permit;
(4)   The location of each curbside teller;
(5)   The name and address of any mortgagee under a duly recorded mortgage to
which the curbside tellers would be subject; and
(6)   The signature of the applicant or of a person authorized to execute
instruments on behalf of the applicant.
(g)   The following documents must be filed with each application.
(1)   A certificate of insurance or a copy of a public liability insurance
policy, issued by a carrier, to be approved by the director of budget and
fiscal services, and naming specifically the applicant, the city, and the
State, and any other parties designated by the applicant as assureds, and
generally the owners, lessees, and occupants of property abutting the public
sidewalk or mall where each curbside teller is located as assureds, covering
any claim or liability for damages, injuries, or deaths, resulting from the
placement, condition, or use of the curbside teller or in any way connected
with the curbside teller. The policy must also include automatic coverage for
curbside tellers added or relocated after the application is filed. The minimum
amount of coverage under such policy must be $100,000 for injuries or death to
any one person, $300,000 for injuries or deaths involving two or more persons
arising from any one occurrence, and $10,000 property damage for each
occurrence. The policy must be kept in force during the entire period of the
permit. Neither the applicant nor the carrier may cancel the policy, except
upon 30 days prior written notice to the director of budget and fiscal
services.
(2)   Written approval from the chief of police that the requested location and
size of each curbside teller does not constitute a hazard to or impede the
traffic of pedestrians or vehicles.
(3)   Written approval from the chief engineer of the department of facility
maintenance that the size, design, construction, and specification of each
particular type of curbside teller are satisfactory for public safety.
(4)   Written authorization signed by any mortgagee under a duly recorded
mortgage to which the curbside tellers are subject.
(h)   Hazardous structures.
(1)   The chief of police shall send written notice to the permittee and the
mortgagees mentioned herein whenever the chief determines that the condition or
location of a curbside teller constitutes a hazard to the public or is impeding
traffic. The chief of police shall send a copy of the notice to the director of
budget and fiscal services.
(2)   Within 24 hours of receipt of the notice, the permittee or mortgagee, or
both, shall remove or correct the condition of the curbside teller. The chief
of police shall send written notice to the director of budget and fiscal
services at the end of the 24-hour period stating what action, if any, the
permittee or mortgagee, or both, has taken.
(3)   Upon receipt of notification that the permittee or mortgagee, or both,
has failed to take the necessary action, the director of budget and fiscal
services shall suspend the permit and notify the council of the suspension.
(i)   Conditions of permit. Permits will be issued subject to the following
conditions:
(1)   The permittee shall maintain a current public liability insurance policy,
required by this section, at all times during the effective period of the
permit.
(2)   The permittee may not add or relocate any curbside teller after the
filing of the application without amending the permit to specify the number and
locations of additional curbside tellers and the new locations of relocated
curbside tellers and without the approval of the chief of police and the chief
engineer of the department of facility maintenance as provided under subsection
(g) for the additional or relocated curbside tellers. The approval of the chief
engineer of the department of facility maintenance is not necessary if the
curbside teller is of a type previously approved.
(3)   The permittee shall give written notice to the director of budget and
fiscal services whenever a curbside teller is permanently vacated.
(j)   The applicant need not be franchised; however, only applicants who are
authorized to do business in the State as a bank, savings and loan association,
credit union, or financial services loan company are eligible for the permit.
(k)   A fee of $120 per year for each curbside teller covered by the permit, or
added by amendment thereto, shall be charged and collected by the director of
budget and fiscal services at the time of issuance, reissuance, or amendment of
the permit. Only one permit shall be issued to each applicant.
(Sec. 26-8.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 8, § 29-8.4) (Am.
Ords. 96-58, 25-22, 25-37)
Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to § 13-8.4 in Ord. 25-37 take effect on January 1, 2026,
and are not yet incorporated herein.
§ 13-8.5 Reserved.
§ 13-8.6 Public convenience and necessity.
   The permits provided herein shall be issued subject to a finding by the
director of budget and fiscal services, upon evidence submitted by the
applicant, that the public convenience and necessity require the issuance
thereof.
(Sec. 26-8.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 8, § 29-8.6)
§ 13-8.7 Nonwaiver of other requirements.
   No provision contained in this article shall be interpreted to modify any
State or city law or regulation pertaining to fees, licenses, permits,
standards, and specifications of the equipment and structures covered by this
article.
(Sec. 26-8.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 8, § 29-8.7)
§ 13-8.8 Payment of fees.
   All fees shall be paid in advance on a yearly basis computed from July 1 to
June 30. The fees for any structure placed on the sidewalk or mall after July 1
shall be prorated on a monthly basis. No refund of fees shall be made.
(Sec. 26-8.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 8, § 29-8.8)
§ 13-8.9 Revocation of permits.
   Notwithstanding any other provision herein to the contrary, any permit may
be revoked at any time by the council.
(Sec. 26-8.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 8, § 29-8.9)
§ 13-8.10 Unlawful to erect gasoline pumps on sidewalks—Penalty.
(a)   It is unlawful for any person to erect or place, or permit, or cause to
be erected or placed, any gasoline pumps upon any sidewalk or mall in the city.
(b)   Any person violating this provision shall, upon conviction, be punished
by a fine not to exceed $5 for each day of violation.
(Sec. 26-8.10, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 8, § 29-8.10)
(Am. Ord. 25-37)
Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to § 13-8.10 in Ord. 25-37 take effect on January 1, 2026,
and are not yet incorporated herein.
§ 13-8.11 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person establishing, constructing, maintaining, keeping, or operating a
newsstand, curbside teller, or any other structure or appliance on, above, or
below a public sidewalk or mall without a valid permit as provided herein will,
upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine not
exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or by both.
(Sec. 26-8.11, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 8, § 29-8.11)
(Am. Ord. 25-22)
ARTICLE 9: PROCEDURE ON ARREST
Sections
   
13-9.1   Procedure
   
13-9.2   Summons or citation
§ 13-9.1 Procedure.
   Any authorized police officer, upon making an arrest for a violation of this
chapter, shall take the name and address of the alleged violator and shall
issue to the alleged violator in writing a summons or citation hereinafter
described, notifying the alleged violator to answer to the complaint to be
entered against such person at a place and at a time provided in the summons or
citation.
(Sec. 26-9.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 9, § 29-9.1)
§ 13-9.2 Summons or citation.
(a)   There shall be provided for use by authorized police officers, a form of
summons or citation for use in citing violators of this chapter where the
circumstances do not mandate the physical arrest of such violators. The form
and content of such summons or citation shall be as adopted or prescribed by
the administrative judge of the district court and shall be printed on a form
commensurate with the form of other summonses or citations used in modern
methods of arrest, so designed to include all necessary information to make the
same valid within the laws and regulations of the State and the city.
(b)   In every case when a citation is issued, the original of the same shall
be given to the violator; provided that the administrative judge of the
district court may prescribe by giving to the violator a carbon copy of the
citation and provide for the disposition of the original and any other copies.
(c)   Every citation shall be consecutively numbered and each carbon copy shall
bear the number of its respective original.
(Sec. 26-9.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 9, § 29-9.2)
ARTICLE 10: USE OF MALLS
Sections
   
13-10.1   Declaration of intent
   
13-10.2   Definitions
   
13-10.3   Powers and duties of the department
   
13-10.4   Appeals
   
13-10.5   Penalty—Procedure on arrest—Summons or citation
   
13-10.6   Severability
§ 13-10.1 Declaration of intent.
   The council finds that:
(1)   Indiscriminate and uncontrolled use of malls by individuals, commercial
establishments fronting malls, and other organizations and deterioration of the
aesthetic aspects of malls are detrimental to the public interest;
(2)   The department of parks and recreation is able to provide effective
control and coordination of permitted usage of malls, and to preserve or
upgrade the aesthetic aspects of malls; the council therefore delegates to the
department of parks and recreation the authority to control and coordinate
permitted usage of malls, except for Downtown malls, in accordance with the
terms of this article. The department may post signs to prohibit skateboarding
and other activities regulated under §
10-1.2 when necessary for the protection and preservations of malls and
facilities thereon, or the health, safety, and welfare of persons or property;
and
(3)   The department of transportation services is able to provide effective
control and coordination of vehicular traffic on malls; the council therefore
delegates to the department of transportation services the authority to control
and coordinate vehicular traffic on malls; provided that for Downtown malls,
the council further delegates to the department of transportation services the
authority to control and coordinate permitted usage of those malls.
(Sec. 26-10.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 10, § 29-10.1)
(Am. Ords. 91-29, 25-8)
§ 13-10.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
College Walk Mall. The mall as defined in §
13-1.1.
Department. The department of parks and recreation, unless the context
otherwise requires; provided that for Downtown malls, Fort Street Mall, and
Union Mall, the term “department” means the department of transportation
services.
Downtown Malls. Collectively the College Walk Mall, Fort Street Mall, Kauluwela
Mall, Kekaulike Mall, Kila Kalikimaka Mall, Sun Yat Sen Mall, and Union Mall.
Event. The use of malls for any one or more of the following:
(1)   For membership drives sponsored by any person;
(2)   For organized activities sponsored by any person on any portion of malls,
whether for profit or not;
(3)   For meetings, which are defined to mean any gatherings on malls sponsored
by any person; and
(4)   For speeches or other communications made by any person and addressed to
other users of the mall for the purpose of influencing their views on any
subject.
Fort Street Mall. The mall established pursuant to §
15-25.1(b).
Kauluwela Mall.  The parcel designated by TMK 1-7-023:033.
Kekaulike Mall.  The area as described in §
13-15B.1(d).
Kila Kalikimaka Mall.  The area as described in §
13-15B.1(d).
Malls District. The area from a private property line to a private property
line as to the width of the mall, and physical demarcation indicating the
length of the mall.
Merchant. Any property owner who has been assessed for a mall improvement
district, including lessees or tenants of such property.
Sun Yat Sen Mall.  The mall as defined in §
13-1.1.
Union Mall. The mall established pursuant to §
15-25.1(a).
(Sec. 26-10.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 10, § 29-10.2)
(Am. Ords. 02-51, 25-8)
§ 13-10.3 Powers and duties of the department.
(a)   Applications. The department shall receive and review applications for
permits for the use of malls by any person where required by subsection (b), on
forms approved by the department. The filing of applications shall be pursuant
to rules adopted by the department. The applications for permits shall be filed
not fewer than 10 working days before the date of the proposed event. There
shall be no charge for the filing of an application. The department shall
inform the applicant in writing of any approval or denial of an application by
delivering or mailing to the last known address of the applicant a copy of the
department’s decision within five working days before the proposed event.
(b)   Permits. The department shall issue permits for the use of a particular
area of a mall or malls for events, together with any activities reasonably
related thereto, whenever such events promote: the safety, health, and welfare
of the public; the use of the malls for which they were established; the
interest of the malls district; or any other community endeavors sponsored,
undertaken, or promoted by duly established organizations. The department shall
determine and establish by rules as prescribed herein the number and boundaries
of areas within each mall, which shall reasonably promote the safety, health,
and welfare of the public; the use of the malls for which they were
established; the interest of the malls district; or any other community
endeavors sponsored, undertaken or promoted by duly established organizations.
All permits may be issued subject to the following restrictions:
(1)   That such events do not impair the health, safety, and welfare of the
users of malls and of the merchants and the property owners in malls, and do
not violate any statutes, ordinances, or rules or regulations having the effect
of law;
(2)   No permit shall be granted for more than seven consecutive calendar days
in any calendar year;
(3)   No permit shall be issued for more than one event in a particular area of
a mall during a given period; provided that several areas of a mall or malls
may be used concurrently for such event;
(4)   No permit shall be issued to any person for an event in a particular area
of a particular mall more than once during a calendar year; provided that any
events sponsored by merchants shall be done collectively as an association of
merchants and not individually; and provided further, that any person who has
the privilege of using a particular mall during a calendar year as provided
herein, may submit another application, and the department may issue a permit
to such person if there are no conflicts in the use of malls granted to other
permittees, or no applicant has submitted a request for the use of malls for
the date or period requested by such prior user of the mall; and
(5)   A security deposit for each day of use for the purpose of cleaning up
malls if a permittee fails so to do, or as reimbursement for any damage to
plants or other property of the city or to any private property fronting or
situated alongside malls. Such deposit shall be returned to the applicant if
the foregoing situations have not occurred; provided that if such deposit has
been held for more than a month, interest at the prevailing rate on a month-to-
month basis shall be paid by the city.
The department shall establish monetary deposit schedules based on the number
of people using a specific area for which a permit has been issued, the term of
the permit and the type of activity; if a permittee charges admission to the
permittee’s functions or activities, the director shall require that the
permittee obtain a public liability insurance policy that names the city as an
insured party.
(c)   Advisory function of the department.  The department shall:
(1)   Recommend to the merchants or the property owners, as the case may be:
(A)   Appropriate renovations or repairs to facades of buildings fronting
malls; and
(B)   Appropriate renovations or repairs to overhanging signs and permanent
marquees fronting malls; and
(2)   Recommend to the appropriate city agency or merchants proposals to
preserve or upgrade the aesthetic aspects of malls.
(d)   Control of repairs and traffic.
(1)   The department shall control and coordinate pedestrian traffic on, and
use of, malls.
(2)   The department of transportation services shall control and coordinate
vehicular traffic on malls, including the timing and coordination of vehicles
on malls for the purpose of repairing or removing public utility services or in
connection with construction on real property abutting malls.
The control and coordination authority of this subdivision, however, shall not
apply to an “authorized maintenance vehicle,” as defined under §
15-2.4, when operated on the Fort Street Mall as such a vehicle.
(e)   Newsstands, dumpsters, and so forth. The department shall confer with the
director of budget and fiscal services relative to permits and placement of
newsstands and curbside tellers, which are under the jurisdiction of the
director of budget and fiscal services as provided in
Article 8. The department, in consultation with the department of planning and
permitting, may allow the temporary placement of dumpsters on a mall during a
period of construction where the city has entered into a development agreement
for construction on the mall and where the establishments abutting the mall
cannot accommodate the dumpster on their property during the period of
construction.
(f)   Rules. To adopt rules, including rules of procedure for the suspension or
revocation of permits and such other adjudicatory functions, all pursuant to
HRS Chapter 91, as amended, that are not inconsistent with the provisions
contained herein.
(g)   Hearings.
(1)   For revocation or suspension of permit. To conduct hearings pursuant to
the provisions of HRS Chapter 91, as amended, before revoking or suspending any
permit. No hearing shall be required as a prerequisite to the issuance of any
permit.
(2)   Notice of determination. If after the hearing it is determined that a
permit shall be revoked or suspended, the applicant shall be informed in
writing and in the form as provided in HRS Chapter 91, as amended.
(Sec. 26-10.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 10, § 29-10.3)
(Am. Ords. 91-29, 02-50, 25-22)
§ 13-10.4 Appeals.
   An applicant whose permit for the use of malls has been denied, revoked, or
suspended by the department may file within 30 days after receipt of the
revocation, suspension, or denial an appeal for a hearing with the city
council.
(Sec. 26-10.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 10, § 29-10.4)
§ 13-10.5 Penalty—Procedure on arrest—Summons or citation.
(a)   Penalty. Any person violating this article shall be, upon conviction,
subject to a fine of $250 or 30 days in the city jail, or both.
(b)   Procedure on arrest. Any authorized police officer, or authorized special
police officer, upon making an arrest for a violation of this article, shall
take the name and address of the alleged violator and shall issue to the
alleged violator in writing a summons or citation hereinafter described,
notifying the alleged violator to answer to the complaint to be entered against
such person at a place and at a time provided in the summons or citation.
(c)   Summons or citation.
(1)   There shall be provided for use by authorized police officers or
authorized special police officers, a form of summons or citation for use in
citing violators of this article that does not mandate the physical arrest of
such violators. The form and content of such summons or citation shall be as
adopted or prescribed by the administrative judge of the district court and
shall be printed on a form commensurate with the form of other summonses or
citations used in modern methods of arrest, so designed to include all
necessary information to make the same valid within the laws and regulations of
the State and the city.
(2)   In every case when a citation is issued, the original of the same shall
be given to the violator; provided that the administrative judge of the
district court may prescribe by giving to the violator a carbon copy of the
citation and provide for the disposition of the original and any other copies.
(3)   Every citation shall be consecutively numbered and each carbon copy shall
bear the number of its respective original.
(Sec. 26-10.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 10, § 29-10.5)
§ 13-10.6 Severability.
   This article is declared to be severable. In accordance therewith, if any
portion of the article is held invalid for any reason, the validity of any
other portion of this article shall not be affected and if the application of
any portion of this article to any person, property, or circumstance is held
invalid, the application hereof to any other person, property, or circumstance
shall not be affected.
(Sec. 26-10.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 10, § 29-10.6)
ARTICLE 11: PUBLICATION DISPENSING RACKS IN WAIKIKI
Sections
   
13-11.1   Applicability
   
13-11.2   Definitions
   
13-11.3   Location and installation of publication dispensing rack enclosures
   
13-11.4   Publication dispensing rack enclosures
   
13-11.5   Publication dispensing rack inserts
   
13-11.6   Publication dispensing rack space permits
   
13-11.7   Method of allocation and reallocation of publication dispensing rack
spaces
   
13-11.8   Unallocated, abandoned, or surrendered publication dispensing rack
spaces
   
13-11.9   Installation, maintenance, and repair of publication dispensing
enclosures, spaces, and inserts
   
13-11.10   Temporary dislocations
   
13-11.11   Prohibitions
   
13-11.12   Liability
   
13-11.13   Enforcement
   
13-11.14   Penalty
   
13-11.15   Rules
   
13-11.16   Severability
§ 13-11.1 Applicability.
   This article shall apply to publication dispensing devices, publication
dispensing rack enclosures, and publication dispensing rack spaces throughout
the Waikiki special district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.1) (Added by Ord. 02-10)
§ 13-11.2 Definitions.*
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Allocation. The triennial allocation made by the director under §
13-11.6(c)(1).
City-Installed, City Shall Install, Installed by the City, or Words of Similar
Import. Installation undertaken by, or caused to be undertaken by, the city.
Director. The director of customer services of the City and County of Honolulu
or the director’s duly authorized subordinate.
Insert. When used as a noun, means a publication dispensing rack insert.
Install. Includes construct, erect, fabricate, and affix.
Location. A site designated by the director for a group of the city-installed
publication dispensing rack enclosures situated in the Waikiki special district
pursuant to this article.
Permit. A paid publication dispensing rack space allocation or reallocation
invoice issued pursuant to this article.
Permit Period. The three-year period for which spaces are allocated under §
13-11.6(c)(1).
Permittee. A person to which or to whom a publication dispensing rack permit
has been issued pursuant to this article.
Publication. Any written or printed matter, including but not limited to daily
or periodical newspapers, or both, and visitor information publications, but
may exclude any “handbill” defined in rules adopted by the director pursuant to
§
13-11.15 if such rules provide that handbills, as so defined, shall be
excluded.
Publication Dispensing Device. Any stand, box, rack, or other device, other
than a publication dispensing rack enclosure or a publication dispensing rack
insert, used to dispense any publication. For the purposes of this definition,
a natural person shall not be deemed a device.
Publication Dispensing Rack Enclosure or Enclosure. A structure installed by
the city in the Waikiki special district with spaces in which publication
dispensing rack inserts may be inserted.
Publication Dispensing Rack Insert. A box, insert, or rack with a clear plastic
face that is:
(1)   Owned by a permittee;
(2)   Designed to be inserted into a publication dispensing rack space; and
(3)   Constructed to hold and display a publication.
Publication Dispensing Rack Space or Space. An area within a publication
dispensing rack enclosure that is constructed to hold a publication dispensing
rack insert to display and dispense a publication.
Publisher. An owner or authorized agent of the owner of a publication. The
director of customer services may adopt rules defining the term “owner” or
“authorized agent” for purposes of this definition.
Reallocation. A reallocation of unallocated, abandoned, or surrendered spaces
made by the director pursuant to §
13-11.6(c)(2).
Sidewalk. That portion of a street between a curb line or the pavement of a
roadway, and the adjacent private or public property line, whichever the case
may be, intended for the use of pedestrians, including any setback areas
acquired by the city for road widening purposes. The term shall also include
any “mall,” as that term is defined in §
13-10.2.
Twelve-Inch Publication Dispensing Rack Enclosure. A publication dispensing
rack enclosure designated as such by the director under §
13-11.4.
Twelve-Inch Publication Dispensing Rack Insert. An insert designed to fit
snugly within a space in a 12-inch publication dispensing rack enclosure.
Twenty-Four-Inch Publication Dispensing Rack Enclosure. A publication
dispensing rack enclosure designated as such by the director under §
13-11.4.
Twenty-Four-Inch Publication Dispensing Rack Insert. An insert designed to fit
snugly within a space in a 24-inch publication dispensing rack enclosure.
Unallocated Publication Dispensing Rack Space. A publication dispensing rack
space that has not been allocated in the most recent allocation under §
13-11.6(c)(1) or reallocated since that time under §
13-11.6(c)(2).
Waikiki special district. The Waikiki special district identified in
Chapter 21, Article 9.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.2) (Added by Ord. 02-10)
Editor’s note:
   *This section may be amended pursuant to §§ 6 and 7 of Ord. 02-10.
§ 13-11.3 Location and installation of publication dispensing rack enclosures.*
(a)   Each designated location must include at least one publication dispensing
rack enclosure consisting of a minimum of four 12-inch or two 24-inch spaces.
(b)   The city shall install publication dispensing rack enclosures within the
Waikiki special district. The director shall adjust the location of publication
dispensing rack enclosures and the number of spaces in each enclosure existing
on January 1, 2014 as follows.
(1)   The director may remove a publication dispensing rack enclosure or
replace an enclosure with an enclosure containing a lesser number of spaces
(but not less than the minimum number of spaces per enclosure required in
subsection (a)), if greater than 50 percent of the number of spaces in an
enclosure remain unallocated after two successive allocation or reallocation of
the spaces.
(2)   The director may add a minimum-sized publication dispensing rack
enclosure or increase the number of spaces in an existing enclosure if the
director determines, upon petition and submission of evidence by an applicant,
that additional spaces are warranted because there is sufficient demand to
occupy at least 50 percent of the additional spaces requested. The director
shall determine the evidence required to be submitted by an applicant, and the
decision of the director is final.
(c)   (1)   The design, dimensions, placement, materials, and orientation of
each publication dispensing rack enclosure shall be determined by the director
or the appropriate city agency and shall be based on compliance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA),
Chapter 21 (the land use ordinance), and
Chapter 15 (the traffic code). Standards prescribed by the director or
appropriate city agency may differ for the various publication dispensing rack
enclosures.
(2)   Sound traffic engineering principles and pedestrian safety factors may be
considered in determining the exact dimensions and placement of each enclosure.
The director or appropriate city agency may also adhere to the department of
transportation services’ guidelines for the placement of obstructions in
sidewalk areas, and any revisions thereto, to the extent practicable.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.3) (Added by Ord. 02-10; Am. Ord. 14-7)
Editor’s note:
   * This section may be amended pursuant to § 8 of Ord. 02-10.
§ 13-11.4 Publication dispensing rack enclosures.*
(a)   A publication dispensing rack enclosure in the Waikiki special district
shall contain a minimum of two publication dispensing rack spaces.
(b)   Each publication dispensing rack enclosure shall be designed so that
publication dispensing rack inserts inserted therein may meet the standards for
such inserts established by the director.
(c)   The director shall assign a designation to each space within each
publication dispensing rack enclosure for the purpose of identification. The
designation may, but need not be, displayed on the enclosure. The director may
redesignate the spaces when the director deems the redesignation appropriate.
(d)   Nothing in this article shall be construed to preclude the city from
installing additional publication dispensing rack enclosures.
(e)   The director shall designate each publication rack enclosure as a 12-inch
publication dispensing rack enclosure or as a 24-inch dispensing rack
enclosure. The designation shall take effect for the first allocation following
the designation. No 12-inch publication dispensing rack insert may be placed in
a 24-inch dispensing rack enclosure and no 24-inch dispensing rack insert may
be placed in a 12-inch publication dispensing rack enclosure.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.4) (Added by Ord. 02-10)
Editor’s note:
   *This section may be amended pursuant to § 9 of Ord. 02-10.
§ 13-11.5 Publication dispensing rack inserts.
(a)   The director shall establish, by rules adopted pursuant to §
13-11.15, standards for the size, design, color, and material of publication
dispensing rack inserts that may be inserted into the city’s publication
dispensing rack enclosures pursuant to permit. Different standards may be
established for 12-inch publication dispensing rack inserts and 24-inch
publication dispensing rack inserts.
(b)   No person may place anything into a space in a publication dispensing
rack enclosure other than:
(1)   A publication dispensing rack insert for which a permit has been issued
and meeting the standards established pursuant to subsection (a); and
(2)   Copies of the publication permitted to be dispensed from the publication
dispensing rack insert.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.5) (Added by Ord. 02-10)
§ 13-11.6 Publication dispensing rack space permits.*
(a)   Any publisher desiring the use of a publication dispensing rack space in
a publication dispensing rack enclosure for purposes of dispensing a
publication therefrom shall submit an application for a publication dispensing
rack space permit to the director. For any one allocation or reallocation, a
publisher may submit applications for more than one publication, but shall
submit no more than one application per publication. For any one allocation, no
more than one application may be submitted for any publication. Only those
publishers submitting completed applications shall be eligible to obtain a
publication dispensing rack space permit.
The director shall determine the form of, and provide to interested persons
copies of, the publication dispensing rack space permit application form.
The director shall, before the earliest date established under subsection (f)
on which applications may be submitted for any allocation or reallocation, send
a copy of the form to each person who is a permittee as of that date, addressed
to the permittee at the last address on file with the director. The failure of
the director to notify a permittee, however, will not excuse the permittee from
filing a timely application.
(b)   The application for a publication dispensing rack space permit shall be
submitted by the publisher and shall include the following:
(1)   The name, mailing address, telephone number, and cellular telephone
number, and, if any, the facsimile number and e-mail address of both the owner
of the publication and the applicant and the names under which the owner and
applicant conduct business, if any;
(2)   The name, mailing address, telephone number, and cellular telephone
number, and, if any, the facsimile number and e-mail address of the individual
person or persons who will have supervision of and responsibility for the use
and maintenance of the publication dispensing rack space and of any permitted
publication dispensing rack insert placed therein;
(3)   The relationship between the owner of the publication and the applicant
and a statement of the applicant’s authority to make the application on behalf
of the owner of the publication;
(4)   The name of the publication for which the space is desired, a statement
verifying that the publication exists as of the date of the application, and a
copy of the publication for which the permit is desired;
(5)   A nonrefundable application fee of $50;
(6)   Proof of liability insurance, for the term of the permit, with minimum
policy limits of $500,000 for personal injury or death and $100,000 for
property damage, or with such higher limits, not to exceed $1,000,000 for
personal injury or death and $200,000 for property damage, as is determined
appropriate by the director based on the risk experience under this article,
naming the city as an additional named insured in the event of personal injury
or death or property damage caused by any negligence of the permittee in the
maintenance of any publication dispensing rack space or any permitted
publication dispensing rack insert. For purposes of this subdivision,
“negligence” also includes reckless, knowing, or intentional conduct;
(7)   Such other information as is requested on the form; and
(8)   A statement as to whether the applicant desires spaces for the
publication in 12-inch publication dispensing rack enclosures or in 24-inch
publication dispensing rack enclosures, but not both.
(c)   (1)   All spaces in all publication dispensing rack enclosures shall be
allocated by the director in May of 2002 for the three-year period commencing
July 1, 2002 and ending June 30, 2005 and shall be allocated again in May every
three years thereafter for the three-year period beginning on July 1 of the
year of the allocation and ending on June 30 of the third year thereafter.
(2)   In November of each year in which a triennial allocation is made under
subdivision (1), and in May and November of all other years, the director shall
reallocate all publication dispensing rack spaces that are unallocated or have
been abandoned or surrendered. The reallocation of spaces made in November
shall be effective from January 1 of the year immediately following the
reallocation until June 30 of the year in which the next triennial allocation
is made pursuant to subdivision (1). The reallocation of spaces made in May
under this subdivision shall be effective from July 1 of the year of the
reallocation until June 30 of the year in which the next triennial allocation
is made pursuant to subdivision (1). If, as of the latest date set in
subsection (f) for the submission of applications for a reallocation, there are
fewer than 25 unallocated, abandoned, or surrendered spaces available for
reallocation, the director may cancel the scheduled reallocation, provided that
the director may not cancel two consecutive scheduled reallocations. If
cancelling a scheduled reallocation, the director shall give notice of the
cancellation to all applicants that have filed applications to participate in
the reallocation.
(3)   The allocation or reallocation shall be recorded on permits issued by the
director to the applicants for all publications for which spaces are allocated
or reallocated.
(4)   The procedures for the allocation or reallocation of spaces shall be in
accordance with §
13-11.7.
(d)   For each publication to which any publication dispensing rack spaces are
allocated or reallocated, there shall be one permit issued, for each allocation
or reallocation, listing the date of the allocation or reallocation, the name
of the permittee, the name of the publication, the designation assigned by the
director under §
13-11.4(c) to each space allocated or reallocated for the publication, the
total number of spaces assigned to that publication under the allocation or
reallocation, and the term of the permit.
(e)   No applicant may be allocated or reallocated, or be issued a permit for,
more than one publication dispensing rack space at any one location for any one
publication.
(f)   Applications to participate in a triennial allocation pursuant to
subsection (c)(1) or in a May reallocation under subsection (c)(2) shall be
submitted to the director no earlier than March 1, and no later than May 1, of
the year in which the allocation or reallocation is scheduled to take place.
Applications to participate in a November reallocation under subsection (c)(2)
shall be submitted to the director no earlier than September 1, and no later
than November 1, of the year in which the reallocation is scheduled to take
place.
(g)   The publication dispensing rack space permit shall not be transferable.
No permit may be used to dispense a publication other than the publication
named in the permit. The director may adopt rules for determining whether a
publication is the same publication as that for which the permit was issued and
for determining when a permit is deemed to have been transferred.
(h)   The director, by rule, shall establish the fee based on the city’s cost
to clean, maintain, and repair the publication dispensing rack enclosures.
Until such time as the director establishes a new fee, the permit fee is $444
per triennium for each publication dispensing rack space allocated for a
publication. The fee is payable in equal annual amounts due no later than 30
days before the start of each new 12 month period beginning on July 1, or as
otherwise adjusted by the director. Failure to submit payment by the due date
will result in termination of the space permit, and the applicable space will
be reallocated pursuant to subsection (c)(2).
(1)   No refund of fees will be made if the publication abandons or surrenders
a space.
(2)   Permit fees for spaces reallocated under subsection (c)(2) will be
prorated for the remainder of the three-year permit period.
(i)   The requirement that a copy of the publication be submitted with the
application is intended to ensure that the publication exists at the time of
the application and the director may not deny a permit for any publication
based upon its content. No permit shall be issued for a publication that does
not exist at the time of the application.
(j)   The director shall maintain a record of all publication dispensing rack
spaces that have been allocated or reallocated, the permittees to which the
spaces have been allocated or reallocated, and the publication permitted to be
dispensed from the spaces.
(k)   No space in a 24-inch publication dispensing rack enclosure may be
allocated or reallocated for a publication if any application submitted for
that publication for the permit period stated that the applicant was applying
for spaces in 12-inch publication dispensing rack enclosures. No space in a 12-
inch publication dispensing rack enclosure may be allocated or reallocated for
a publication if any application for that publication for the permit period
stated that the applicant was applying for spaces in 24-inch publication
dispensing rack enclosures. No space in a 24-inch publication dispensing rack
enclosure may be reallocated for a publication permitted to be dispensed from
any 12-inch publication dispensing rack enclosure. No space in a 12-inch
publication dispensing rack enclosure may be reallocated for a publication
permitted to be dispensed from any 24-inch dispensing rack enclosure.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.6) (Added by Ord. 02-10; Am. Ords. 14-7,
25-37)
Editor’s note:
   *This section may be amended pursuant to §§ 10 and 11 of Ord. 02-10.
   Amendments made to § 13-11.6 in Ord. 25-37 take effect on January 1, 2026,
and are not yet incorporated herein.
§ 13-11.7 Method of allocation and reallocation of publication dispensing rack
spaces.*
(a)   The director shall, by rules adopted under HRS Chapter 91, determine and
provide procedures for the allocation of publication dispensing rack spaces
pursuant to §
13-11.6(c)(1) by lottery or other method of random selection.
(b)   The director shall, by rules adopted under HRS Chapter 91, determine and
provide procedures for the reallocation pursuant to §
13-11.6(c)(2) of publication dispensing rack spaces that are unallocated,
abandoned, or surrendered by lottery or other method of random selection.
(c)   The methods for allocation and reallocation of publication dispensing
rack spaces shall not distinguish between publications for which payment is
required and publications for which no payment is required.
(d)   The method for allocation of publication dispensing rack spaces
established by the director under subsection (a) shall:
(1)   Provide each publication for which an application is submitted for spaces
in 12-inch publication dispensing rack enclosures with an equal opportunity to
be allocated a publication dispensing rack space in a 12-inch publication
dispensing rack enclosure; and
(2)   Provide each publication applying for spaces in 24-inch publication
dispensing rack enclosures with an equal opportunity to be allocated a space in
a 24-inch publication dispensing rack enclosure.
This provision shall not apply to the spaces allocated after a publication has
been allocated the maximum number of spaces for which it applied.
(e)   The rules adopted under subsections (a) and (b) may provide for the
allocation or reallocation of spaces in the 12-inch publication dispensing rack
enclosures to be made at a different time or on a different date than the
allocation or reallocation of spaces in the 24-inch publication dispensing rack
enclosures.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.7) (Added by Ord. 02-10)
Editor’s note:
   * This section may be amended pursuant to § 12 of Ord. 02-10.
§ 13-11.8 Unallocated, abandoned, or surrendered publication dispensing rack
spaces.
(a)   Any person desiring to use a publication dispensing rack space that is
unallocated, or that has become available through abandonment or surrender, to
dispense a publication may apply for the reallocation of such publication
dispensing rack spaces under §
13-11.6(c)(2).
(b)   The director shall adopt rules pursuant to §
13-11.15:
(1)   To determine when a publication dispensing rack space has been abandoned
or surrendered; and
(2)   To establish procedures relating to the abandonment or surrender of
publication dispensing rack spaces.
(c)   When the director makes an initial determination that a publication
dispensing rack space has been abandoned or surrendered, the affected permittee
shall be notified of the director’s initial determination and given an
opportunity to contest the initial determination. The director shall adopt
rules pursuant to §
13-11.15 relating to notification of the director’s determination, the
permittee’s opportunity to contest the initial determination, and the procedure
and notification requirements for the making of a final determination. Upon the
final determination, any permit purporting to be a permit for the space or
spaces finally determined to be surrendered or abandoned shall be void as to
the space or spaces so determined and the holder of the voided permit shall no
longer be deemed a permittee as to the space or spaces so determined.
(d)   A permittee may surrender a publication dispensing rack space before
expiration of the permit for the space when the permittee no longer wishes to
dispense the publication through the space.
(e)   The director shall maintain a record of unallocated, abandoned, and
surrendered spaces. Unallocated, abandoned, or surrendered spaces shall be
reallocated pursuant to §
13-11.6(c)(2).
(f)   No person, including the person to whom a publication dispensing rack
space has been allocated or reallocated, may place an insert or any publication
in the space if the space has been finally determined to have been abandoned or
surrendered until such time as the space has been reallocated pursuant to §
13-11.6(c)(2), after which the permittee under the reallocation may insert its
insert and publication in the space.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.8) (Added by Ord. 02-10)
§ 13-11.9 Installation, maintenance, and repair of publication dispensing
enclosures, spaces, and inserts.
(a)   It shall be the responsibility of the city to install, maintain, and
repair the publication dispensing rack enclosures, either directly, by contract
with a private contractor or through a special improvement district. Any cost
for the installation, maintenance, and repair of the enclosure shall be borne
by the city.
(b)   It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to maintain any
publication dispensing rack space for which it holds a permit. Any cost to
maintain the space shall be borne by the permittee.
(c)   It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to maintain in good
operating order and repair any publication dispensing rack insert inserted into
a space in a publication dispensing rack enclosure.
(d)   Failure of a permittee to comply with either subsection (b) or (c)
constitutes grounds for the suspension or revocation of the permit.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.9) (Added by Ord. 02-10; Am. Ord. 14-7)
§ 13-11.10 Temporary dislocations.
(a)   The director may direct a permittee to remove copies of the permitted
publication and the permittee’s publication dispensing rack insert from a
publication dispensing rack enclosure temporarily during any public, private,
or utility construction work conducted on the public sidewalk, the abutting
roadway, an adjacent building or structure or to any utility, when the director
determines that the removal is necessary in the interest of public safety or to
facilitate the construction work.
(b)   The director may also direct a permittee to remove copies of the
permitted publication and the permittee’s publication dispensing rack insert
from a publication dispensing rack enclosure during any installation or repair
work on the publication dispensing rack enclosure.
(c)   The director shall adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 to provide a
partial rebate for publications temporarily dislocated under this section. The
director may also adopt rules relating to the temporary relocation of
publications that are dislocated under subsection (a) or (b).
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.10) (Added by Ord. 02-10; Am. Ord. 14-7)
§ 13-11.11 Prohibitions.
(a)   The following prohibitions shall apply to a publication dispensing
device:
(1)   There shall be no publication dispensing device allowed and no person may
install or direct another person to install any publication dispensing device
on any sidewalk within the Waikiki special district;
(2)   Any publication dispensing device installed in violation of this article
shall be subject to removal by, and forfeiture to, the director if not removed
within five days of demand for removal thereof by the director; and
(3)   The director, or a person or agency designated by the director, shall be
responsible for the removal and forfeiture of the publication dispensing
device.
(b)   The following prohibitions shall apply to publication dispensing rack
spaces, publication dispensing rack inserts, and publication dispensing rack
enclosures:
(1)   No person may move, remove, destroy, deface, or detach any publication
dispensing rack enclosure unless directed to do so by the director;
(2)   No advertising, signage, or lettering of any kind shall appear on the
exterior of, or be otherwise visible from the exterior of, any publication
dispensing rack insert, any publication dispensing rack enclosure, or any space
within a publication dispensing rack enclosure. For the purposes of this
section, any one of the following: the display of a copy of the publication
being dispensed, the designation assigned to a space by the director, or
instructions on the dispensing of the publication from the publication
dispensing rack insert, shall not be deemed advertising, signage, or lettering,
provided that the dispensing instructions, if any, shall not protrude beyond
two rectangles with dimensions of 3.5 x 4 inches;
(3)   No publication dispensing rack insert may be inserted within a space in a
publication dispensing rack enclosure, except pursuant to a current and valid
permit issued under this article. Any publication dispensing rack insert so
inserted without a current and valid permit shall be subject to removal by and
forfeiture to the director or a person or agency designated by the director;
(4)   No person may place any trash, rubbish, or, without the approval of the
director, any other material, other than a permitted publication dispensing
rack insert and copies of the permitted publication, in a space in a
publication dispensing rack enclosure;
(5)   No person may move, remove, deface, or detach any publication dispensing
rack insert that has been inserted into a publication dispensing rack enclosure
under a current and valid permit without authorization of the permittee or the
city; and
(6)   No person may climb, sit, stand, or lie on top of, inside of, or under
any publication dispensing rack enclosure, any space within a publication
dispensing rack enclosure, or any publication dispensing rack insert without
authorization of the city.
(c)   The director shall adopt rules, pursuant to §
13-11.15, to establish procedures for giving notice of violations, and for the
removal and forfeiture of publication dispensing devices in accordance with
subsection (a), or of publication dispensing rack inserts in accordance with
subsection (b).
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.11) (Added by Ord. 02-10; Am. Ord. 14-2)
§ 13-11.12 Liability.
   The city shall not be held liable for the installation of any publication
dispensing rack space at any of the designated locations within the Waikiki
special district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.12) (Added by Ord. 02-10)
§ 13-11.13 Enforcement.
   The director and any person or agency designated by the director may enforce
and administer this article. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any authorized
police officer has the authority to enforce §
13-11.11(b)(6) as follows:
(1)   Powers of arrest or citation. Police officers and any other officer so
authorized shall issue a citation for any violation of this article or of any
rule adopted by the director to administer, implement, or enforce this article,
except they may arrest for instances when:
(A)   The alleged violator refuses to provide the officer with such person’s
name and address and any proof thereof as may be reasonably available to the
alleged violator; and
(B)   The alleged violator refuses to cease such person’s illegal activity
after being issued a citation.
(2)   Citation.
(A)   There shall be provided for use by authorized police officers, a form of
citation for use in citing violators for this article for instances that do not
mandate the physical arrest of such violators. The form and content of such
citation shall be as adopted or prescribed by the administrative judge of the
district court and shall be printed on a form commensurate with the form of
other citations used in modern methods of arrest, so designated to include all
necessary information to make the same valid within the laws and rules of the
State and the city.
(B)   In every case when a citation is issued, a copy of the same shall be
given to the violator; provided that the administrative judge of the district
court may prescribe by giving the violator a copy of the citation and provide
for the disposition of the original and any other copies.
(C)   Every citation shall be consecutively numbered and each carbon copy shall
bear the number of its respective original.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.13) (Added by Ord. 02-10; Am. Ord. 14-2)
§ 13-11.14 Penalty.
   Any person violating §
13-11.11, any other provision of this article, or any rule adopted pursuant to
§
13-11.15, shall be fined not less than $100 and not more than $500 for each
violation. In addition, a permittee violating §
13-11.11, any other provision of this article, or any rule adopted under §
13-11.15 may have the permit suspended or revoked, may have some or all of the
spaces allocated or reallocated to the permittee deemed abandoned or
surrendered, or may be precluded for a time from the allocation or reallocation
of publication dispensing rack spaces under this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.14) (Added by Ord. 02-10)
§ 13-11.15 Rules.
   The director shall adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, having the force
and effect of law, for the interpretation, implementation, administration, and
enforcement of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.15) (Added by Ord. 02-10)
§ 13-11.16 Severability.
   If this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is
held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or
applications of this article which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are
severable.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.16) (Added by Ord. 02-10)
ARTICLE 12: RESERVED
ARTICLE 13: USE OF ANIMALS IN SOLICITATIONS IN THE
WAIKIKI SPECIAL DISTRICT
Sections
   
13-13.1   Definitions
   
13-13.2   Prohibition
   
13-13.2A   Exception
   
13-13.3   Violation—Penalty
   
13-13.4   Other laws not affected
§ 13-13.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Public Property. Includes any street, highway, boulevard, road, sidewalk,
alley, island, lane, bridge, parking lot, park, square, space, grounds, mall,
building, or other property owned by or under the jurisdiction of any
governmental entity or otherwise open to the public.
Solicitation. To request or demand money or gifts.
Waikiki Special District. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-9.80-2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 13, § 29-13.1) (Added by Ord. 97-66; Am. Ord. 99-52)
§ 13-13.2 Prohibition.
   In the Waikiki special district, no person shall use any live animal in
furtherance of any solicitation on any public property, except in compliance
with all of the following conditions of this section or, if applicable, §
13-13.2A:
(1)   The animal shall be held or carried by the person conducting the
solicitation at all times. No animal too large to be held or carried shall be
used in any solicitation. This subsection shall not apply to a service animal
as defined in 49 CFR § 37.3 when such service animal is being used by an
individual with a disability requiring such service animal.
(2)   The person conducting the solicitation shall not place the animal on or
otherwise transfer the animal to any other person.
(3)   The person shall not place any cage, table, stand, or other object on
public property.
(4)   The person shall not use any city-owned or -maintained street furniture
or structure, including any bench, planter, utility cabinet, or other street
furniture or structure permanently installed on public property, for the
display of anything in connection with the solicitation, or otherwise put such
bench, planter, utility cabinet, street furniture, or structure to use in
furtherance of such solicitation.
(5)   The person conducting the solicitation shall wear at all times on that
person’s chest so that it is clearly visible to persons being solicited a sign
of at least 8.5 x 11 inches in size, upon which the following words are legibly
printed in letters or characters at least 2 inches in height in both English
and Japanese:
(A)   Solicitor: (Name and address of the person or organization conducting the
solicitation).
(B)   Purpose: (The reason the solicitation is being made.).
(C)   “YOU NEED NOT PAY OR CONTRIBUTE ANY MONEY TO THIS PERSON, ANY PAYMENT OR
CONTRIBUTION IS COMPLETELY VOLUNTARY.”; and
(D)   The Japanese translation for the disclaimer set forth in (C).
The statements required in (C) and (D) shall be in capital letters and bold
type.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 13, § 29-13.2) (Added by Ord. 97-66; Am. Ord. 99-52)
§ 13-13.2A Exception.
(a)   Section 13-13.2(1) through (5) shall not apply to a person using a live
animal to solicit on privately owned public property in the Waikiki special
district when the person has the express written authorization of the property
owner to conduct such solicitation on the property. For the purposes of this
section, “privately owned public property” means public property under the
possession of a private person through fee title, lease, easement grant, or
other conveyance instrument and “property owner” means the private person in
possession of the property or the person’s agent.
A person with such authorization from the property owner shall conduct the
solicitation in compliance with subsection (b).
(b)   When conducting the solicitation:
(1)   Neither the person conducting the solicitation or any cage, table, stand,
or other object owned or used by the person shall be on government-owned public
property; and
(2)   The person, upon the request of a police officer, shall immediately
display to the officer the written authorization from the property owner.
(c)   A person using a live animal to solicit on privately owned public
property in the Waikiki special district, but without the express written
authorization of subsection (a), shall be subject to §
13-13.2(1) through (5).
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 13, § 29-13.2A) (Added by Ord. 99-52)
§ 13-13.3 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person who is required to comply with §
13-13.2(1) through (5), who violates any of those subsections shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and subject to punishment in
accordance with HRS §§ 706-640 and 706-663.
   Any person who is required to comply with §
13-13.2A(b), who violates any of its provisions shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a petty misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with HRS
§§ 706-640 and 706-663.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 13, § 29-13.3) (Added by Ord. 97-66; Am. Ord. 99-52)
§ 13-13.4 Other laws not affected.
   Nothing in this article shall be deemed to limit or affect the application
of any other law, including but not limited to any trespass law, animal cruelty
law, or
Article 6 of this chapter, regulating peddling in public places.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 13, § 29-13.4) (Added by Ord. 97-66; Am. Ord. 99-52)
ARTICLE 14: UNLAWFUL SIGNS WITHIN STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND PUBLIC MALLS
Sections
   
13-14.1   Definitions
   
13-14.2   Council finding and declaration of nuisance
   
13-14.3   Summary removal of unlawful signs
   
13-14.4   Rules
   
13-14.5   Application
   
13-14.6   Severability
§ 13-14.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Portable Sign. Has the same meaning as defined under §
21-7.20.
Sign. Has the same meaning as defined under §
21-7.20.
Sign Area. Has the same meaning as defined under §
21-7.20.
Unlawful Sign. Any sign erected, established, constructed, maintained, kept, or
operated in violation of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 14, § 29-14.1) (Added by Ord. 98-42)
§ 13-14.2 Council finding and declaration of nuisance.
   The council finds and declares unlawful signs to be public nuisances,
hazardous to the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city and,
therefore, such signs shall be subject to summary removal pursuant to this
article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 14, § 29-14.2) (Added by Ord. 98-42)
§ 13-14.3 Summary removal of unlawful signs.
(a)   No person shall erect, establish, construct, maintain, keep, or operate a
sign, including but not limited to a portable sign, on, above or below:
(1)   Any street right-of-way, including any sidewalk area or medial strip; or
(2)   Any public mall;
except as may be permitted under §§
21-7.10 to 21-7.80-1, or other applicable law.
Any sign in violation of this subsection shall be considered an unlawful sign
and shall be subject to summary removal under this section.
(b)   The director of planning and permitting may immediately and summarily
remove or cause the immediate and summary removal of an unlawful sign. The
director of planning and permitting may request and shall receive the full
cooperation and assistance of the chief of police, and of the directors of the
departments of facility maintenance and transportation services, as may be
appropriate, to carry out such removal.
(1)   The director of planning and permitting shall store or cause to be stored
any sign removed pursuant to this section until the director of planning and
permitting is authorized to destroy, sell, or otherwise dispose of the sign
pursuant to this section, but in no event, less than 30 calendar days from the
date of removal.
(2)   Notification.
(A)   If a sign removed pursuant to this section has a sign area greater than
324 square inches, and the name or address of the owner of the sign appears on
the face or reverse side of the sign, then the director of planning and
permitting shall issue a written notice to the owner of the sign before, or
within 10 working days following the date of the sign’s removal; provided that
no notice shall be required if only the name appears and the director of
planning and permitting is unable after a good faith effort to determine the
address of the named person.
(B)   The written notice shall explain the violation and removal of the sign,
where the sign is being stored, that the owner may reclaim the sign within 30
calendar days from the date of issuance of the written notice, the place and
time that the sign may be reclaimed by the owner, that the owner has the right
to appeal the removal of the sign in accordance with subsection (e), and that,
if not timely reclaimed or the subject of a timely appeal, the sign shall be
subject to disposal.
(C)   If a sign has a sign area of 324 square inches or less, or no name or
address of the owner appears on the face or reverse side of the sign, then the
sign shall be deemed to have no value and to be abandoned, and the notification
requirements of this subdivision shall not apply.
(3)   The director of planning and permitting may destroy, sell, or otherwise
dispose of a sign removed under this section after the following time periods:
(A)   For signs for which no notification is required by this subsection, after
a period of 30 calendar days from the date of removal of the sign; and
(B)   For signs for which notification is required by this subsection, after a
period of 30 calendar days from the date of issuance of the written notice
under subdivision (2), unless a timely appeal has been duly filed under
subsection (e).
(c)   A sign removed pursuant to this section may be reclaimed by the owner
within the applicable 30-day period specified in subsection (b)(3). To reclaim
a sign, an owner or the owner’s authorized representative shall make
arrangements with the director of planning and permitting for the time and
place to reclaim the sign, shall appear in person within the applicable 30-day
period at the time and place designated by the director of planning and
permitting, shall provide adequate proof of identity and ownership and shall
pay to the city a $200 fee, per sign, for the city’s costs of removal, storage,
and handling of the sign, whereupon the director of planning and permitting
shall release the sign to the owner, as is.
(d)   The city shall not be responsible for any losses, liabilities, damages,
costs, claims, demands, suits, actions, payments, or judgments arising from the
removal, storage, or handling of a sign properly removed under this article.
(e)   An owner of a sign removed pursuant to this section may appeal the
removal to the building board of appeals as provided by §
16-1.1. The appeal shall be limited to a determination of whether the sign was
properly removed pursuant to this section. The director of planning and
permitting shall continue to store or have stored the sign until the appeal has
been decided. If the decision of the board of appeals is in favor of the owner,
then the sign shall be returned to the owner and no fee for the removal,
storage, and handling of the sign shall be charged. If the decision of the
board of appeals is in favor of the director of planning and permitting, then
the sign may be returned to the owner upon payment of the removal, storage, and
handling fee of $200 or, if the owner fails to pay the fee within seven days of
issuance of notice of the decision, the sign may be destroyed, sold or
otherwise disposed of by the director of planning and permitting.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 14, § 29-14.3) (Added by Ord. 98-42) (Am. Ord. 25-37)
Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to § 13-14.3 in Ord. 25-37 take effect on January 1, 2026,
and are not yet incorporated herein.
§ 13-14.4 Rules.
   The director of planning and permitting may adopt rules pursuant to HRS
Chapter 91 for the implementation of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 14, § 29-14.4) (Added by Ord. 98-42)
§ 13-14.5 Application.
(a)   This article applies only to unlawful signs erected on, above or below
street rights-of-way and public malls. Unlawful signs erected in other
locations shall not be subject to summary removal as provided herein, but shall
be subject to any other applicable provision of State or city law, ordinance,
or rule, including but not limited to the abatement and removal procedure set
forth in §
21-7.70.
(b)   This article shall be in addition to and shall not limit any other
applicable provision of State or city law, ordinance, or rule.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 14, § 29-14.5) (Added by Ord. 98-42)
§ 13-14.6 Severability.
   This article is declared to be severable. If any portion of this article is
held invalid for any reason, the validity of any other portion of this article
which may be given effect without the invalid portion shall not be affected and
if the application of any portion of this article to any person, property, or
circumstance is held invalid, the application of this article to any other
person, property, or circumstance shall not be affected.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 14, § 29-14.6) (Added by Ord. 98-42)
ARTICLE 15: SITTING OR LYING ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS IN THE
WAIKIKI SPECIAL DISTRICT
Sections
   
13-15.1   Prohibition—Exceptions—Citations
   
13-15.2   Penalty
§ 13-15.1 Prohibition—Exceptions—Citations.
(a)   No person shall sit or lie on a public sidewalk, or on a tarp, towel,
sheet, blanket, sleeping bag, bedding, planter, chair, bench, or any other
object or material placed upon a public sidewalk in the Waikiki special
district.
(b)   The prohibitions in subsection (a) shall not apply to:
(1)   Any person sitting or lying on a sidewalk due to a medical emergency;
(2)   Any person who, as a result of a disability, is using a wheelchair or
other similar device to move about the public sidewalk;
(3)   Any person sitting or lying on a sidewalk for the purpose of engaging in
an expressive activity;
(4)   Any person sitting on a sidewalk while attending or viewing any parade,
festival, performance, rally, demonstration, or similar event conducted on the
street pursuant to a permit issued by the city;
(5)   Any person engaged in a maintenance, repair, or construction activity on
behalf of a governmental entity or a public utility;
(6)   Any child who is sitting or lying in a baby carriage, stroller, or
carrier, or similar device, to move about the public sidewalk;
(7)   Any person sitting on a chair or bench located on the public sidewalk
that is placed there by a public agency; or
(8)   Any person sitting in line for goods or services, unless the person or
person’s possessions impede the ability of pedestrians to travel along the
length of the sidewalk or enter a doorway or other entrance alongside the
sidewalk.
(c)   No person shall be cited for a violation of this section unless the
person engages in conduct prohibited by this article after having been notified
by a law enforcement officer that the conduct violates this section.
(d)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Expressive Activity. Speech or conduct, the principal object of which is the
expression, dissemination, or communication by verbal, visual, literary, or
auditory means of political, religious, philosophical, or ideological opinions,
views, or ideas, and for which no fee is charged or required as a condition of
participation in or attendance at such activity. Expressive activity generally
would not include sports events, such as marathons; fundraising events; beauty
contests; commercial events; cultural celebrations or other events the
principal purpose of which is entertainment.
Public Sidewalk. A publicly owned or maintained “sidewalk,” as defined in §
13-1.1, and includes a “replacement sidewalk” as defined in that section.
Waikiki Special District. The area described in §
21-9.80-2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 15, § 29-15.1) (Added by Ord. 14-26)
§ 13-15.2 Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with HRS §§ 706-640
and 706-663, as amended.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 15, § 29-15.2) (Added by Ord. 14-26)
ARTICLE 15A: SITTING OR LYING ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS OUTSIDE OF THE
WAIKIKI SPECIAL DISTRICT
Sections
   
13-15A.1   Declaration of legislative intent—Purpose
   
13-15A.2   Prohibition—Exceptions—Citations
   
13-15A.3   Penalty
§ 13-15A.1 Declaration of legislative intent—Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to prohibit, subject to exceptions, persons
from sitting or lying on public sidewalks in areas zoned for commercial and
business activities.
   The council finds:
(1)   Public sidewalks in areas zoned for commercial and business activities
are created and maintained for the primary purposes of enabling pedestrians to
safely and effectively move about from place to place, facilitating deliveries
of goods and services, and providing convenient access to entertainment, goods,
and services;
(2)   Sitting or lying down is not the customary use of the public sidewalks.
Persons who sit or lie down on public sidewalks impede and deter others from
using the sidewalks; thus, they discourage residents and visitors from walking
to get from place to place and accessing local shops, restaurants, and
businesses, and interfere with the delivery of goods and services;
(3)   The need to maintain pedestrian and commercial traffic is greatest during
the hours of operation of businesses, shops, restaurants, and other commercial
enterprises when public sidewalks are congested. Persons who sit or lie down on
public sidewalks during business hours threaten their own safety and the safety
of pedestrians, especially the elderly, disabled, vision-impaired, and
children, who are put at increased risk when they must avoid and navigate
around persons unexpectedly sitting or lying upon the public sidewalk;
(4)   The prohibition against sitting or lying on public sidewalks set forth in
this article leaves intact the individual’s right to speak, protest, or engage
in other lawful activity on any sidewalk consistent with the individual’s free
speech rights. In addition, the prohibition contains exceptions for medical
emergencies, and expressive activities, among others;
(5)   There are a number of places where the restrictions of this article do
not apply, including private property, plazas, public parks, and other common
areas open to the public, that do not unduly interfere with the safe flow of
pedestrian traffic, impair commercial activity, or threaten public safety;
(6)   The council acknowledges that there are reasons why one might sit or lie
on a public sidewalk. The city has offered and continues to offer services to
those engaged in sitting or lying on the sidewalk who appear to be in need, or
to those who request service assistance. However, in many cases, these persons
refuse such services or continue the conduct despite the accessibility of these
services. The city will continue to invest in services for those in need and to
make efforts to maintain and improve safety on public sidewalks for everyone. A
law enforcement officer may not issue a citation to a person for a violation of
this article without first warning the person that sitting or lying down on a
public sidewalk is unlawful;
(7)   Present laws that prohibit the obstruction of sidewalks do not adequately
address the safety hazards, disruption and deterrence to pedestrian traffic or
impairment of commercial activity caused by persons sitting or lying on the
public sidewalks in areas zoned for commercial and business activities; and
(8)   Pedestrians are discouraged from using public sidewalks if persons are
sitting or lying down on the unpaved public property immediately abutting the
public sidewalk, and pedestrians often use this expanded sidewalk area as an
extension of the sidewalk, to walk and move from place to place. Pedestrian
traffic is impeded when persons sit or lie down on these expanded sidewalk
areas, deterring persons from accessing and using the sidewalks, and
discouraging persons from walking as a means of transportation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 15A, § 29-15A.1) (Added by Ord. 14-35; Am. Ord. 15-14)
§ 13-15A.2 Prohibition—Exceptions—Citations.
(a)   No person shall sit or lie on a public sidewalk, or on a tarp, towel,
sheet, blanket, sleeping bag, bedding, planter, chair, bench, or any other
object or material placed upon a public sidewalk located within or immediately
abutting the following described zones, or upon the public sidewalks on both
sides of the following described street segments, or where specified in this
section, on the expanded sidewalk area, during the hours from 5:00 a.m. to 11:
00 p.m.:
(1)   Chinatown. The Chinatown zone is the area of the city bounded by the
following streets as illustrated in Exhibit 1, set forth at the end of this
article:
(A)   Starting at the intersection of Nimitz Highway/River Street;
(B)   River Street to the intersection of River Street/Vineyard Boulevard;
(C)   Vineyard Boulevard to the intersection of Vineyard Boulevard/Nuuanu
Avenue;
(D)   Nuuanu Avenue to Nimitz Highway; and
(E)   Nimitz Highway to the intersection of Nimitz Highway/River Street;
(2)   Downtown. The Downtown zone is the area of the city bounded by the
following streets as illustrated in Exhibit 2, set forth at the end of this
article:
(A)   Starting at the intersection of Nimitz Highway/Nuuanu Avenue;
(B)   Nuuanu Avenue to the intersection of Nuuanu Avenue/South Vineyard
Boulevard;
(C)   South Vineyard Boulevard to the intersection of South Vineyard Boulevard/
Punchbowl Street;
(D)   Punchbowl Street to the intersection of Punchbowl Street/South Beretania
Street;
(E)   South Beretania Street to the intersection of South Beretania Street/
Richards Street;
(F)   Richards Street to the intersection of Richards Street/Halekauwila
Street;
(G)   Halekauwila Street to the intersection of Halekauwila Street/Nimitz
Highway/Ala Moana Boulevard, and
(H)   Nimitz Highway/Ala Moana Boulevard to the intersection of Nimitz Highway/
Nuuanu Avenue;
(3)   McCully-Moiliili. The McCully-Moiliili zone is the area of the city
bounded by the following streets as illustrated in Exhibit 3, set forth at the
end of this article:
(A)   Starting at the intersection of South Beretania Street/McCully Street;
(B)   McCully Street to the intersection of McCully Street/Algaroba Street;
(C)   Algaroba Street to the intersection of Algaroba Street/Makahiki Way;
(D)   Makahiki Way to the intersection of Makahiki Way/South King Street;
(E)   South King Street to the intersection of South King Street/Isenberg
Street;
(F)   Isenberg Street to the intersection of Isenberg Street/South Beretania
Street; and
(G)   South Beretania Street to the intersection of South Beretania Street/
McCully Street;
The McCully-Moiliili zone also includes the sidewalks abutting the following
street segments:
(H)   University Avenue beginning at the intersection of University Avenue/
South Beretania Street/South King Street and ending at University Avenue/
Varsity Place;
(I)   South Beretania Street beginning at the intersection of South Beretania
Street/McCully Street and ending at the intersection of South Beretania Street/
University Avenue;
(J)   South King Street beginning at the intersection of South King Street/
Makahiki Way and ending at the intersection of South King Street/University
Avenue;
(K)   McCully Street beginning at the intersection of South Beretania Street/
McCully Street and ending at the intersection of McCully Street/Algaroba
Street; and
(L)   Makahiki Way beginning at the intersection of Algaroba Street/Makahiki
Way and ending at the intersection of Makahiki Way/South King Street;
(4)   Kailua. The Kailua zone is the area of the city bounded by the following
streets as illustrated in Exhibit 4, set forth at the end of this article:
(A)   Starting at the intersection of Kainehe Street/Kihapai Street;
(B)   Kihapai Street to the intersection of Kihapai Street/Oneawa Street;
(C)   Oneawa Street to the intersection of Oneawa Street/Uluniu Street;
(D)   Uluniu Street to the intersection of Uluniu Street/Maluniu Avenue;
(E)   Maluniu Avenue to the intersection of Maluniu Avenue/Kuulei Road;
(F)   Kuulei Road to the intersection of Kuulei Road/Oneawa Street/Kailua Road;
(G)   Oneawa Street/Kailua Road to the intersection of Kailua Road/Hahani
Street;
(H)   Hahani Street to the intersection of Hahani Street/Hekili Street;
(I)   Hekili Street to the intersection of Hekili Street/Hamakua Drive/Kainehe
Street; and
(J)   Hamakua Drive/Kainehe Street to the intersection of Kainehe Street/
Kihapai Street;
The Kailua zone also includes the sidewalks abutting the following street
segments:
(K)   Oneawa Street beginning at the intersection of Oneawa Street/Kawainui
Street and ending at the intersection of Oneawa Street/Ulunui Street; and
(L)   Hamakua Drive beginning at the intersection of Hamakua Drive/Hahani
Street and ending at the intersection of Hamakua Drive/Aoloa Street;
(5)   Wahiawa. The Wahiawa zone is the area of the city bounded by the
following streets as illustrated in Exhibit 5, set forth at the end of this
article:
(A)   Starting at the intersection of Kilani Avenue/Kukui Street;
(B)   Kukui Street to the intersection of Kukui Street/California Avenue;
(C)   California Avenue to the intersection of California Avenue/Ohai Street;
(D)   Ohai Street to the intersection of Ohai Street/Olive Avenue;
(E)   Olive Avenue to the intersection of Olive Avenue/Walker Avenue;
(F)   Walker Avenue to the intersection of Walker Avenue/California Avenue;
(G)   California Avenue to the intersection of California Avenue/Lehua Street;
(H)   Lehua Street to the intersection of Lehua Street/Center Street;
(I)   Center Street to the intersection of Center Street/North Cane Street;
(J)   North Cane Street to the intersection of North Cane Street/Kilani Avenue;
and
(K)   Kilani Avenue to the intersection of Kilani Avenue/Kukui Street;
The Wahiawa zone also includes the sidewalks abutting the following street
segments:
(L)   North Cane Street at the intersection of Center Street/North Cane Street
to the intersection of North Cane Street/California Avenue; and
(M)   California Avenue at the intersection of California Avenue/North Cane
Street to the entrance to Wahiawa District Park parking lot;
(6)   Ala Moana-Sheridan. The Ala Moana-Sheridan zone is composed of two zones,
Zone A and Zone B.
Ala Moana-Sheridan Zone A. Ala-Moana Sheridan Zone A is the area of the city
bounded by the following streets as illustrated in Exhibit 6-A, set forth at
the end of this article:
(A)   Starting at the intersection of South Beretania Street/Victoria Street;
(B)   Victoria Street to the intersection of Victoria Street/South King Street;
(C)   South King Street to the intersection of South King Street/Hauoli Street;
(D)   Hauoli Street to the intersection of Hauoli Street/Algaroba Street;
(E)   Algaroba Street to the intersection of Algaroba Street/McCully Street;
(F)   McCully Street to the intersection of McCully Street/South Beretania
Street;
(G)   South Beretania Street to the intersection of South Beretania Street/
Artesian Street;
(H)   Artesian Street to the intersection of Artesian Street/South King Street;
(I)   South King Street to the intersection of South King Street/Kalakaua
Avenue;
(J)   Kalakaua Avenue to the intersection of Kalakaua Avenue/South Beretania
Street; and
(K)   South Beretania Street to the intersection of South Beretania Street/
Victoria Street;
Ala Moana-Sheridan Zone B. Ala Moana-Sheridan Zone B is the area of the city
bounded by the following streets as illustrated in Exhibit 6-B, set forth at
the end of this article:
(L)   Starting at the intersection of South King Street/Cedar Street;
(M)   South King Street to the intersection of South King Street/Kaheka Street;
(N)   Kaheka Street to the intersection of Kaheka Street/Liona Street;
(O)   Liona Street to the intersection of Liona Street/Keeaumoku Street;
(P)   Keeaumoku Street to the intersection of Keeaumoku Street/Makaloa Street;
(Q)   Makaloa Street to the intersection of Makaloa Street/Kaheka Street;
(R)   Kaheka Street to the intersection of Kaheka Street/Kanunu Street;
(S)   Kanunu Street to the intersection of Kanunu Street/Kalakaua Avenue;
(T)   Kalakaua Avenue to the intersection of Kalakaua Avenue/Kapiolani
Boulevard;
(U)   Kapiolani Boulevard to the intersection of Kapiolani Boulevard/Piikoi
Street;
(V)   Piikoi Street to the intersection of Piikoi Street/Makaloa Street;
(W)   Makaloa Street to the intersection of Makaloa Street/Sheridan Street;
(X)   Sheridan Street to the intersection of Sheridan Street/Rycroft Street;
(Y)   Rycroft Street to the intersection of Rycroft Street/Cedar Street; and
(Z)   Cedar Street to the intersection of Cedar Street/South King Street;
The Ala Moana-Sheridan Zone B also includes the sidewalks abutting the
following street segment:
(AA)   Keeaumoku Street beginning at the intersection of Keeaumoku Street/Liona
Street and ending at the intersection of Keeaumoku Street/Makaloa Street;
(7)   Kaneohe. The Kaneohe zone is composed of two zones, Zone A and Zone B.
Kaneohe Zone A. Kaneohe Zone A is the area of the city bounded by the following
streets as illustrated in Exhibit 7-A, set forth at the end of this article:
(A)   Starting at the intersection of Kamehameha Highway/Kahuhipa Street;
(B)   Kamehameha Highway to the intersection of Kamehameha Highway/Haiku Road;
(C)   Haiku Road to the intersection of Haiku Road/Alaloa Street;
(D)   Alaloa Street to the intersection of Alaloa Street/Kahuhipa Street; and
(E)   Kahuhipa Street to the intersection of Kahuhipa Street/Kamehameha
Highway;
The Kaneohe Zone A also includes the sidewalks abutting the following street
segments:
(A)   Kamehameha Highway beginning at the intersection of Kamehameha Highway/
Kahuhipa Street/Lilipuna Road and ending at the intersection of Kamehameha
Highway/Paleka Road/Waikalua Road; and
(B)   Lilipuna Road beginning at the intersection of Lilipuna Road/Kahuhipa
Street/Kamehameha Highway and ending at the intersection of Lilipuna Road/Cobb
Adams Road;
Kaneohe Zone B. Kaneohe Zone B is the area of the city bounded by the following
streets as illustrated in Exhibit 7-B, set forth at the end of this article:
(H)   Starting at the intersection of Kamehameha Highway/Likelike Highway/
Kaneohe Bay Drive;
(I)   Kamehameha Highway to the intersection of Kamehameha Highway/Koa Kahiko
Street;
(J)   Koa Kahiko Street to the intersection of Koa Kahiko Street/Aumoku Street;
(K)   Aumoku Street to the intersection of Aumoku Street/Kaneohe Bay Drive; and
(L)   Kaneohe Bay Drive to the intersection of Kaneohe Bay Drive/Kamehameha
Highway/Likelike Highway;
(8)   Waimanalo. The Waimanalo zone is the area of the city bounded by the
following streets as illustrated in Exhibit 8, set forth at the end of this
article:
(A)   Starting at the intersection of Kalanianaole Highway/Mekia Street;
(B)   Mekia Street to the intersection of Mekia Street/Lukanela Street;
(C)   Lukanela Street to the intersection of Lukanela Street/Poalima Street;
(D)   Poalima Street to the intersection of Poalima Street/Kalanianaole
Highway; and
(E)   Kalanianaole Highway to the intersection of Kalanianaole Highway/Mekia
Street;
(9)   Kapahulu. The Kapahulu street segments include the following streets as
illustrated in Exhibit 9, set forth at the end of this article:
(A)   The eastern side of Kapahulu Avenue beginning at the intersection of
Kapahulu Avenue/Leahi Avenue and ending 200 feet to the north of the
intersection of Kapahulu Avenue/Herbert Street;
(B)   Kapahulu Avenue beginning 200 feet to the north of the intersection of
Kapahulu Avenue/Herbert Street and ending at the intersection of Kapahulu
Avenue/Olu Street;
(C)   The eastern side of Kapahulu Avenue beginning at the intersection of
Kapahulu Avenue/Olu Street and ending at the intersection of Kapahulu Avenue/
Charles Street;
(D)   Kapahulu Avenue beginning at the intersection of Kapahulu Avenue/Charles
Street and ending 100 feet north of the intersection of Kapahulu Avenue/Charles
Street;
(E)   The eastern side of Kapahulu Avenue beginning 100 feet to the north of
the intersection of Kapahulu Avenue/Charles Street and ending at the
intersection of Kapahulu Avenue/Kaimuki Avenue;
(F)   Kapahulu Avenue beginning at the intersection of Kapahulu Avenue/Kaimuki
Avenue and ending at the intersection of Kapahulu Avenue/Waialae Avenue;
(G)   Campbell Avenue beginning at the intersection of Campbell Avenue/Kapahulu
Avenue and ending at the intersection of Campbell Avenue/Brokaw Street;
(H)   Kanaina Avenue beginning at the intersection of Kanaina Avenue/Kapahulu
Avenue and ending at the intersection of Kanaina Avenue/Brokaw Street;
(I)   Herbert Street beginning at the intersection of Herbert Street/Kapahulu
Avenue and ending at the intersection of Herbert Street/Campbell Avenue;
(J)   Castle Street beginning at the intersection of Castle Street/Kapahulu
Avenue and ending at the intersection of Castle Street/Campbell Avenue; and
(K)   Brokaw Street beginning at the intersection of Brokaw Street/Kanaina
Avenue and ending at the intersection of Brokaw Street/Campbell Avenue;
(10)   Kaimuki. The Kaimuki street segments include the following streets as
illustrated in Exhibit 10, set forth at the end of this article:
(A)   Kapiolani Boulevard beginning at the intersection of Kapiolani Boulevard/
Kaimuki Avenue and ending at the intersection of Kapiolani Boulevard/Waialae
Avenue;
(B)   Waialae Avenue beginning at the intersection of Waialae Avenue/Kapiolani
Boulevard and ending at the intersection of Waialae Avenue/Palolo Avenue;
(C)   The northern side of Waialae Avenue beginning at the intersection of
Waialae Avenue/Palolo Avenue and ending at the intersection of Waialae Avenue/
6th Avenue;
(D)   Waialae Avenue, beginning at the intersection of Waialae Avenue/7th
Avenue and ending at the intersection of Waialae Avenue/10th Avenue;
(E)   The northern side of Waialae Avenue beginning at the intersection of
Waialae Avenue/10th Avenue and ending at the intersection of Waialae Avenue/
11th Avenue;
(F)   Waialae Avenue beginning at the intersection of Waialae Avenue/11th
Avenue and ending at the intersection of Waialae Avenue/Koko Head Avenue;
(G)   The northern side of Waialae Avenue beginning at the intersection of
Waialae Avenue/Koko Head Avenue and ending 200 feet east of the intersection of
Waialae Avenue/Wilhelmina Rise;
(H)   The eastern side of 11th Avenue beginning at the intersection of 11th
Avenue/Waialae Avenue and ending at the intersection of 11th Avenue/Harding
Avenue;
(I)   12th Avenue beginning at the intersection of 12th Avenue/Waialae Avenue
and ending at the intersection of 12th Avenue/Harding Avenue;
(J)   Harding Avenue from the intersection of Harding Avenue/11th Avenue to the
intersection of Harding Avenue/Koko Head Avenue; and
(K)   The western side of Koko Head Avenue beginning at the intersection of
Koko Head Avenue/Harding Avenue and ending at the intersection of Koko Head
Avenue/Waialae Avenue;
(11)   Kahala. The Kahala street segments include the following streets as
illustrated in Exhibit 11, set forth at the end of this article:
(A)   The southern side of Waialae Avenue beginning at the intersection of
Waialae Avenue/21st Avenue and ending at the intersection of Waialae Avenue/
Hunakai Street;
(B)   Waialae Avenue beginning at the intersection of Waialae Avenue/Hunakai
Street and ending 650 feet to the east of the intersection of Waialae Avenue/
Hunakai Street;
(C)   The southern side of Waialae Avenue beginning 650 feet to the east of the
intersection of Waialae Avenue/Hunakai Street and ending at the intersection of
Waialae Avenue/Kealaolu Avenue;
(D)   The northern side of Waialae Avenue beginning at the intersection of
Waialae Avenue/Kilauea Avenue and ending at the Waialaenui Gulch Stream Bridge
crossing;
(E)   The eastern side of Hunakai Street beginning at the intersection of
Hunakai Street/Waialae Avenue and ending at the Kahala Mall parking lot
entrance via Hunakai Street; and
(F)   The western side of Kilauea Avenue beginning at the intersection of
Kilauea Avenue/Waialae Avenue and ending at the intersection of Kilauea Avenue/
Pahoa Avenue;
(12)   Aina Haina-Niu Valley. The Aina Haina-Niu Valley street segments include
the following streets as illustrated in Exhibit 12, set forth at the end of
this article:
(A)   The northern side of Kalanianaole Highway from 400 feet west of the
intersection of Kalanianaole Highway/West Hind Drive to 600 feet east of the
intersection of Kalanianaole Highway/West Hind Drive; and
(B)   The northern side of Kalanianaole Highway from the intersection of
Kalanianaole Highway/Niuiki Circle to the intersection of Kalanianaole Highway/
Halemaumau Street;
(13)   Hawaii Kai. The Hawaii Kai street segments include the following streets
as illustrated in Exhibit 13, set forth at the end of this article:
(A)   The northern side of Kalanianaole Highway from the intersection of
Kalanianaole Highway/Keahole Street to the Hawaii Kai Marina Bridge;
(B)   The southeastern side of Keahole Street from the intersection of Keahole
Street/Kalanianaole Highway to the northernmost entrance to the Hawaii Kai
Towne Center parking lot via Keahole Street;
(C)   The northern side of Kalanianaole Highway from the intersection of
Kalanianaole Highway/Lunalilo Home Road to the westernmost entrance to the Koko
Marina Center parking lot via Kalanianaole Highway;
(D)   The western side of Lunalilo Home Road from the intersection of Lunalilo
Home Road/Kalanianaole Highway to 200 feet north of the intersection of
Lunalilo Home Road/Kaumakani Street; and
(E)   The northern side of Hawaii Kai Drive from the intersection of Hawaii Kai
Drive/Pepeekeo Street to the Hahaione Valley Stream Bridge;
(14)   Aala. The Aala zone is the area of the city bounded by the following
streets as illustrated in Exhibit 14, set forth at the end of this article:
(A)   Starting at the intersection of Aala Street and North Beretania Street;
(B)   Aala Street to the intersection of Aala Street/North Vineyard Boulevard;
(C)   North Vineyard Boulevard to the intersection of North Vineyard Boulevard/
River Street;
(D)   River Street to the intersection of River Street/North Beretania Street;
and
(E)   North Beretania Street to the intersection of North Beretania Street/Aala
Street;
The Aala zone also includes the sidewalks abutting the following street
segments:
(F)   North Beretania Street beginning at the intersection of North Beretania
Street/North King Street and ending at the intersection of North Beretania
Street/River Street;
(G)   River Street beginning at the intersection of River Street/North
Beretania Street and ending at the intersection of River Street/North King
Street;
(H)   North King Street beginning at the intersection of North King Street/
River Street and ending at the intersection of North King Street/North
Beretania Street;
(I)   North Hotel Street beginning at the intersection of North Hotel Street/
North King Street and ending at the intersection of North Hotel Street/River
Street; and
(J)   The entire length of Aala Place;
(15)   Kapalama. The Kapalama street segments include the following streets as
illustrated in Exhibit 15, set forth at the end of this article, and the
expanded sidewalk areas along those streets:
(A)   Kohou Street beginning at the intersection of Kohou Street/Olomea Street
and ending at the intersection of Kohou Street/Kalani Street;
(B)   Kokea Street beginning at the intersection of Kokea Street/Olomea Street
and ending at the southern terminus of Kokea Street;
(C)   The portion of Pacific Street as illustrated in Exhibit 15;
(D)   The western side of Kanoa Street beginning at the intersection of Kanoa
Street/Pua Lane and ending at the intersection of Kanoa Street/Palama Street;
(E)   The northern side of Pua Lane beginning at the intersection of Pua Lane/
Kanoa Street and ending at the intersection of Pua Lane/North King Street; and
(F)   North King Street beginning at the intersection of North King Street/Pua
Lane and ending at the intersection of North King Street/Palama Street;
(16)   Kalihi. The Kalihi zone is the area of the city bounded by the following
streets as illustrated in Exhibit 16, set forth at the end of this article:
(A)   Starting at the intersection of Waiakamilo Road/North King Street;
(B)   North King Street to the intersection of North King Street/Kohou Street;
(C)   Kohou Street to the intersection of Kohou Street/Dillingham Boulevard;
(D)   Dillingham Boulevard to the intersection of Dillingham Boulevard/
Waiakamilo Road; and
(E)   Waiakamilo Road to the intersection of Waiakamilo Road/North King Street;
(17)   Iwilei. The Iwilei street segments include the following streets as
illustrated in Exhibit 17, set forth at the end of this article:
(A)   Iwilei Road beginning at the intersection of Iwilei Road/Pacific Street
and ending at the intersection of Iwilei Road/North King Street;
(B)   The entire length of the segment of roadway connecting the Ewa- bound
lanes of North Nimitz Highway to Iwilei Road, as illustrated in Exhibit 17;
(C)   Sumner Street beginning at the intersection of Sumner Street/Pine Street
and ending at the intersection of Sumner Street/North Nimitz Highway;
(D)   The entire length of Pine Street;
(E)   The entire length of Kuwili Street;
(F)   The entire length of Kaaahi Street;
(G)   The entire length of Kaamahu Place; and
(H)   The entire length of Kaaahi Place; and
(18)   Dillingham. The Dillingham street segments includes the following
portions and sides of Dillingham Boulevard as illustrated in Exhibit 18, set
forth at the end of this article:
(A)   The southern side of Dillingham Boulevard beginning at the intersection
of Dillingham Boulevard/Puuhale Road and ending at the intersection of
Dillingham Boulevard/North King Street;
(B)   The northern side of Dillingham Boulevard beginning at the intersection
of Dillingham Boulevard/Puuhale Road and ending at the intersection of
Dillingham Boulevard/Mokauea Street; and
(C)   The northern side of Dillingham Boulevard beginning 275 feet west of the
intersection of Dillingham Boulevard/Waiakamilo Road and ending at the
intersection of Dillingham Boulevard/North King Street.
(b)   The prohibitions in subsection (a) shall not apply to:
(1)   Any person sitting or lying on a sidewalk due to a medical emergency;
(2)   Any person who, as a result of a disability, is using a wheelchair or
other similar wheeled chair device to move about the public sidewalk;
(3)   Any person sitting or lying on a sidewalk for the purpose of engaging in
an expressive activity;
(4)   Any person sitting on a sidewalk while attending or viewing any parade,
festival, performance, rally, demonstration, or similar event conducted on the
street pursuant to a permit issued by the city;
(5)   Any person engaged in a maintenance, repair, or construction activity on
behalf of a governmental entity or a public utility;
(6)   Any child who is sitting or lying in a baby carriage, stroller, or
carrier, or similar device, to move about the public sidewalk;
(7)   Any person sitting on a chair or bench located on the public sidewalk
that is placed there by a public agency;
(8)   Any person sitting in line for goods or services, unless the person or
person’s possessions impede the ability of pedestrians to travel along the
length of the sidewalk or enter a doorway or other entrance alongside the
sidewalk; or
(9)   Sitting or lying on a public sidewalk in a designated geographic area
regulated by separate ordinance enactment.
(c)   No person shall be cited for a violation of this section, unless the
person engages in conduct prohibited by this section after having been notified
by a law enforcement officer that the conduct violates this section.
(d)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Expanded Sidewalk Area. The unpaved public property immediately abutting a
public sidewalk that extends 10 feet away from the sidewalk from the edge of
the sidewalk farthest from the roadway.
Expressive Activity. Speech or conduct, the principal object of which is the
expression, dissemination, or communication by verbal, visual, literary, or
auditory means of political, religious, philosophical, or ideological opinions,
views, or ideas, and for which no fee is charged or required as a condition of
participation in or attendance  at such activity. Expressive activity generally
would not include sports events, such as marathons; fundraising events; beauty
contests; commercial events; cultural celebrations or other events the
principal purpose of which is entertainment.
Public Sidewalk. A publicly owned or maintained “sidewalk,” defined in §
13-1.1, and includes a “replacement sidewalk” as defined in that section. Where
the property line adjacent to a public sidewalk is not clearly established,
then for the purposes of this article, the sidewalk is deemed to extend 10 feet
away from the roadway from the curb line or pavement of the roadway.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 15A, § 29-15A.2) (Added by Ord. 14-35; Am. Ords. 15-
14, 17-15, 17-41, 20-15, 23-8)
§ 13-15A.3 Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with HRS §§ 706-640
and 706-663, as amended.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 15A, § 29-15A.3) (Added by Ord. 14-35)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-61.png]
Date prepared: September 29, 2014
(Added by Ord. 14-35)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-63.png]
Date prepared: April 13, 2015
(Added by Ord. 14-35; Am. Ord. 15-14)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-65.png]
Date prepared: January 30, 2015
(Added by Ord. 14-35; Am. Ord. 15-14)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-67.png]
Date prepared: October 13, 2014
(Added by Ord. 14-35)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-69.png]
Date prepared: October 13, 2014
(Added by Ord. 14-35)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-71.png]
Date prepared: March 29, 2017
(Added by Ord. 17-41)
Editor’s note:
   * Exhibit 6-A, “Ala Moana-Sheridan,” as added by Ord. 14-35, was repealed by
Ord. 17-41.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-73.png]
Date prepared: October 13, 2014
(Added by Ord. 14-35)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-75.png]
Date prepared: October 1, 2014
(Added by Ord. 14-35)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-77.png]
Date prepared: October 1, 2014
(Added by Ord. 14-35)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-79.png]
Date prepared: October 1, 2014
(Added by Ord. 14-35)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-81.png]
Date prepared: October 6, 2014
(Added by Ord. 14-35)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-83.png]
Date prepared: April 6, 2015
(Added by Ord. 14-35, Am. Ord. 15-14)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-85.png]
Date prepared: April 16, 2015
(Added by Ord. 14-35; Am. Ord. 15-14)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-87.png]
Date prepared: September 29, 2014
(Added by Ord. 14-35)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-89.png]
Date prepared: September 29, 2014
(Added by Ord. 14-35)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-91.png]
Date prepared: April 6, 2015
(Added by Ord. 15-14)
Exhibit 15
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9636.png]
(Added by Ord. 23-8)
Exhibit 16
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-95.png]
(Added by Ord. 17-15)
Exhibit 17
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-97.png]
(Added by Ord. 17-15; Am. Ord. 20-15)
Exhibit 18
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-99.png]
(Added by Ord. 20-15)
ARTICLE 15B: SITTING OR LYING ON PUBLIC MALLS IN THE
DOWNTOWN AND CHINATOWN AREAS
Sections
   
13-15B.1   Prohibition—Exceptions—Citations
   
13-15B.2   Penalty
§ 13-15B.1 Prohibition—Exceptions—Citations.
(a)   No person shall sit or lie on a public mall, or on a tarp, towel, sheet,
blanket, sleeping bag, bedding, planter, chair, bench, or any other object or
material placed upon a public mall during the following hours:
(1)   College Walk Mall: Sunday through Saturday, all hours;
(2)   Fort Street Mall: Sunday through Saturday from 5:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.;
(3)   Kekaulike Mall: Sunday through Saturday from 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.;
(4)   Kila Kalikimaka Mall: Sunday through Saturday, all hours;
(5)   Sun Yat Sen Mall: Monday through Friday from 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.; and
(6)   Union Mall: Sunday through Saturday, all hours.
(b)   The prohibitions in subsection (a) shall not apply to:
(1)   Any person sitting or lying on a public mall due to a medical emergency;
(2)   Any person who, as a result of a disability, is using a wheelchair or
other similar wheeled chair device to move about the public mall;
(3)   Any person sitting or lying on the public mall for the purpose of
engaging in an expressive activity;
(4)   Any person sitting on the public mall while attending or viewing any
festival, performance, rally, demonstration, or similar event conducted on the
public mall pursuant to a permit issued by the city;
(5)   Any person engaged in a maintenance, repair, or construction activity on
behalf of a governmental entity or a public utility;
(6)   Any child who is sitting or lying in a baby carriage, stroller, or
carrier, or similar device, to move about the public mall;
(7)   Any person sitting on a chair or bench located on the public mall that is
placed there by a public agency or pursuant to permit issued by the city;
(8)   Any person sitting in line for goods or services unless the person or
person’s possessions impede the ability of pedestrians to travel along the
length of the mall or enter a doorway or other entrance alongside the mall; and
(9)   Any person engaging in an authorized activity on the mall pursuant to a
permit issued by the director of parks and recreation in accordance with
department of parks and recreation rules.
(c)   No person shall be cited for a violation of this section, unless the
person engages in conduct prohibited by this section after having been notified
by a law enforcement officer that the conduct violates this section.
(d)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
College Walk Mall. Has the same meaning as “College Walk Mall” in §
13-1.1.
Expressive Activity. Speech or conduct, the principal object of which is the
expression, dissemination, or communication by verbal, visual, literary, or
auditory means of political, religious, philosophical, or ideological opinions,
views, or ideas, and for which no fee is charged or required as a condition of
participation in or attendance at such activity. Expressive activity generally
would not include sports events, such as marathons; fundraising events; beauty
contests; commercial events; cultural celebrations or other events the
principal purpose of which is entertainment.
Fort Street Mall. The portion of Fort Street established as a pedestrian mall
under §
15-25.1(b).
Kekaulike Mall. The area of Kekaulike Street, between Hotel Street and King
Street.
Kila Kalikimaka Mall. The area immediately adjacent to the parcel designated by
TMK 1-7-026:010, from College Walk Mall to Aala Street.
Mall. When used generally in this article, means collectively the College Walk
Mall, Fort Street Mall, Kekaulike Mall, Kila Kalikimaka Mall, Sun Yat Sen Mall,
and Union Mall.
Sun Yat Sen Mall. Has the same meaning as “Sun Yat Sen Mall” in §
13-1.1.
Union Mall. The portion of Union Street established as a pedestrian mall under
§
15-25.1(a).
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 15B, § 29-15B.1) (Added by Ord. 15-1; Am. Ord. 15-40)
§ 13-15B.2 Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with HRS §§ 706-640
and 706-663, as amended.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 15B, § 29-15B.2) (Added by Ord. 15-1)
ARTICLE 16: NUISANCES ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS
Sections
   
13-16.1   Council finding and declaration of nuisance
   
13-16.2   Definitions
   
13-16.3   Summary removal of sidewalk-nuisances
   
13-16.4   Rules
   
13-16.5   Miscellaneous provisions
   
13-16.6   Exceptions
   
13-16.7   City not liable
   
13-16.8   Severability
§ 13-16.1 Council finding and declaration of nuisance.
   The council finds and declares that objects erected, established, placed,
constructed, maintained, kept, or operated on sidewalks to be public nuisances,
hazardous to the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city, and
therefore, shall be subject to summary removal pursuant to this article.
Nuisances on public sidewalks are inconsistent with and frustrate the purposes,
functions, and activities for which the sidewalk is intended. The purpose of
this article is to promote traffic and pedestrian health, safety, and welfare;
prevent visual blight; and ensure that the sidewalk is free of obstacles and
available for use and enjoyment of members of the public.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 16, § 29-16.1) (Added by Ord. 13-8)
§ 13-16.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Director. The director and chief engineer of facility maintenance or the
director’s authorized representative.
Expressive Activity. Speech or conduct, the principal object of which is the
expression, dissemination, or communication by verbal, visual, literary, or
auditory means of political, religious, philosophical, or ideological opinions,
views, or ideas, and for which no fee is charged or required as a condition of
participation in or attendance at such activity. Expressive activity generally
would not include sports events, such as marathons; fundraising events; beauty
contests; commercial events; cultural celebrations or other events the
principal purpose of which is entertainment.
Roadway. That portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
Sidewalk. Includes sidewalks and replacement sidewalks.
Sidewalk-Nuisance. Any object or collection of objects constructed, erected,
installed, maintained, kept, or operated on or over any sidewalk, including but
not limited to structures, stalls, stands, tents, furniture, and containers,
and any of their contents or attachments.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 16, § 29-16.2) (Added by Ord. 13-8)
§ 13-16.3 Summary removal of sidewalk-nuisances.
(a)   No person shall erect, establish, place, construct, maintain, keep, or
operate any sidewalk-nuisance on any sidewalk, except as provided in §
13-16.6 or as otherwise authorized by law. Any sidewalk-nuisance in violation
of this subsection shall be subject to summary removal.
(b)   The director may immediately and summarily remove, or cause the immediate
and summary removal, of a sidewalk-nuisance. A sidewalk-nuisance may be
disassembled for removal.
(1)   The director shall store or cause to be stored any sidewalk-nuisance
removed pursuant to this subsection until the director is authorized to
destroy, sell, or otherwise dispose of the sidewalk-nuisance pursuant to this
section, but in no event, less than 30 calendar days from the date of removal.
(2)   Notification.
(A)   Written notice of the city’s removal of the sidewalk-nuisance shall be
posted for three consecutive days following removal of the sidewalk-nuisance on
the public property where the sidewalk-nuisance was removed. If notice cannot
be posted as provided, then it shall be posted on the internet website for the
city for three consecutive days following removal of the sidewalk-nuisance.
(B)   The written notice shall state:
(i)   The date, violation, and removal of the sidewalk-nuisance;
(ii)   That the owner may reclaim the sidewalk-nuisance within 30 calendar days
from the date of the removal of the sidewalk-nuisance;
(iii)   Contact information and instructions on how the owner may reclaim the
sidewalk-nuisance;
(iv)   That the owner has the right to appeal the removal of the sidewalk-
nuisance in accordance with subsection (d); and
(v)   That, if not timely reclaimed or the subject of timely appeal, the
sidewalk-nuisance shall be subject to disposal.
(C)   If a name and mailing address has been legibly and conspicuously provided
on a sidewalk-nuisance removed pursuant to this subsection, then the director
also shall issue a written notice, by certified mail, to the person named on
the sidewalk-nuisance within seven calendar days following the date of the
removal of the sidewalk-nuisance; provided that if only an address is provided
on a sidewalk-nuisance, the director shall issue a written notice, by certified
mail, addressed to the “occupant” of that address, within seven calendar days
following the date of the removal of the sidewalk-nuisance. No such notice
shall be required if only the name is provided and the director is unable after
a good faith effort to determine the address of the named person.
(D)   Shopping carts. If a shopping cart is removed and impounded pursuant to
this subsection, the city shall notify the Retail Merchants Association or its
successor organization of the location where the shopping cart may be claimed.
The Retail Merchants Association or its successor organization shall notify the
owner of the shopping cart or owner’s agent of the location where the shopping
cart may be claimed. The owner or owner’s agent shall have three business days
from the date the city notifies the Retail Merchants Association or its
successor organization to retrieve the shopping cart without charge. If the
owner or owner’s agent fails to retrieve the shopping cart within three
business days, the shopping cart shall be treated as a removed sidewalk-
nuisance pursuant to this subsection, and written notice shall be provided as
in subsection (b)(2), and the owner shall be subject to a fee pursuant to
subsection (c), unless the owner successfully contests the removal as provided
in subsection (d).
(3)   The director may destroy, sell, or otherwise dispose of a sidewalk-
nuisance removed under this subsection after a period of 30 calendar days from
the date of removal of the sidewalk-nuisance, unless a timely appeal has been
filed under subsection (d).
(c)   A sidewalk-nuisance removed pursuant to this section may be reclaimed by
the owner within the applicable 30-day period specified in subsection (b). To
reclaim a sidewalk-nuisance, an owner or the owner’s authorized representative
shall make arrangements with the director to reclaim the sidewalk-nuisance;
shall appear in person within the applicable 30-day period at the time and
place designated by the director; shall provide satisfactory proof of identity
and entitlement; and shall pay to the city a $200 fee for the city’s cost of
removal, storage and handling of the sidewalk-nuisance, whereupon the city
shall release the sidewalk-nuisance to the owner or the owner’s authorized
representative, as is.
(d)   An owner of a sidewalk-nuisance removed pursuant to this section may
contest the removal by written request for a hearing to the director received
no later than 25 calendar days after removal of the sidewalk-nuisance. The
owner shall provide a current mailing address to receive the notice of the
decision of the director regarding the appeal. The hearing shall be conducted
by the director in accordance with HRS Chapter 91. The appeal shall be limited
to a determination of whether the sidewalk-nuisance was properly removed and a
fee properly assessed pursuant to this section. The director shall continue to
store or have stored the sidewalk- nuisance until the appeal has been decided.
If the decision of the director is in favor of the owner, then the owner may
arrange to reclaim the sidewalk-nuisance without paying the fee for the
removal, storage, and handling of the sidewalk-nuisance. If the decision of the
director is in favor of the city, then the sidewalk-nuisance may be returned to
the owner or the owner’s authorized representative upon payment of the removal,
storage, and handling fee of $200. If the owner or the owner’s authorized
representative fails to reclaim the sidewalk-nuisance within seven calendar
days of the postmark for the notice of the decision, the sidewalk-nuisance may
be destroyed, sold, or otherwise disposed of by the director.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 16, § 29-16.3) (Added by Ord. 13-8)
§ 13-16.4 Rules.
   The director may adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 for the
implementation of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 16, § 29-16.4) (Added by Ord. 13-8)
§ 13-16.5 Miscellaneous provisions.
(a)   This article shall be in addition to and shall not limit any other
applicable provisions of federal, State, or city law, ordinance, or rule.
(b)   This article shall not create a duty on the part of the city regarding
sidewalk accessibility other than is already required by law.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 16, § 29-16.5) (Added by Ord. 13-8)
§ 13-16.6 Exceptions.
   This article shall not apply to the following:
(1)   An object or collection of objects smaller than 42 inches in length, 25
inches in width, and 43 inches in height, provided that:
(A)   The object or collection of objects is attended to by an individual at
all times;
(B)   The object or collection of objects, or any portion thereof, does not
extend into the roadway;
(C)   The object or collection of objects does not obstruct the use of 36
inches in width of the sidewalk and does not obstruct the free movement of
pedestrians;
(D)   The object or collection of objects does not obstruct individuals from
access to, or egress from, legally parked vehicles;
(E)   The object or collection of objects does not interfere with other lawful
activities taking place on the sidewalk, and its placement complies with other
provisions of this chapter; and
(F)   The object or collection of objects does not otherwise threaten public
health and safety;
(2)   An object or collection of objects used in the performance of a
government-approved public safety, maintenance, or construction function; or
(3)   Tables or other portable outdoor furniture or items used for the purpose
of displaying literature or other expressive material or otherwise directly
facilitating expressive activities; provided that the tables, furniture, or
items:
(A)   Are attended to by an individual at all times;
(B)   Do not extend into the roadway;
(C)   Do not obstruct the use of 36 inches in width of the sidewalk and do not
obstruct the free movement of pedestrians;
(D)   Do not obstruct individuals from access to, or egress from, legally
parked vehicles;
(E)   Do not interfere with other lawful activities taking place on the
sidewalk and comply with other provisions of this chapter;
(F)   Do not otherwise threaten public health and safety; and
(G)   Are not larger than 5 x 2 feet or 10 square feet for each individual
engaging in the expressive activity.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 16, § 29-16.6) (Added by Ord. 13-8)
§ 13-16.7 City not liable.
   The owner of a removed sidewalk-nuisance shall bear the responsibility for
any loss or damage to the sidewalk-nuisance. The city, its officers, employees,
and agents shall not be liable to any person entitled to a removed sidewalk-
nuisance because of any disposal or other disposition of the property made
pursuant to this article.
   The remedies available to a person entitled to a removed sidewalk-nuisance
are limited to those provided in this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 16, § 29-16.7) (Added by Ord. 13-8)
§ 13-16.8 Severability.
   This article is declared to be severable. If any portion of this article is
held invalid for any reason, the validity of any other portion of this article
which may be given effect without the invalid portion shall not be affected and
if the application of any portion of this article to any person, property, or
circumstance is held invalid, the application of this article to any other
person, property, or circumstance shall not be affected.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 16, § 29-16.8) (Added by Ord. 13-8)
ARTICLE 17: AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING
Sections
   
13-17.1   Definitions
   
13-17.2   Aggressive panhandling; where prohibited
   
13-17.3   Penalty, summons, or citation
   
13-17.4   Severability
§ 13-17.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Automated Teller Machine. A device, linked to a financial institution’s account
records, which is able to carry out transactions, including but not limited to:
account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries, and mortgage
and loan payments.
Automated Teller Machine Facility. The area comprised of one or more automatic
teller machines and any adjacent space that is made available to banking
customers after regular banking hours.
Aggressive Panhandling. Engaging in the following behavior in the course of a
solicitation of another person:
(1)   Persisting in soliciting money from, following, or approaching a person
after the person has given a negative response by either words or conduct to a
solicitation for money;
(2)   Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with a person being
solicited without that person’s consent;
(3)   Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a
person exiting or entering a vehicle near an automated teller machine;
(4)   Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person being solicited;
(5)   Using profane or abusive language that is likely to provoke an immediate
violent reaction from the person being solicited; or
(6)   Approaching or following a person being solicited in a group of two or
more persons, in a manner and with conduct, words, or gestures intended or
likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or damage to,
or loss of, property or otherwise to be intimidated into giving money or other
thing of value.
Check. Any check, draft, money order, or other instrument for the transmission
or payment of money. Check does not include a traveler’s check, foreign
denomination, or foreign drawn payment instrument.
Check Cashing Business. Any business engaged in the cashing of checks. This
article shall not apply to:
(1)   Any person who is principally engaged in the bona fide retail sale of
goods or services, and who, either as incident to, or independent of, the
retail sale or service, from time to time, cashes items for a fee or other
consideration, where not more than $2, or 2 percent of the amount of the check,
whichever is greater, is charged for the service; or
(2)   Any person authorized to engage in business as a bank, trust company,
savings bank, savings and loan association, financial services loan company, or
credit union under the laws of the United States, any state or territory of the
United States, or the District of Columbia.
Donation. Any item of value, monetary or otherwise, accepted by a panhandler.
Panhandling or Soliciting. Any solicitation made in person upon any street or
public place in the city in which a person requests an immediate donation from
another person. The term does not include passively standing or sitting nor
does it include performing music, singing, or conducting other street
performances with a sign or other indication that money is being sought without
any spoken request other than in response to an inquiry by another person.
Public Place. Any area to which the public is invited or permitted, including a
public sidewalk or way.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 17, § 29-17.1) (Added by Ord. 8-02)
§ 13-17.2 Aggressive panhandling; where prohibited.
   No person shall engage in aggressive panhandling within 10 feet in any
direction of any automated teller machine, automated teller machine facility,
or check cashing business. The distance to a check cashing business or
automatic teller machine facility shall be measured from the entrance or exit
of the facility.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 17, § 29-17.2) (Added by Ord. 8-02)
§ 13-17.3 Penalty, summons, or citation.
(a)   Penalty. Any person violating this article shall be subject to a fine of
$25 for each offense.
(b)   Summons or citation.
(1)   There shall be provided for use by authorized police officers, or
authorized special police officers, a form of summons or citation for use in
citing any violation of this article that does not mandate the physical arrest
of the violator. The form and content of such summons or citation shall be as
adopted or prescribed by the administrative judge of the district court and
shall be printed on a form commensurate with the form of other summonses or
citations used in modern methods of arrest, so designed as to include all
necessary information to make the same valid within the laws and regulations of
the State and city. The summons or citation shall instruct such person to
report to the violations bureau of the district court for the district of
Honolulu. Each such violator may, within seven days after receipt of such
summons, appear at such violations bureau and post a bail bond in such amounts
as may be set by the administrative judge of the district court for appearance
on the date as may be set out for such person to appear before the district
court. Upon failure to appear on such date, the bail bond shall be deemed
forfeited. Bail forfeiture by mail shall be permitted.
(2)   In every case when a citation is issued, the original of the same shall
be given to the violator; provided that the administrative judge of the
district court may prescribe the giving to the violator of a carbon copy of the
citation and provide for the disposition of the original and any other copies.
(3)   Every citation shall be consecutively numbered, and each carbon copy
shall bear the number of its respective original.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 17, § 29-17.3) (Added by Ord. 8-02)
§ 13-17.4 Severability.
   This article is severable, and if any part of this article should be held
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect
the remainder of the article and the remainder of this article shall stay in
full force and effect.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 17, § 29-17.4) (Added by Ord. 8-02)
ARTICLE 18: USE OF SIDEWALK FOR PEDESTRIAN USE
Sections
   
13-18.1   Limitation
   
13-18.2   Applicability
   
13-18.3   Exceptions
   
13-18.4   Penalty
   
13-18.5   Marking of boundaries of pedestrian use zone
   
13-18.6   Rules
§ 13-18.1 Limitation.
(a)   Except as otherwise provided in §
13-18.3, only a pedestrian may use the pedestrian use zone in accordance with
this article.
(b)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this article that the
behavior occurred within 1 foot of the curbside boundary of the pedestrian use
zone, that the boundary of the zone was not marked, and the person believed in
good faith that the person was not in the pedestrian use zone.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 18, § 29-18.1) (Added by Ord. 10-26)
§ 13-18.2 Applicability.
(a)   The requirements and restrictions of this article shall apply only to the
urban zone between the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., except that in the
Waikiki district, the requirements and restrictions of this article shall apply
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. on any one day until 2:00 a.m. of the succeeding
day. The city may extend these hours in one or more of the areas described in
subsection (b) when the requirements and restrictions of this article shall
apply, during an emergency, or for special security reasons. For the purposes
of this subsection, an emergency means a natural disaster, such as a fire,
flood, tsunami, earthquake, or other natural calamity, or a man-made disaster,
including those caused by sabotage or other hostile action.
(b)   For the purposes of this article, the Ala Moana/Kakaako district is the
area whose boundaries are shown in Exhibit A, the Downtown district is the area
whose boundaries are shown in Exhibit B, the Kalihi district is the area whose
boundaries are shown in Exhibit C, the McCully/Moiliili/Makiki district is the
area whose boundaries are shown in Exhibit D, and the Waikiki district is the
area whose boundaries are shown in Exhibit E.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 18, § 29-18.3) (Added by Ord. 10-26)
§ 13-18.3 Exceptions.
   The prohibitions in this article shall not apply to persons:
(1)   Unable to comply due to suffering a medical emergency;
(2)   Acting as authorized or allowed by any article under this chapter or any
other ordinance, permit, regulation, or statute;
(3)   Performing a government-approved public safety, maintenance, or
construction function;
(4)   Participating in or attending a parade, festival, performance, rally,
demonstration, meeting, or similar event conducted on the public sidewalk
pursuant to, and in compliance with, an applicable permit;
(5)   Sitting on a chair or bench supplied or permitted by a public agency;
(6)   Waiting in line for goods or services, unless the person refuses to
comply with a lawful order of a police officer to form the line in a way that
moderates impact on passage along the sidewalk;
(7)   Waiting at a bus stop or taxi stand for a bus or a taxi;
(8)   Moving freight or merchandise for commercial purposes; or
(9)   Engaged in expressive activities or who are using tables or other
portable outdoor furniture or items for the purpose of displaying literature or
other expressive material or otherwise directly facilitating expressive
activities; provided that the tables, furniture, or items do not obstruct the
free movement of pedestrians through the pedestrian use zone, do not interfere
with other lawful activities taking place on the sidewalk and comply with other
provisions of this chapter; and provided further, that no table, item of
furniture, or other item shall be larger than 5 x 2 feet or 10 square feet for
each person engaging in the expressive activity.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 18, § 29-18.4) (Added by Ord. 10-26)
§ 13-18.4 Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
maximum penalty of $50. In lieu of this penalty, a judge may sentence a person
found to have violated this article to community service for such period as
determined by the judge.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 18, § 29-18.5) (Added by Ord. 10-26)
§ 13-18.5 Marking of boundaries of pedestrian use zone.
   The city may mark the boundary or boundaries of the pedestrian use zone.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 18, § 29-18.6) (Added by Ord. 10-26)
§ 13-18.6 Rules.
   In accordance with HRS Chapter 91, the department of facility maintenance or
a department designated by the mayor may adopt rules having the force and
effect of law for the implementation, administration, and enforcement of this
article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 18, § 29-18.8) (Added by Ord. 10-26)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-101.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-103.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-105.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-107.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-109.png]
ARTICLE 19: STORED PROPERTY
Sections
   
13-19.1   Declaration of legislative intent—Purpose
   
13-19.2   Definitions
   
13-19.3   Stored property—Impoundment
   
13-19.4   Notice
   
13-19.5   Storage and disposal
   
13-19.6   Proceeds of sale
   
13-19.7   Repossession
   
13-19.8   City not liable
§ 13-19.1 Declaration of legislative intent—Purpose.
   Public property may be accessible and available to residents and the public
at large for its intended uses. The unauthorized use of public property for the
storage of personal property interferes with the rights of other members of the
public to use public property for its intended purposes and can create a public
health and safety hazard that adversely affects residential and commercial
areas. The purpose of this article is to maintain public areas in clean,
sanitary, and accessible condition, to prevent harm to the health or safety of
the public, to prevent the misappropriation of public property for personal
use, and to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by ensuring
that public property remains readily accessible for its intended uses.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 19, § 29-19.1) (Added by Ord. 11-29)
§ 13-19.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Medial Strip. Has the same meaning as defined in §
15-2.23.
Personal Property. Any and all tangible property, and includes but is not
limited to items, goods, materials, merchandise, furniture, equipment,
fixtures, structures, clothing, and household items. The term shall not include
any vehicle as defined in HRS § 291C-1, any vessel as defined in HRS § 200-23,
or any property subject to HRS Chapter 523A.
Public Property. All property that is owned, managed, or maintained by the
city, and shall include but not be limited to any street, sidewalk, replacement
sidewalk, medial strip, space, ground, mall, building, structure, public park,
and any other property of the city.
Sidewalk. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 291C-1.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 19, § 29-19.2) (Added by Ord. 11-29)
§ 13-19.3 Stored property—Impoundment.
(a)   No person shall store personal property on public property. All stored
personal property may be impounded by the city. In the event personal property
placed on public property interferes with the safe or orderly management of the
premises or poses a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, it
may be impounded at any time by the city.
(b)   Personal property placed on public property shall be stored personal
property if it has not been removed from public property within 24 hours of
service of the written notice required by §
13-19.4, which requires such removal, and the city may cause the removal and
impoundment of such stored personal property; provided that moving the personal
property to another location on public property shall not be considered to be
removing the personal property from public property; and provided further, that
this section shall not apply to personal property that, pursuant to statute,
ordinance, permit, regulation, or other authorization by the city or State, is
placed on property that is owned or controlled by the city.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 19, § 29-19.3) (Added by Ord. 11-29)
§ 13-19.4 Notice.
(a)   The written notice required to be served by §
13-19.3(b) is deemed to have been served if a copy of the written notice is
served on the person storing the personal property or is posted prominently and
conspicuously on the stored personal property. The written notice must contain
the following:
(1)   A description of the personal property to be removed (such description
may refer to an attached photograph);
(2)   The location of the personal property;
(3)   The date and time the notice was posted;
(4)   The section of the ROH that is being violated;
(5)   A statement that the personal property will be impounded if not removed
within 24 hours;
(6)   The location where the removed property will be stored;
(7)   A statement that impounded property will be sold or otherwise disposed of
if not claimed within 30 days after impoundment; and
(8)   A statement that the property owner shall be responsible for all costs of
removal, storage, and disposal.
(b)   Shopping carts. If a shopping cart is removed and impounded pursuant to §
13-19.3, the city shall notify the Retail Merchants Association or its
successor organization of the location where the shopping cart may be claimed.
The Retail Merchants Association or its successor organization shall notify the
owner of the shopping cart or owner’s agent of the location where the shopping
cart may be claimed. The owner or owner’s agent shall have three business days
from the date the city notifies the Retail Merchants Association or its
successor organization to retrieve the shopping cart without charge. If the
owner or owner’s agent fails to retrieve the shopping cart within three
business days, the shopping cart shall become impounded property as provided in
§
13-19.5(a), written notice shall be provided as in §
13-19.5(b), and the owner shall be subject to any applicable fees and costs
imposed pursuant to §
13-19.5(a). Any shopping cart not reclaimed by the owner or owner’s agent
within 30 days after the date of written notice may be disposed of as personal
property valued at less than $1,000.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 19, § 29-19.4) (Added by Ord. 11-29)
§ 13-19.5 Storage and disposal.
(a)   Impounded personal property shall be moved to a place of storage, and the
owner shall be assessed moving, storage, and other related fees and costs.
Additionally, the owner of impounded personal property shall bear the
responsibility for the risk of any loss or damage to the impounded property.
(b)   At least 30 days before disposal of impounded personal property, the city
shall serve notice in writing apprising the owner of the personal property of
the description and location of the impounded personal property and of the
intent of the city to sell, donate, or otherwise dispose of the impounded
property. Service of written notice shall be by personal service or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the
owner of the impounded property if the owner is known or can be determined.
Where the identity or the address of the owner is unknown or cannot be
determined through the exercise of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be
posted for three consecutive days on the public property where the property was
stored or seized. If notice cannot be posted as provided heretofore, then it
shall be posted on the internet website of the city for three consecutive days.
(c)   If any item of impounded personal property has an estimated value of
$1,000 or more, the city shall also give public notice of its disposal,
including a brief description of the property, details of the time and place of
the auction and giving notice to all persons interested in claiming the
property that unless claims are made by persons who can provide satisfactory
proof of ownership before a specified date, the property will be sold at public
auction to the highest bidder. Such public notice shall be published at least
once in a publication of statewide circulation or in a publication of local
circulation where the property was impounded; provided that the disposal shall
not take place less than five days after public notice has been given.
Following proper notices as provided in subsections (b) and (c), any item of
impounded personal property having an estimated value of $1,000 or more shall
be disposed of by public auction, through oral tenders, or by sealed bids.
Where no bid is received, the impounded personal property may be sold by
negotiation, disposed of or sold as junk, kept by the city, or donated to any
other government agency or charitable organization.
(d)   The requirement for public notice and public auction shall not apply when
the estimated value of the impounded personal property is less than $1,000. In
that event, the impounded personal property may be sold by negotiation,
disposed of or sold as junk, kept by the city, or donated to any other
government agency or charitable organization.
(e)   Any impounded property of a perishable nature may be disposed of
immediately in any manner without notice after impoundment by the city.
(f)   The city shall maintain a record of the date and method of disposal of
the impounded personal property, including the consideration received for the
property, if any, and the name and address of the person taking possession of
the property. Such record shall be kept as a public record for a period of not
less than one year from the date of disposal of the property.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 19, § 29-19.5) (Added by Ord. 11-29)
§ 13-19.6 Proceeds of sale.
   All fees and unpaid rent, debts, and charges owing, and all expenses of
handling, storage, appraisal, advertising, and other sale expenses incurred by
the city shall be deducted from the proceeds of any sale of the impounded
property. Any amount remaining shall be held in trust for the owner of the
property for 30 days after sale, after which time the proceeds shall be paid
into the general fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 19, § 29-19.6) (Added by Ord. 11-29)
§ 13-19.7 Repossession.
   The owner or any other person entitled to the impounded personal property
may repossess the property before its disposal upon submitting satisfactory
proof of ownership or entitlement and payment of all unpaid rent, debts, and
charges owing and all handling, storage, appraisal, advertising, and other
expenses incurred by the city in connection with the proposed disposal of the
impounded property.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 19, § 29-19.7) (Added by Ord. 11-29)
§ 13-19.8 City not liable.
   The City and County of Honolulu, its officers, employees, and agents shall
not be liable to the owner of impounded personal property because of any
disposal of the property made pursuant to this article. The remedies available
to the owner of impounded property are limited to those provided in this
article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 19, § 29-19.8) (Added by Ord. 11-29)
ARTICLE 20: CREATING, CAUSING, OR MAINTAINING OBSTRUCTIONS ON
PUBLIC SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED
Sections
   
13-20.1   Prohibition—Exceptions—Citations
   
13-20.2   Penalty
   
13-20.3   Outdoor dining services program
   
13-20.4   Article additional to Article 18 with respect to use of sidewalk, and
to Articles 6A, 8, and 10 with respect to use of mall
§ 13-20.1 Prohibition—Exceptions—Citations.
(a)   No person shall create, cause, or maintain an obstruction on a public
sidewalk that interferes, impedes, and/or prevents the full, free, and
unobstructed passage of pedestrians upon public sidewalks or interferes with
the normal flow of pedestrian traffic upon a public sidewalk during the hours
from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(b)   The prohibitions in subsection (a) do not apply to a person:
(1)   Unable to comply due to suffering a medical emergency;
(2)   Unable to comply due to physical or mental incapacitation;
(3)   Engaging in protected expressive activity;
(4)   Participating in or attending a parade, festival, performance, rally,
demonstration, or similar event conducted on the street pursuant to a permit
issued by the city;
(5)   Acting as authorized or allowed by ordinance, permit, or regulation
issued by the city and county of Honolulu;
(6)   Engaged in a maintenance, repair, or construction activity on behalf of a
governmental entity or a public utility; and
(7)   In line for goods or services, unless the person or person’s possessions
impede the ability of pedestrians to travel along the length of the sidewalk or
enter a doorway or other entrance alongside the sidewalk.
(c)   No law enforcement officer shall issue a citation, make an arrest, or
otherwise enforce this section against any person unless:
(1)   The law enforcement officer visually observes the interference with,
impediment to, or prevention of the full, free, and unobstructed passage of
pedestrians; and
(2)   The officer orally requests or orders the person to refrain from the
alleged violation of this section and the person fails to comply after
receiving the oral request or order.
(d)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Expressive Activity. Speech or conduct, the principal object of which is the
expression, dissemination, or communication by verbal, visual, literary, or
auditory means of political, religious, philosophical, or ideological opinions,
views, or ideas, and for which no fee is charged or required as a condition of
participation in or attendance at such activity. Expressive activity generally
would not include sports events, such as marathons, fundraising events, beauty
contests, commercial events, cultural celebrations, or other events the
principal purpose of which is entertainment.
Obstruct. To block up, stop up, or close up, or place an obstacle in or fill
with obstacles or impediments that interfere with the passing of a pedestrian
or to be or come in the way of a pedestrian’s free use of the sidewalk.
Obstruction. The act or condition of being obstructed, or a condition of being
clogged or blocked.
Public Sidewalk. A publicly owned or maintained “sidewalk,” as defined in §
13-1.1, and includes a “replacement sidewalk” as defined in that section. Where
the property line adjacent to a public sidewalk is not clearly established,
then for purposes of this article, the sidewalk is deemed to extend 10 feet
away from the roadway from the curb line or pavement of the roadway.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 20, § 29-20.1) (Added by Ord. 18-34)
§ 13-20.2 Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall be subject to a $100 fine. In lieu
of a $100 fine, a judge may sentence a person found in violation of this
section to provide community service.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 20, § 29-20.2) (Added by Ord. 18-34)
§ 13-20.3 Outdoor dining services program.
(a)   For the purposes of this section:
Department. The city department or agency designated by the mayor.
Program. The outdoor dining services program established under this section.
(b)   The department may establish a program for outdoor dining services that
allows restaurants to use certain city properties for dining and take-out
operations. These city properties are limited to sidewalks, parklets,
pedestrian malls, parks, and playgrounds.
(c)   The department is authorized to implement the program consistent with
this section, commencing on July 22, 2025.
(d)   The department may issue permits to applicants to provide outdoor dining
services pursuant to this section upon acceptance of an application,
application fee, a completed liability form, the indemnification of the city,
and proof of insurance; provided that such permits are revocable on notice of
30 days or less and are valid for a maximum one-year period. A permit
application review fee of $50 must accompany a permit application. The
department may establish a charge for the use of the property.
(e)   The program must incorporate terms and conditions to ensure public health
and safety, including but not limited to consideration of the following as
applicable:
(1)   The restaurant must be on the ground floor and abut paved city property.
(2)   Upon 24 hours’ notice, the restaurant must vacate city property for
regular maintenance by the city, including, for example, steam cleaning.
(3)   The restaurant is responsible for its own equipment, furniture, and
supplies, which must be stored elsewhere than on city property during hours
when the restaurant is closed.
(4)   The utilized city property may only be used by the restaurant during its
normal business hours but must not be used between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.
(5)   The restaurant is responsible for compliance with any additional
requirements relating to its applicable State department of health food
establishment permit.
(6)   Liquor sales, if any, on the utilized city property must be authorized
under the restaurant’s liquor license and allowed under applicable law.
(7)   No additional signage is permitted within the utilized city property.
(8)   Dining services must be consistent with any requirements imposed by law
or emergency order, including social distancing requirements and the physical
spacing of tables, seats, and customers.
(9)   Furniture must be located at least 6 feet from any vehicular ramp,
driveway, or street intersection.
(10)   No live or amplified music is allowed on the utilized city property.
(11)   Furniture must not be placed over planter strips and tree wells.
(12)   Furniture must be outside an 8-foot radius around bus stops and a 5-foot
radius around fire hydrants.
(13)   All fire lanes must be open and accessible at all times.
(14)   The restaurant is responsible for rubbish collection.
(15)   Upon expiration of the restaurant’s permit, the restaurant shall return
the city property to the state it was in prior to the commencement of the
restaurant’s use under the program.
(16)   The permit is transferable upon change in ownership due to the sale or
transfer of the restaurant; provided that the new owner or operator of the
restaurant notifies the department of the change in ownership and complies with
all requirements under this section, including any requests by the department
for information or documentation.
(17)   Violations of these requirements may result in revocation of the permit
by the department; provided that the department shall notify the restaurant of
the violation and provide an opportunity for the restaurant to respond before
revocation.
(18)   Outdoor dining under this section may include parklets, subject to
pedestrian clearance, traffic, and safety issues as determined by the city
through the departments having authority over these issues.
(19)   Where sidewalks are present on all or part of the utilized city
property, the restaurant must ensure a clear right-of-way at least 36 inches
wide at all times.
(20)   For restaurants abutting pedestrian “malls,” as more specifically
defined in §
13-1.1, the following additional requirements apply:
(A)   A clear 20-foot wide right-of-way to accommodate delivery and emergency
vehicles must be maintained at all times;
(B)   Business hours for outdoor dining operations must not exceed mall hours;
(C)   All rubbish must be removed nightly; and
(D)   If the ground of the city property utilized consists of pavers, the
restaurant must take actions to prevent and address food, liquid, and grease
spills.
(21)   For restaurants abutting a city park or playground, use of the city
property is limited to a maximum of 7 feet from the property line and to no
more than one row of tables.
(f)   The department shall submit to the council an annual report no later than
September 1, 2026, and by September 1 of each year thereafter, that includes,
at a minimum:
(1)   An assessment of the program, including identification of the assessment
criteria used and the impact of the program on the local economy;
(2)   An analysis of the method of implementation of the program, the cost of
the program, and the number of permits issued;
(3)   Recommendations for retention, termination, or modification of the
program; and
(4)   For participants in the program seeking renewal of the permit by the
department, a compilation of input requested by the department from
participants in the program relating to the program’s positive or negative
impact on their business.
The council shall review the department’s reports and recommendations no later
than five years after the submission of the department’s first annual report
required under this subsection and every five years thereafter to determine
whether retention, termination, or modification of the program is necessary.
(g)   The department may adopt rules in accordance with HRS Chapter 91 to
implement this section.
(Added by Ord. 25-14)
Editor’s note:
   In accordance with Ord. 25-14, any outdoor dining permits granted and in
effect prior to July 21, 2025 under the pilot program in § 13-20.3, as it read
prior to July 21, 2025, will continue to be valid and in effect until the
timely expiration or timely renewal of the permit.
   “July 22, 2025” is substituted for “the effective date of this ordinance.”
§ 13-20.4 Article additional to Article 18 with respect to use of sidewalk, and
to Articles 6A, 8, and 10 with respect to use of mall.
   The use of a sidewalk as authorized by this article is additional to the use
of a sidewalk authorized under
Article 18; the use of a mall or sidewalk as authorized by this article is
additional to the use of a mall or sidewalk authorized under
Articles 6A,
8, and
10; and the use of a park or playground as authorized by this article is
additional to the use of a park or playground authorized under
Chapter 10, Article 1.
(Added by Ord. 25-14)
ARTICLE 21: ILLEGAL LODGING ON A PUBLIC SIDEWALK OR OTHER PUBLIC PLACE
Sections
   
13-21.1   Prohibition—Exceptions—Citations
   
13-21.2   Penalty
§ 13-21.1 Prohibition–-Exceptions—Citations.
(a)   No person shall lodge on a public sidewalk or other public place.
(b)   No law enforcement officer shall issue a citation, make an arrest, or
otherwise enforce this section against any person unless:
(1)   Shelter space is readily available;
(2)   An offer has been made to transport the person to the available shelter;
and
(3)   The officer requests or orders the person to refrain from the alleged
violation of this section.
(c)   A person may be cited or arrested for a violation of this section if the
person fails to comply after receiving the oral request or order and refuses to
go to or to be transported to the available shelter after being given one hour
to relocate from the sidewalk or other public place.
(d)   As used in this section:
Lodge or Lodging. To sleep; to come to rest and refuse to vacate the area when
requested pursuant to subsection (b) above.
Public Place. Has the same meaning as defined in §
13-1.1.
Public Sidewalk. Has the same meaning as defined in §
13-15.1(d).
Shelter. A facility that provides temporary housing for individuals or
families. A shelter may include an incarceration diversion program, a medical
facility, or related supportive services.
(e)   This article does not apply to any person engaging in an activity
pursuant to a permit or license issued by the State, city, or federal
government.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 21, § 29-21.1) (Added by Ord. 18-35)
§ 13-21.2 Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with HRS §§ 706-640
and 706-663, as amended.
(1990 Code, Ch. 29, Art. 21, § 29-21.1) (Added by Ord. 18-35)
CHAPTER 14: PUBLIC WORKS INFRASTRUCTURE
Articles
   
1.   Use of Indigenous and Polynesian Introduced Plants in Public Landscaping
   
2.   Excavation and Repairs of Streets and Sidewalks
   
3.   Regulations Governing the Construction of Sidewalks, Curbs, or Driveways
Within the Right-of-Way of Public Streets
   
4.   Public Utility Reserved Areas
   
5.   Cleaning and Maintaining Sidewalks
   
6.   Construction of Improvements by Certain Property Owners
   
7.   Public Utility Facilities
   
8.   General Provisions for Assessments
   
9.   Costs for Assessments
   
10.   Procedure for Assessments
   
11.   Assessments
   
12.   Financing for Assessments
   
13.   Refunding
   
14.   Limitation on Time to Sue
   
15.   Severability
   
16.   General Provisions for Maintenance by Assessments
   
17.   Maintenance of Private Streets and Roads
   
18.   Complete Streets
   
19.   Glasphalt Paving
   
20.   Banners Displayed From Lampposts
   
21.   Neighborhood Watch Signs
   
Appendix 14-A: Improvement District Ordinances
ARTICLE 1: USE OF INDIGENOUS AND POLYNESIAN INTRODUCED PLANTS
IN PUBLIC LANDSCAPING
Sections
   
14-1.1   Definitions
   
14-1.2   Implementation
   
14-1.3   Shoreline protection in public parks
§ 14-1.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Facility. Any physical improvement owned by the city or used for city purposes
such as municipal buildings, police stations, fire stations, satellite city
halls, and recreation centers.
Indigenous. Any land plant species growing or living naturally in Hawaii
without having been brought to Hawaii by humans.
Polynesian Introduced. Any plant species brought to Hawaii by Polynesians
before European contact, such as kukui, noni, and coconut.
Public Park.  Has the same meaning as defined in §
10-1.1.
Shoreline.  The upper reaches of the wash of the waves, other than storm and
seismic waves, at high tide during the season of the year in which the highest
wash of the waves occurs, usually evidenced by the edge of vegetation growth,
or the upper limit of debris left by the wash of the waves.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 11, § 14-11.1) (Added by Ord. 14-6; Am. Ord. 22-22 )
§ 14-1.2 Implementation.
   Wherever and whenever feasible, all plans, designs, and specifications for
new or renovated landscaping of any building, complex of buildings, facility,
complex of facilities, park, or housing developed by the city with public
moneys shall incorporate indigenous and Polynesian introduced plant species,
provided that:
(1)   Suitable cultivated plants can be made available for this purpose without
jeopardizing wild plants in their natural habitat; and
(2)   Wherever and whenever possible, plants indigenous to Oahu shall be used.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 11, § 14-11.2) (Added by Ord. 14-6)
§ 14-1.3 Shoreline protection in public parks.
(a)   Wherever and whenever feasible, the department of parks and recreation
shall prioritize the utilization of indigenous plant species, such as naupaka,
phuehue, ‘aki‘aki, ‘kulikuli, phinahina, and ‘ilima papa, in public parks to
help mitigate beach and shoreline erosion, and promote landscaping habitats
that provide for greater sediment filtration and better protection against
extreme weather events.
(b)   All landscaped areas and landscaping in public parks along beaches and
shorelines must be contained and maintained within city property and should not
extend or encroach:
(1)   Seaward of the presumed or certified shoreline; or
(2)   Into any adjoining beach access right-of-way, public or private.
(c)   The director of parks and recreation may adopt rules pursuant to HRS
Chapter 91 for the implementation, administration, and enforcement of this
section.
(Added by Ord. 22-22 )
ARTICLE 2: EXCAVATION AND REPAIRS OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Sections
   
14-2.1   Permit required—Application—Insurance—Bond—Permit fee
   
14-2.2   Notice of commencement, prosecution of work, and inspection
   
14-2.3   Trench excavation, backfill, and pavement restoration
   
14-2.4   Repairs by city
   
14-2.5   Charges to be levied for work done by the city for the board of water
supply—Disposition
   
14-2.6   Indemnification of city
   
14-2.7   Violation—Penalty
§ 14-2.1 Permit required—Application—Insurance—Bond—Permit fee.
(a)   No person, including city officials and employees, shall, in any manner
or for any purpose, break up, dig up, disturb, undermine, or dig under, any
public highway, street, thoroughfare, alley, or sidewalk or any other public
place, or cause the same to be done without having first obtained a permit
therefor from the chief engineer; provided that work to accomplish emergency
repairs to utilities may be started without a permit. When such emergency work
is performed, the chief engineer or the chief engineer’s authorized
representative shall be notified of the location and type of the emergency not
later than the first work day following the emergency. A written permit
covering the emergency work shall be obtained from the chief engineer not later
than 10 working days following the emergency. The city road division shall not
be required to obtain a permit for routine street maintenance, repair, or
resurfacing; provided that such work does not require excavating below the sub-
base course. City departments shall not be required to obtain a permit for
excavating single holes at any one location in sidewalk area for installation
of pipe supported signs, markers, meters, or planting of trees.
(b)   Any person desiring the permit required under this section shall make
application therefor to the chief engineer on a form prescribed by the chief
engineer. As a condition precedent to the issuance of any such permit, the
chief engineer shall require:
(1)   The securing of insurance naming the city as an additional assured, to
protect it against any and all claims or action for injury and death to person
or property damages due to any act or omission of the holder of the permit
arising out of any work done under the permit, the insurance to be in the
amount of $100,000 for property damages per occurrence and in an amount not
less than $500,000 for bodily injury or death. A public utility company
performing work for installation of service connections, for the location of
troubles in pipes or conduits, or for making repairs thereto may furnish a
certificate of insurance listing the limits of liability that shall equal or
exceed the amounts specified above for each and every service connection,
trouble location, or repair work accomplished by the company’s own forces
during the term of the policy and certifying that the insurance company will
not cancel or materially alter the coverage without giving the city 15 days
advance notice; and
(2)   When the work of restoration is not performed by the city, a bond shall
be required in favor of the city, extending for a period not to exceed one year
after approval of any restored pavement, sidewalk, or other public improvement,
to ensure the proper restoration thereof. The amount of the bond shall be not
less than $1,000 or the estimated cost of the excavation and restoration work,
whichever is higher. Utility companies shall be responsible for work and
repairs in existing public streets performed by its employees, contractors, or
subcontractors. In lieu of furnishing a separate bond for each permit, a
utility company may furnish written guarantee to the city that the company will
be responsible for the restoration work for a period not to exceed one year
after satisfactory completion of the restoration work.
(c)   Before issuing a permit, the chief engineer shall:
(1)   Require the presentation of a plan, drawn to scale, showing the location
of each proposed excavation and the dimensions thereof, including the surface
area of the opening in paving, sidewalk, and other structures, the nature,
size, length, and purpose of the structure to be installed therein, and such
other details and information as the chief engineer may require to be shown
upon the plan. In lieu of the plan, a single line sketch, drawn to scale, may
be submitted to show the location of each excavation for a service connection,
for location of trouble or for repair to utilities;
(2)   Obtain clearance from city departments having underground installations
and from the various utility companies before issuance of the permit; and
(3)   Collect a permit fee based on the schedule below. The permit fee shall
not be refundable even if the applicant, after issuance of the permit, decides
not to proceed with the construction.
      (A)
 
Work                                                               Permit Fee
Service connection                                                 $50
Repairs to utilities                                               $50
Trench for installation of pipelines, underground cables, etc. for
the first 20 lineal feet, plus $10 for each additional 10 lineal   $195
feet or any fraction thereof
 
(B)   When the work is performed by or on behalf of the city, the permit fee
will be waived.
All permit fees shall be deposited in the highway fund.
(d)   Each permit shall be deemed to include the provision that all surplus
excavated material, if desired by the chief engineer, shall be carted or hauled
to and deposited upon such place as may be directed by the chief engineer at
the expense of the permittee. The maximum distance such material is to be
hauled shall not exceed the distance between the job site and the nearest city
and county corporation yard.
(e)   Every trenching permit shall expire and become void one year after the
date of issuance of the permit. Upon expiration of a permit, no work shall be
commenced unless a new permit is first obtained. Permit fee for a new permit
shall be the fee as specified above.
(f)   The permittee shall also obtain a permit from the city department of
transportation services before any work on any portion of a public street may
begin.
(g)   Failure to obtain any permit or the violation of this section shall be
deemed a misdemeanor.
(Sec. 20-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 17, § 14-17.1)
(Am. Ords. 92-122, 03-12, 14-4, 17-28)
§ 14-2.2 Notice of commencement, prosecution of work, and inspection.
(a)   Notice of commencement of work. At least three working days before the
work is started, the permittee or the permittee’s representative shall give
notice of the time of commencement of the work to the chief engineer or the
chief engineer’s representative.
(b)   Prosecution of work. After the work has begun, it shall be diligently and
continuously prosecuted until completed. All work shall be completed within the
time specified in the permit, unless an extension of time for good cause shown
is granted by the chief engineer.
(c)   Inspection. All work authorized under
Articles 2 through
7 of this chapter shall be subject to inspection by the chief engineer or the
chief engineer’s authorized representative.
(Sec. 20-1.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 17, § 14-17.2)
§ 14-2.3 Trench excavation, backfill, and pavement restoration.
(a)   Trench excavation and backfill shall be accomplished in accordance with
the applicable provisions contained in the Standard Specifications for Public
Works Construction dated September 1986 and Standard Details for Public Works
Construction, dated September 1984, as amended, of the department of public
works, City and County of Honolulu.
(b)   The permittee shall provide, in connection with the work covered by the
permit, all necessary traffic control devices, which shall conform to the
requirements of the “Rules and Regulations Governing the Use of Traffic Control
Devices at Work Sites or Adjacent to Public Streets and Public Highways” of the
State highway safety coordinator. The permittee shall be responsible for all
damages of every kind or nature suffered because of the work done by the
permittee.
(c)   In dewatering trenches, the discharge shall not be drained directly onto
the street or gutter. In urban areas and areas where a storm sewer system has
been installed, the discharge shall be drained to the nearest storm sewer by
the use of pipes or other suitable means acceptable to the chief engineer. If
necessary, the discharge shall be processed, filtered, ponded, or otherwise
treated to comply with the applicable provisions of Hawaii Administrative
Rules, Chapter 11-54, “Water Quality Standards” and Chapter 11-55, “Water
Pollution Control” and any other applicable federal, State, and city ordinances
and regulations concerning water pollution before its release into waterways or
city storm sewer systems. No work shall commence unless a construction
dewatering permit is first obtained from the chief engineer. The permittee is
also required to obtain a NPDES permit for the discharge of any pollutant into
State waters through the city-owned storm sewer system from the State
department of health. The city shall receive a copy of the NPDES permit and all
analysis of the discharge required under the NPDES permit whenever the city-
owned storm sewer system is used for the dewatering operation. Whenever the
discharge is released directly into waterways not owned by the city, only a
NPDES permit is required.
(d)   Concrete envelope or jacket for pipes or duct lines shall be not more
than 6 inches wider than the width of the concrete envelope or jacket shown on
the plan or drawings submitted by the applicant for a trenching permit.
Whenever this tolerance is exceeded, the sides of the concrete envelope or
jacket shall be formed to maintain the dimensions shown on the plan or
drawings.
(e)   The permit holder shall, upon completion of the backfilling and
compaction of any excavation and after inspection and approval by the chief
engineer, immediately commence the necessary work to restore the foundation and
surface, including any public structure appurtenant thereto, to its original or
equally good condition. The chief engineer may require compaction tests be
performed to assure that the backfill has been compacted to the required
density. Backfill not conforming to the specified degree of compaction shall be
recompacted or removed and replaced with suitable material. Restoration shall
be accomplished in accordance with the applicable provisions contained in the
Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction dated September 1986 and
Standard Details for Public Works Construction dated September 1984, as
amended, of the department of public works, City and County of Honolulu.
Pavement restoration over the trench excavation shall be similar to that
existing before the excavation, i.e., concrete base course shall be replaced
with concrete of the same thickness.
(f)   When trenching in concrete sidewalks or concrete pavement the concrete to
be removed shall first be cut with a saw to a depth of not less than one-fourth
the depth of the slab. The concrete shall be cut so as to leave a 6-inch wide
undisturbed surface between the cut and the side of the trench. When any
portion of a sidewalk block measuring 4 feet or less in dimension is cut,
trenched, or damaged during construction, the entire block shall be removed and
replaced. A sidewalk block greater than 4 feet in dimension that is cut,
trenched, or damaged shall be removed and replaced in such a manner that the
replaced and remaining strip or block shall be not less than 4 feet wide. The
replaced sidewalk block shall be scored, finished, and colored to match the
finish and color of the adjacent blocks.
(g)   All agencies having construction performed under a trenching permit shall
submit as-built drawings to the chief engineer showing the actual construction
performed.
(Sec. 20-1.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 17, § 14-17.3)
(Am. Ord. 92-122)
§ 14-2.4 Repairs by city.
   In the case of any excavation that has not been backfilled or restored in
accordance with this article, or in the case where the excavation poses hazards
or nuisances, the chief engineer shall make or cause to be made, the necessary
repairs and the expenses thereof shall be charged to and collected from the
permit holder or any surety where a bond has been required, or the person
responsible for the excavation if no permit has been obtained. Such repairs
shall include but not be limited to the restoration of the foundation and
surface, reexcavation and backfilling of excavations, repairs to any public
structure and replacement of any public structure not properly restored.
(Sec. 20-1.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 17, § 14-17.4)
(Am. Ord. 92-122)
§ 14-2.5 Charges to be levied for work done by the city for the board of water
supply—Disposition.
(a)   For any work done by the city for the board of water supply under the
permit required by this article, charges for restoring the foundation and
surface to its original or equally good condition shall be made by the city
against the board of water supply.
(b)   Charges for the patching of any trench shall be at the following rates.
These rates shall be escalated on a fiscal year basis by the representative
consumer price index factor for the year preceding.
 
Asphalt concrete               $ 4.05 per square foot
Concrete                       $19.54 per square foot
Asphaltic concrete on concrete $22.05 per square foot
 
(c)   All moneys collected from charges herein levied shall be deposited into
the highway fund and made available for purposes of the highway fund.
(Sec. 20-1.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 17, § 14-17.5)
(Am. Ord. 92-122)
§ 14-2.6 Indemnification of city.
(a)   The holder of a permit shall indemnify and save harmless the city, the
officers, and agents thereof from all claims, demands, suits, actions, or
proceedings of every name, character, and description that may be brought
against the city for or on account of any injuries or damages to any person or
property received or sustained by any person as a consequence of any act or
acts of the holder of permit on work done under the permit.
(b)   The city, while making repairs, shall use every precaution required of
the holder of permit as to barricades, lights, and watchpersons for the safety
of the public, but such action shall not relieve the holder of the permit from
responsibility for accidents, should any occur.
(Sec. 20-1.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 17, § 14-17.6)
§ 14-2.7 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not
exceeding three months, or by both for each separate offense. Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, any person upon
conviction shall be liable for the total cost of any restoration of the
foundation and surface, reexcavation, and backfilling of excavations, repairs
to any public structure, and replacement of any public structure not properly
restored.
(Sec. 20-1.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 17, § 14-17.7)
(Am. Ord. 92-122)
ARTICLE 3: REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS,
CURBS, OR DRIVEWAYS WITHIN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC STREETS
Sections
   
14-3.1   Short title and purpose
   
14-3.2   Definitions
   
14-3.3   Sidewalks, curbs, and driveways to conform to grade, standards, and
specifications
   
14-3.4   Permit required
   
14-3.5   Notice of reconstruction or repair of sidewalks, curbs, or driveways
   
14-3.6   Notice to owner
   
14-3.7   Failure to reconstruct or repair sidewalks, curbs, or driveways
   
14-3.8   Standards and specifications for sidewalks
   
14-3.9   Standard details and specifications for curbs
   
14-3.10   Standards and specifications for driveways
   
14-3.11   Standards and specifications for wheelchair ramps
   
14-3.12   Ramp in gutter prohibited
   
14-3.13   Conversion of abandoned driveway to sidewalk
   
14-3.14   Inspection and approval
   
14-3.15   Violation—Penalty
§ 14-3.1 Short title and purpose.
(a)   Short title. This article shall be known as the “sidewalk code,” may be
cited as such, and is referred to herein as “this code.”
(b)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to regulate, control, and provide
uniformity in the construction, reconstruction, installation, improvement, and
repairing of sidewalks, curbs, and driveways.
(Sec. 20-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.1)
§ 14-3.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Abandoned Driveway. A driveway no longer used for egress and ingress purposes
by motor vehicles.
Asphalt Concrete Walkway. A temporary walkway along a street constructed of
asphalt concrete and intended for use by pedestrians.
Chief Engineer. The director and chief engineer of the department of public
works or such person’s duly authorized representative.
Curb. The raised border of concrete, asphaltic concrete, or stone along the
edge of the pavement of a street.
Director. The director of planning and permitting of the city or the director’s
duly authorized representative.
Driveway. A facility constructed between the pavement of a roadway and any
abutting property, which is used by motor vehicles for egress or ingress to the
property.
Owner. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity
holding title to any property adjoining any street in the city and county or
any lessee thereof holding under a recorded lease.
Sidewalk. That portion of a street between a curb line or the pavement of a
roadway, and the adjacent property line intended for use by pedestrians,
including any street setback area acquired by the city for road widening
purposes.
Street. A public highway, as defined in HRS § 264-1, unless otherwise
specified.
Wheelchair Ramp. A facility constructed between the curb and concrete sidewalk
to provide access from the street to the sidewalk for wheelchairs.
(Sec. 20-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 18,
§ 14-18.2)
§ 14-3.3 Sidewalks, curbs, and driveways to conform to grade, standards, and
specifications.
   All sidewalks, curbs, and driveways shall be constructed according to
standards and specifications as herein provided and shall conform to
established grades.
(Sec. 20-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.3)
§ 14-3.4 Permit required.
   A permit and the payment of fees are required under
Chapter 18 to perform work under this article.
(Sec. 20-2.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.4)
§ 14-3.5 Notice of reconstruction or repair of sidewalks, curbs, or driveways.
   Whenever the director finds that any sidewalk, curb, or driveway is in need
of reconstruction or repair in the interest of public safety or welfare, and
such need is caused by action or actions attributable to the owner of land
abutting such sidewalk, curb, or driveway, the director is authorized to give
notice thereof to such owner and to require such owner to reconstruct or repair
the sidewalk, curb, or driveway.
(Sec. 20-2.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.5)
§ 14-3.6 Notice to owner.
(a)   The notices specified in §
14-3.5 shall be given by the director either by publication thereof in a daily
newspaper of general circulation in the city once in each of three consecutive
weeks, or by mailing a copy of such notice by certified mail to the owner.
(b)   Publication and notice by mail. When the director has doubt that the
owner received the notice by mail, such notice shall also be given by
publication.
(c)   Contents of notice. The notice shall set forth the nature of the
reconstruction or repair to be made, the location thereof, and a specific
direction to such owner to reconstruct or repair such sidewalk, curb, or
driveway.
(Sec. 20-2.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.6)
§ 14-3.7 Failure to reconstruct or repair sidewalks, curbs, or driveways.
(a)   Time limit. If after the expiration of 60 days after the date of
publication or after the receipt of the notice thereof, an owner fails to
reconstruct or repair the sidewalk, curb, or driveway, the director shall issue
a work order to the chief engineer to reconstruct or repair the sidewalk, curb,
or driveway as provided in subsection (b).
If both written notice and publication is given to an owner, the expiration of
the 60 days shall be based on whichever form of notice was last given.
(b)   Reconstruction or repair of sidewalks, curbs, or driveways by city. The
chief engineer is authorized and empowered to pay for the reconstruction or
repair of sidewalks, curbs, or driveways out of city funds or to have the work
done by city employees.
(c)   Charge to owner. When the city has reconstructed or repaired the
sidewalk, curb, or driveway or has paid for such work, the cost thereof,
including overhead costs, plus accrued interest at the rate of 7 percent per
year shall be charged to the owner of such property and the owner shall be
billed therefor by mail. The bill shall apprise the owner that failure to pay
the bill will result in a lien. Interest at the rate of 7 percent per year
shall accrue from the 31st calendar day after the bill has been mailed to the
owner for payment if the same has not been paid prior thereto.
(d)   Statement of chief engineer. Where the full amount due the city is not
paid by such owner within 30 calendar days after the bill has been mailed for
payment, the chief engineer shall cause to be recorded with the city director
of budget and fiscal services a statement showing the cost and expense incurred
for the work, the date the work was done and the location of the property on
which the work was done and file the same with the director of budget and
fiscal services who shall refer the collection thereof to the corporation
counsel.
(e)   Mechanic’s and materialman’s lien procedure. Any work done by the city
under this section is deemed to be done pursuant to quasi-contract or
constructive contract between the city and the owner. Based on the foregoing
contractual relationship, if the owner fails to pay the amount duly noted on
the statement filed by the chief engineer, the corporation counsel may proceed
to file a mechanic’s and materialman’s lien pursuant to HRS Chapter 507, Part
II, or any other appropriate lien procedures.
(Sec. 20-2.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.7)
§ 14-3.8 Standards and specifications for sidewalks.
(a)   Generally. All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the
Standard Details, department of public works, City and County of Honolulu,
dated September, 1984, as amended, and with the applicable sections of the
Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, department of public
works, City and County of Honolulu, dated September, 1986, as amended.
(b)   Exceptions.
(1)   Winding sidewalks. Any and all sidewalks shall be constructed adjacent to
the property lines; provided that the chief engineer may authorize winding
sidewalks; and provided further, that such sidewalks shall not cause additional
hazards to the public as the chief engineer may determine.
(2)   Other surface encroachments. The chief engineer may also authorize the
placement of walls, fences, benches, and other surface encroachments in the
sidewalk area; provided that application for such encroachments are made in
writing to the chief engineer, and provided further, that such encroachments do
not unduly interfere with the public use of such space for utilities and
pedestrian traffic. Such encroachments shall be removed at the owner’s expense
upon notification by the director when recommended by the chief engineer that
the space is needed for public use.
(3)   Notice. The director upon such recommendation by the chief engineer shall
issue a notice in writing to the owner directing the owner to remove the
encroachments or improvements. The work shall be done within such reasonable
time limit as shall be stated in such notice that in no case shall be less than
20 days nor more than 60 days. The notice may be given by personal service or
by mailing a copy of such notice by certified mail to the owner.
(4)   Failure to remove encroachments. Upon failure of the owner to comply with
such notice within the time mentioned therein, the director shall cause such
encroachments to be removed. The costs thereby incurred by the city shall be
billed to such owner and shall, if not paid to the city by such owner within 30
days after such billing date, become a lien upon the property abutting such
encroachments.
(5)   Whenever the chief engineer finds that in the interest of public safety
or welfare an asphalt concrete walkway is necessary for pedestrians, the chief
engineer is authorized to construct such a walkway.
(c)   Filing fee. A fee of $200 shall be required for each application
submitted under subsection (b)(2) dealing with other surface encroachments. All
application fees collected shall not be refundable and shall be deposited into
the highway fund.
(Sec. 20-2.8, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 18,
§ 14-18.8) (Am. Ords. 03-12, 14-4)
§ 14-3.9 Standard details and specifications for curbs.
   All curbs shall be constructed in accordance with the Standard Details,
department of public works, City and County of Honolulu, dated September, 1984,
as amended, and with the applicable sections of the Standard Specifications for
Public Works Construction, department of public works, City and County of
Honolulu, dated September, 1986, as amended.
(Sec. 20-2.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.9)
§ 14-3.10 Standards and specifications for driveways.
(a)   Standards—where found. All driveways shall be constructed in accordance
with the applicable standard driveway apron and layout details of the Standard
Details, department of public works, City and County of Honolulu, dated
September, 1984, as amended, and with the applicable sections of the Standard
Specifications for Public Works Construction, department of public works, City
and County of Honolulu, dated September, 1986, as amended.
(b)   Nonstandard driveway. The chief engineer may authorize the construction
of driveways that do not conform to the foregoing standards where topographic
or traffic conditions warrant a variance from the standards.
(c)   Nonconforming driveway. Whenever a driveway is constructed in a location
where the existing driveways are finished in conformance to standards adopted
before approval of this section, the chief engineer may authorize the
constructed driveway to be finished and scored to match the finish and scoring
of the adjacent driveways.
(d)   Designation. The chief engineer is further authorized to designate the
location of a driveway in an area zoned for business, industrial, or hotel-
apartment use.
(e)   Exemption. When an existing driveway having width or location that does
not conform to the width or location prescribed in the standard driveway layout
is constructed, such driveway may be constructed to its existing width and
location and shall be exempted from the width and location provisions in the
standard driveway layout, provided that such driveway shall be constructed to
conform to the standard driveway apron details.
(f)   Filing fee. A fee of $200 shall be required for each variance application
or request covered under subsections (b) and (c) above. All application fees
collected shall not be refundable and shall be deposited into the highway fund.
(Sec. 20-2.10, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.10)
(Am. Ords. 03-12, 14-4)
§ 14-3.11 Standards and specifications for wheelchair ramps.
   Wheelchair ramps shall be constructed only at locations approved by the
chief engineer and in accordance with the applicable standards in the Standard
Details, department of public works, City and County of Honolulu, dated
September, 1984, as amended, and with the applicable sections of the Standard
Specifications for Public Works Construction, department of public works, City
and County of Honolulu, dated September, 1986, as amended.
(Sec. 20-2.11, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.11)
§ 14-3.12 Ramp in gutter prohibited.
   The construction of a ramp in the gutter to permit vehicles to drive over
the curb is prohibited.
(Sec. 20-2.12, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.12)
§ 14-3.13 Conversion of abandoned driveway to sidewalk.
(a)   Conversion. The director may require the owner to convert an abandoned
driveway to a sidewalk.
(b)   Work to be done by city. If the owner fails to close such abandoned
driveway and to convert it to a sidewalk, the director shall cause the city to
perform the necessary work.
(c)   Notice. Before commencement of any work, the director shall notify the
owner that if such owner fails to obtain a permit to convert the abandoned
driveway to a sidewalk within 20 days from the date of such notice or having
obtained a permit, fails to convert such driveway to a sidewalk before the
expiration of such permit, the city shall perform the necessary work and shall
charge the costs thereof, including the amount of the permit fee required by §
14-3.4, to the owner.
(d)   Lien. All costs shall be billed to such owner and shall, if not paid to
the city by such owner within 30 days after such billing date, become a lien
upon the subject property.
(Sec. 20-2.13, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.13)
§ 14-3.14 Inspection and approval.
(a)   Notice to city. The permittee shall notify the director, at least 24
hours before the permittee, the permittee’s agent, contractor, or subcontractor
begins any work. All work authorized under the permit, including formwork and
placement of reinforcement, shall be subject to inspection by the director.
(b)   Illegal sidewalk construction. Any sidewalk, curb, or driveway
constructed without a permit or without prior notification as provided under
subsection (a) shall be deemed a violation of this article. If the director
finds that a sidewalk, curb, or driveway does not conform to the requirements
prescribed in this article, the director may require that the sidewalk, curb,
or driveway be removed and reconstructed, and if the owner fails to remove and
reconstruct as required, the city shall cause the sidewalk, curb, or driveway
to be reconstructed and all costs thereby incurred by the city shall be billed
to such owner and shall, if not paid to the city by such owner within 30 days
after such billing date, become a lien upon the subject property.
(Sec. 20-2.14, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.14)
§ 14-3.15 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100. The
continuance of any such violation after conviction shall be deemed a new
offense for each day of such continuance.
(Sec. 20-2.15, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.15)
ARTICLE 4: PUBLIC UTILITY RESERVED AREAS
Sections
   
14-4.1   Area abutting street reserved for utilities
   
14-4.2   Reserved area at intersections—Construction of driveways over same
prohibited
§ 14-4.1 Area abutting street reserved for utilities.
   Whenever street and curb lines are established within the city, the area of
2.5 feet immediately back of the face of the curb on both sides of the street
shall be reserved for public utility pole lines and unconduited utility cables;
provided that nothing shall prohibit the public utilities, the facility
maintenance, the department of environmental services, or the board of water
supply from constructing gas lines, conduits, or water and sewer lines across
the strip, or the construction of catch basins and sewer manholes within such
reserve, or the construction by the owner of the property abutting thereon of a
driveway or driveways across the reserved strip; provided further, that
installation of necessary cables and lines on the public utility poles and
underground conduits for transmission of television signals may be allowed
within the reserved area upon the terms and conditions set forth in a written
approval from the city and the joint pole committee representing the public
utility companies.
(Sec. 20-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 19, § 14-19.1)
(Am. Ord. 93-32)
§ 14-4.2 Reserved area at intersections—Construction of driveways over same
prohibited.
   An area 2.5 feet wide as described in §
14-4.1, commencing at a location on the curb line tangent 15 feet before
reaching the point of curb of the curb line and running thence along the curb
line tangent to the point of curve of same and thence along the curb curve
around to the curb line of the adjacent side of the intersecting street and
ending 15 feet beyond the point of tangency, of the curb curve with the curb
line, shall be reserved for the use of public utility poles and unconduited
cables at intersecting streets. No driveway shall be constructed within this
area notwithstanding the provisions of §
14-4.1, except as provided in §
14-3.10; provided that installation of necessary cables and lines on the public
utility poles and underground conduits for transmission of television signals
may be allowed within the reserved area upon the terms and conditions set forth
in a written approval from the city and the joint pole committee representing
the public utility companies.
(Sec. 20-3.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 19, § 14-19.2)
ARTICLE 5: CLEANING AND MAINTAINING SIDEWALKS
Sections
   
14-5.1   Cleaning of sidewalks
   
14-5.2   Procedure on owner failing to clean
   
14-5.3   Notice to property owners
§ 14-5.1 Cleaning of sidewalks.
(a)   Every property owner whose land abuts or adjoins a public street shall
continually maintain, and keep clean, passable and free from weeds and noxious
growths, the sidewalk and gutter area that abuts or adjoins the property
owner’s property; provided that this requirement shall not apply where
maintenance of an abutting sidewalk and gutter may be hazardous to the owner,
or where a sidewalk and gutter, although abutting the owner’s residential
property, are so situated that there is no reasonable access from the property
to the sidewalk and gutter.
(b)   The term “sidewalk” has the same meaning as that portion of a street
between a curb line or the pavement of a roadway, and the adjacent property
line intended for the use of pedestrians, including any setback area acquired
by the city for road widening purposes. The term “gutter” has the same meaning
as that paved portion of a roadway immediately adjacent to the curb or that
portion of a roadway in concrete and 12 to 14 inches wide immediately adjacent
to the curb.
(Sec. 20-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 20, § 14-20.1)
§ 14-5.2 Procedure on owner failing to clean.
   If any such owner or such owner’s agent, which shall include but not be
limited to a lessee, tenant, property manager, or trustee, after receiving
notice from the city, fails, within 20 days after such notice, to clean such
sidewalk, or fails and neglects to keep such sidewalk clean and free from weeds
and noxious growths, then and thereupon, the city may proceed to clean such
sidewalk, as may be reasonably required, and the cost thereof shall be charged
to and against such property owner and shall be collected from such property
owner or the property owner’s agent, if not immediately paid, by action in the
district court.
(Sec. 20-4.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 20, § 14-20.2)
§ 14-5.3 Notice to property owners.
   The notice specified in §
14-5.2 shall be sent to such property owner by mailing it to the property
owner’s last known address in the State of Hawaii, or to the property owner’s
agent at the property owner’s agent’s last known address.
(Sec. 20-4.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 20, § 14-20.3)
ARTICLE 6: CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS BY CERTAIN PROPERTY OWNERS
Sections
   
14-6.1   Construction of improvements required
   
14-6.2   Types of improvements
   
14-6.3   Allocation of costs
   
14-6.4   Failure to construct improvements
   
14-6.5   Exceptions
   
14-6.6   Assessments
   
14-6.7   Deferment of improvements
   
14-6.8   Definitions
§ 14-6.1 Construction of improvements required.
(a)   The owner of real property abutting any public street who or whose lessee
with the approval in writing of the owner, is issued a building permit to
construct or reconstruct a building on such property, where such property is
situated in an area zoned for any use other than residential or agricultural
uses, shall upon the granting of such building permit construct the necessary
improvements and dedicate any general plan or development plan street setback
area along the street abutting the property, pursuant to the requirements of
this article. Such construction of improvements and dedication of any general
plan or development plan street setback area shall be substantially completed
before the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. No temporary certificate
of occupancy shall be issued before the beginning of such construction of
improvements.
If such building permit should be issued to a lessee, the obligation to
construct the improvements shall be on both owner and lessee, but, unless
otherwise agreed between owner and lessee, the obligation shall be primarily
that of the lessee and, if the lessee should fail to meet the same and the
obligation be met by the owner or by enforcement of the lien hereinafter
provided against the property, the owner shall be entitled to recover from the
lessee such expenses and damages as may be incurred or suffered by such owner
in consequence of the default of the lessee.
(b)   The owner of real property abutting any public street where such property
is granted a zoning change from its present use classification to any use
classification other than residential or agricultural uses, shall upon the
granting of such zoning change, dedicate any general plan or development plan
street setback area pursuant to the requirements of this article; provided that
this provision shall only apply to a zoning change initiated by the owner.
(Sec. 20-5.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 21,
§ 14-21.1)
§ 14-6.2 Types of improvements.
(a)   The improvements to be constructed under this article shall include all
sidewalks, curbs, gutters, pavement, adjustments at the property line, and
adjustment or relocation of drainage, water, street lighting, sewer, and other
public utility lines on such owner or lessee’s side of the centerline of the
street. Such improvements shall be in conformity with the general plan and
development plans of the city, and the installation thereof shall be in
compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter and the standards
and specifications of the city; provided that no improvement shall be
constructed unless the plans and specifications therefor have been first
approved by the director of planning and permitting or the chief engineer.
(b)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, no improvement shall be
constructed in or along State highways without the prior approval of the
director of the State department of transportation.
(Sec. 20-5.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 21, § 14-21.2)
(Am. Ord. 93-32)
§ 14-6.3 Allocation of costs.
   The property owner or lessee shall bear the entire cost of the improvements
and dedicate any general plan or development plan street setback area; provided
that any area dedicated under this provision may be included for computing
density at any time for that parcel; and provided further, that the cost of
relocating the utility lines shall be borne by the respective privately owned
utilities.
(Sec. 20-5.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 21, § 14-21.3)
(Am. Ord. 91-25)
§ 14-6.4 Failure to construct improvements.
   If any owner or lessee neglects or refuses to begin the construction of the
improvements within one year after the granting of a building permit as in this
article provided, the director or the chief engineer is authorized to cause
such improvements to be constructed. The costs thereby incurred by the city
shall be a lien upon the property abutting such improvements from the date of
certification by the director or chief engineer of completion of such
construction, and the same shall be collected from the owner of such property
in the name of the city.
(Sec. 20-5.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 21, § 14-21.4)
(Am. Ord. 93-32)
§ 14-6.5 Exceptions.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the requirements of this article
shall not be applicable:
(1)   Where the property in question is situated in an agricultural district
established by the State land use commission but a use other than agricultural
is permitted under a special use permit granted by the zoning board of appeals
and approved by the State land use commission;
(2)   If the property in question is part of a subdivision tract in an
industrial or noxious industrial district where all lots in the tract are 1
acre or more in area and the land and building on all of the lots are in fact
used for industrial or noxious industrial uses, as distinguished from business,
semi-industrial, or limited industrial uses;
(3)   If the general plan or development plans show deletion of the street on
which the property in question abuts;
(4)   If, in the judgment of the chief engineer with respect to city-owned
highways or of the director of the department of transportation with respect to
State-owned highways, the construction of improvements that are required by
this article would create, rather than alleviate, drainage, or traffic
problems;
(5)   In the case where improvements are to be installed in or along city-owned
highways, if curb grades have not been established by the city or are not
readily ascertainable by the chief engineer;
(6)   In the case where improvements are to be installed in or along State-
owned highways, if curb grades are not readily ascertainable by the director of
the State department of transportation;
(7)   In the case of the granting of a building permit for the installation of
signs, demolition work, fencing, or building alterations with a cumulative cost
of $100,000 or less, over a 12-month period, and where the alterations do not
increase the floor area of the existing building; or
(8)   In the case of the granting of a building permit for building alteration
when the affected property abuts a street proposed to be improved under an
improvement district as set forth in the city’s six-year capital improvement
program.
(Sec. 20-5.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 21,
§ 14-21.5) (Am. Ord. 91-25)
§ 14-6.6 Assessments.
   The construction of improvements pursuant to this article shall not affect
assessments made pursuant to
Articles 2 through
7 of this chapter, except that, where sidewalks or curbs have been installed,
appropriate credit therefor shall be given in the computation of the assessment
against the land affected.
(Sec. 20-5.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 21, § 14-21.6)
§ 14-6.7 Deferment of improvements.
(a)   If, in the determination of the director or chief engineer, it would be
in the best interests of the city to defer the construction of improvements and
dedication of general plan and development plan street setback areas specified
in §
14-6.1, based upon the timing of improvements by adjacent property owners or
lessees, then the director or chief engineer shall have the authority to enter
into an agreement with the property owners/lessees deferring such construction
and dedication for a period not to exceed 20 years from the date of execution
of the agreement. Nothing herein shall prohibit the director or chief engineer
from requiring the property owners/lessees to commence construction of the
required improvements at an earlier date upon reasonable notice. The executed
agreement shall be duly recorded at the bureau of conveyances of the State of
Hawaii, and shall be binding on all owners/lessees and their transferees and
assignees.
(b)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, a certificate of occupancy
may be issued in cases where an agreement to defer has been executed between
the city and property owners/lessees.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 21, § 14-21.7) (Added by Ord. 91-25; Am. Ord. 93-32)
§ 14-6.8 Definitions.
   For the purposes of
Articles 6 through
16, the following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
Chief Engineer. The director and chief engineer of facility maintenance or the
chief engineer’s authorized representative.
Director. The director of the department of environmental services or the
director’s authorized representative; except that in Articles
8 through
15, “director” means the director of design and construction or the director of
planning and permitting, as appropriate.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 21, § 14-21.8) (Added by Ord. 93-32; Am. Ord. 00-06)
ARTICLE 7: PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES
Sections
   
14-7.1   Placement of facilities underground
   
14-7.2   Connection by property owners to underground public utility facilities
   
14-7.3   Violation—Penalty
   
14-7.4   Connection by city to underground public utility facilities
   
14-7.5   Allocation of costs for underground public utility facilities in
special design districts
§ 14-7.1 Placement of facilities underground.
   The public utilities companies shall place their utility lines and related
facilities underground whenever the following streets are improved pursuant to
Articles 2 through
7 of this chapter: King Street, Beretania Street, Kapiolani Boulevard, Kalakaua
Avenue, Ward Avenue, and Keeaumoku Street.
(Sec. 20-6.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 22, § 14-22.1)
§ 14-7.2 Connection by property owners to underground public utility
facilities.
(a)   Required. Whenever any public utility company has relocated its overhead
utility lines and related facilities underground in compliance with §
14-7.1 or any general improvement district project, any property owner or
lessee whose property abuts the street in which such underground facilities are
located, and who receives services from such public utility company by means of
the overhead utility lines to be replaced thereby, shall provide underground
lateral connection at the owner’s expense, which meets the standards of such
public utility company, upon receipt of notice as hereinafter provided.
(b)   Notice to connect. Upon completion of the relocation of utility lines and
related facilities, the chief engineer or the director of community services in
the case of urban renewal and rehabilitation projects, is authorized and
empowered to notify the owner or lessee of such abutting property to provide
lateral connection to the underground facilities at such person’s own expense.
Such notice shall be by certified mail, addressed to the owner or lessee at the
street address of such abutting property.
(c)   Form of notice. The notice shall describe the work to be done and shall
state that if the work is not commenced within 30 calendar days after notice is
given and diligently prosecuted to completion without interruption, the chief
engineer or director of community services shall provide the necessary lateral
connection and the cost thereof shall be a lien on the property.
(d)   Chief engineer or director of community services to keep record. The
chief engineer or director of community services shall cause to be kept in such
person’s office a permanent record containing:
(1)   A description of each parcel of property for which notice to connect has
been given;
(2)   The name of the owner or lessee;
(3)   The date on which such notice was mailed;
(4)   The charges incurred by the city in providing the necessary lateral
connection and all incidental expenses in connection therewith; and
(5)   A brief summary of the work performed.
Each such entry shall be made as soon as practicable after completion of such
act.
(e)   Action upon noncompliance. Upon failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner
or lessee so notified to commence work to provide the necessary lateral
connection within 30 calendar days after notice has been given as hereinbefore
provided, the chief engineer or director of community services is authorized
and empowered to pay for providing the necessary lateral connection out of city
funds or to order such work by city employees. The chief engineer or director
of community services and their authorized representatives, including any
contractor with whom they contract under this section, and assistants,
employees, or agents of such contractor, are authorized to enter upon the
property for the purpose of providing the necessary lateral connection
described in the notice. Before the chief engineer or director of community
services or their authorized representative or contractor arrives, any property
owner or lessee may provide the necessary lateral connection at such person’s
own expense.
(f)   Charges. When the city has provided the necessary lateral connection, the
owner of such property shall be billed for the cost thereof. If the bill is not
paid within 30 days after the mailing date of such bill, the owner shall be
liable for payment of penalty at the rate of 6 percent per year for each month
or fraction of a month of delinquency in payment. The chief engineer or
director of community services shall furnish the director of budget and fiscal
services details showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date
of work completion, and such other information as may be deemed necessary to
enable the director of budget and fiscal services to bill the property owner.
The director of budget and fiscal services shall be responsible for the
collection of the charges due the city.
(g)   Mechanic’s and materialman’s lien procedure. Any work done by the city
under this section is deemed to be done pursuant to quasi contract or
constructive contract between the city and the owner. Based on the foregoing
contractual relationship, if the owner fails to pay the amount duly noted on
the statement filed by the director of budget and fiscal services, the
corporation counsel may proceed to file a mechanic’s and materialman’s lien
pursuant to HRS Chapter 507, Part II, or any other appropriate lien procedures.
(Sec. 20-6.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 22, § 14-22.2)
(Am. Ord. 89-60)
§ 14-7.3 Violation—Penalty.
   Any property owner or lessee who fails to provide lateral connection within
the prescribed period shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not
exceeding $100 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or to both
such fine and imprisonment.
(Sec. 20-6.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 22, § 14-22.3)
§ 14-7.4 Connection by city to underground public utility facilities.
(a)   Whenever any public utility company has relocated its overhead utility
lines and related facilities underground in compliance with §
14-7.1 or as part of any general improvement district project, the city may, in
lieu of the procedures prescribed above, include the installation of the
underground lateral connections within private properties, as part of a general
improvement district project so as to assure the timely removal of utility
poles as may remain as hazards to traffic movement and flow in the roadway
constructed; provided that in the case of a general improvement district
project, the city shall include the installation of the lateral connection
within private property if so requested by the property owner.
(b)   When the city undertakes the installation of the lateral connection as
part of an improvement district project, the cost thereof may be added to the
property owner’s share of the cost of assessments and shall be payable in the
same manner and at the same rate of interest, in the event where the owner
elects to pay in installments, as prescribed for the payment of improvement
district assessments; provided that in the case of connections to be made on
properties owned by government, and eleemosynary institution or an entity
exempted by law from the payment of assessments, the costs thereof shall be
assumed and paid by the affected government agency, eleemosynary institution,
or other entity, subject to the method and rate of payment to be established
and determined by the director of budget and fiscal services and as may be
modified by the council after the public hearing on the project.
(c)   Whenever overhead public utilities are to be undergrounded as a part of a
city or State street improvement project, the city shall notify each owner
abutting the street to be improved that the city shall, upon the request of the
owner, install the owner’s lateral connection to the utilities to be
undergrounded and charge the owner for its cost. The notice shall be by
certified mail and shall inform each owner:
(1)   That the owner has 30 days from the mailing of the notice to inform the
city whether the owner wishes the city to install the lateral connection;
(2)   That the owner may pay the city in a lump sum or in up to 10 annual
installments plus interest; and
(3)   That if the owner does not request the city to install the lateral
connection, nothing shall prevent the owner from doing so at the owner’s
expense before the completion of the undergrounding by the public utilities.
(d)   If the owner timely requests the city to install the lateral connection:
(1)   The city shall make every effort to install the connections before the
street improvements are completed, so as to avoid the cost of tearing up or
removing those improvements when installing the lateral connections; and
(2)   The city shall charge the owners for their respective share of the costs
of the installation; provided that nothing herein shall prevent the city or the
State from providing financial assistance to fund all or a portion of the cost
of the lateral connections.
(e)   If the owner has not requested the city to install the lateral
connection, and the owner has not installed the connection as provided for in
subsection (c)(3), the city shall install the lateral connection in accordance
with §
14-7.2(e).
(f)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall notify each owner of the
respective amount that the owner shall pay the city for the cost of the lateral
connection. The notice shall be sent by certified mail, with a request for a
return receipt, addressed to each owner at the address of the owner’s property
that abuts the street improvement guide.
(g)   The owner shall pay the amount charged against the owner within 30 days
after the notice is sent; provided that at the election of the owner, the
amount may be paid in up to 10 annual installments plus interest. Failure to
pay the whole of any cost charged to the owner within the 30-day period above
shall be conclusively considered and held an election on the part of the owner
to pay in installments.
(h)   If an owner has not paid for an installment or interest, or both, after
due notice, the owner shall be penalized as provided in §
14-7.2(f). The chief engineer or the director of community services in the case
of urban renewal and rehabilitation projects, shall provide the director of
budget and fiscal services with the same information described in §
14-7.2(f), and the latter shall be responsible for collecting the charges due
the city under this section.
(i)   The installation of any lateral connection by the city on behalf of an
owner shall be done pursuant to a quasi-contract or constructive contract
between the city and the owner. Based on this contractual relationship, the
city shall have all of the remedies set forth in §
14-7.2(g) if the owner fails to pay the amount duly noted on the statement
filed by the director of budget and fiscal services.
(j)   The chief engineer, or the director of community services, in the case of
urban renewal or rehabilitation projects, may pay for the installation of the
lateral connection out of city funds or may finance the work through the
issuance of bonds.
(k)   The chief engineer, or the director of community services, in the case of
urban renewal or rehabilitation projects, shall keep a permanent record of that
information listed in §
14-7.2(d).
(l)   For the purpose of subsections (c) through (k), “owner” means any person
who, as an owner or lessee, resides on property that abuts a street improvement
or improvement district project; provided that the fee owner of the property
shall approve the lessee’s request to the city that it install the lateral
connection over the fee owner’s property.
(Sec. 20-6.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 22, § 14-22.4)
(Am. Ord. 89-60)
§ 14-7.5 Allocation of costs for underground public utility facilities in
special design districts.
(a)   In areas where the utility companies elect to place their wires
underground because of engineering and economic considerations and operating
problems, the costs shall be allocated as follows:
(1)   All costs of the underground utility facilities within the public right-
of-way shall be borne by the respective utility company;
(2)   No cost shall be borne by the city; and
(3)   The cost of necessary changes on private property shall be borne by the
respective property owners.
(b)   In areas other than as provided in §
14-7.5(a) of this article, the costs shall be allocated as follows:
(1)   The costs of construction of an overhead system in the removal,
relocation, replacement, or reconstruction of the existing overhead utility
facilities within the public right-of-way shall be borne entirely by the
respective utility company.
(2)   The difference of the costs of construction of an underground system and
an overhead system in the removal, relocation, replacement, or reconstruction
of the existing overhead utility facilities within the public right-of-way
shall be borne equally by the city and the respective utility company.
(3)   The cost of engineering shall be included in the above allocation. Such
engineering shall be performed by, or under the direction of, the city.
(4)   The cost of necessary changes on private property shall be borne by the
respective property owners.
(c)   This section relating to allocation of costs for underground public
utility facilities in special design districts shall not apply to improvement
district projects proceeding under
Articles 8 through
15 of this chapter.
(Sec. 20-6.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 22, § 14-22.5)
ARTICLE 8: GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ASSESSMENTS
Sections
   
14-8.1   Methods
   
14-8.2   Sanitary sewer system
   
14-8.3   Parks, playgrounds, and beaches
   
14-8.4   Definitions
§ 14-8.1 Methods.
(a)   Whenever in the opinion of the council, it is desirable to:
(1)   Establish, open, or construct any public highway, as defined by statute,
including in connection therewith the construction of a sidewalk, sanitary
sewer system, storm drainage system, water system, or street lighting system;
(2)   Extend, widen, alter, grade, pave, curb, macadamize, or otherwise
improve, to an extent exceeding maintenance or repair thereof, the whole or any
part of any existing public highway, including in connection therewith the
improvement of a sidewalk, sanitary sewer system, storm drainage system, water
system, or street lighting system;
(3)   Improve a sanitary sewer system, storm drainage system, street lighting
system, or sidewalk independently of any other improvement; or
(4)   Acquire property for or improve pedestrian malls, off-street parking
facilities as provided in HRS Chapter 56, parks, playgrounds or public beaches
as provided in §
14-8.3 hereof, or any other public facility or improvement, including but not
limited to facilities or improvements relating to transportation, police, or
fire related facilities, public restrooms, public benches, public information
booths, public meeting rooms, or any other structure, facility or improvement
determined by the council to be a valid public purpose;
such acquisitions or improvements, when financed by assessments to benefited
properties or as otherwise provided, may be made under
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter. For such purposes, the council may create, define and
establish improvement districts, all according to
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter.
The cost of any improvement includes the cost (if not assumed by the city under
the discretionary power contained in §
14-9.1) of acquiring any land therefor, whether before or after the
commencement of the proceedings for such improvements. Such cost shall be
assessed against the land specially benefited on the frontage basis, or
according to the area of the land, or according to the real property tax
assessment on the value of the land and improvements thereon within an
improvement district, or according to any other method or basis of assessment
determined by the council that correlates the benefits to the land within an
improvement district to the improvements to be undertaken therein, or any
combination of the methods or basis of assessment.
Wherever the frontage or area basis of assessment is mentioned in
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter, such valuation method may be used either alone or in
combination with one or more of the methods of assessment.
The city may issue and sell bonds to provide the funds for such improvements.
Bonds for an improvement initiated pursuant to §§
14-10.1,
14-10.2, or
14-10.3 may, in the sole discretion of the council, be either:
(1)   General obligation bonds of the city (or the funds for such improvements
may be provided from the capital projects fund or from both the capital
projects fund and the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds); or
(2)   Bonds secured only by such assessments as a lien upon the lands assessed.
(b)   Nothing in
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter will prevent the city from compelling abutting property
owners at their own expense to construct, maintain, and repair sidewalks and
curbs in front of the abutting property under any other statute or ordinance.
(c)   Nothing in
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter will prevent the city or the board of water supply from
constructing, improving, maintaining, and repairing any sanitary sewer system,
storm drainage system, street lighting system, or water system, as the case may
be, as empowered by any other statute or ordinance.
(d)   Nothing in
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter will prevent the city from making the improvements referred
to in subsection (a), if property owners and the council mutually agree to
share the cost of such improvements and the estimated amount of such cost to be
borne by the property owners is deposited with the city before the award of the
construction contract; provided that the proportionate share of the cost to be
borne by the property owners and the city shall be subject to revision upon the
determination of the actual cost of the improvement.
(e)   Nothing in
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter will prevent the city from constructing, solely at city
expense, roadway, sidewalk, sanitary sewer system, storm drainage system, water
system, street lighting system, pedestrian mall, off-street parking facility,
park, playground public beach, or any other public facility or improvement for
which funds have been appropriated by the council for such purpose.
(Sec. 24-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 23,
§ 14-23.1) (Am. Ords. 89-2, 90-91, 16-33)
§ 14-8.2 Sanitary sewer system.
(a)   For the construction of sanitary sewer systems, the specially benefitted
area of the lands within an improvement district shall be assessed, except as
hereinafter provided, at the following rates: 25 cents per square foot for
residential, agricultural, parks and recreation, preservation, public and
military development planned areas; 31 cents per square foot for commercial and
industrial development planned areas; and 37 cents per square foot for
apartment and resort development planned areas. The balance of the cost shall
be borne by the city. An unsewered property that is within an improvement
district and is served by an existing properly functioning individual
wastewater disposal system, other than a cesspool, permitted by the DOH and
constructed pursuant to §
43-1.5(c) shall not be subject to an assessment charge; provided that if the
owner or person legally responsible subsequently wishes to connect to the
sanitary sewer system, the property shall be assessed at the then prevailing
rate.
If a property within an improvement district served by an existing properly
functioning individual wastewater disposal system, other than a cesspool,
permitted by the DOH and constructed pursuant to §
43-1.5(c) is required to connect to the public sewer system, then the owner or
person legally responsible shall not be subject to an assessment charge for a
period of 25 years following connection to the public sewer system; provided
that if such property is sold or otherwise transferred, except for a transfer
due to the death of the property owner, prior to the end of the 25-year period,
then the owner of the property, or person legally responsible, following such
sale or other transfer shall be assessed at a rate as set forth in this
subsection immediately following such sale or other transfer.
(b)   Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, if the construction of
any such sanitary sewer system is initiated pursuant to §
14-10.2 or
14-10.3, the total cost of such system shall be assessed against the lands
specially benefited.
(c)   In case of a sanitary sewer system proposed to be constructed or improved
independently of other improvements, such improvement district may embrace two
or more geographically separate or noncontiguous areas; provided that such
separate or noncontiguous areas use one common trunk line or interceptor sewer
in the disposal of sewage from such areas.
(Sec. 24-1.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 23,
§ 14-23.2) (Am. Ords. 90-91, 95-17, 20-36)
§ 14-8.3 Parks, playgrounds, and beaches.
   If deemed in the interests of the public, the council may establish an
improvement district for the purpose of acquiring property for or constructing
or improving a park, playground, or public beach in conformity with
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to limit the
power of the council to provide for the acquisition of property or the
improvement for the same purposes without imposing assessments.
(Sec. 24-1.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 23,
§ 14-23.3) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
§ 14-8.4 Definitions.
   For the purposes of
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
Highways. Includes streets.
Improvements. Includes land acquisition, betterments, and initial construction.
Lessee. A lessee of property to be assessed who, by the express terms of the
lease, must pay the kind of assessment contemplated by
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 23, § 14-23.4) (Added by Ord. 90-91)
ARTICLE 9: COSTS FOR ASSESSMENTS
Sections
   
14-9.1   Liability of city
   
14-9.2   Costs of water system
§ 14-9.1 Liability of city.
(a)   Except where improvements are made pursuant to §§
14-10.2 or
14-10.3, the city may pay, out of any funds available for such purposes, any
one or more of the following: the cost of engineering, incidentals,
inspections, surveys, maps, plans, specifications, other engineering data, land
acquisition, publication of notices of hearing, mailing notices to owners and
lessees, services of bond counsel, printing of bonds, preparation and printing
of an official statement relating to the bonds, publication and distribution of
the notice of sale of bonds, execution and delivery of bonds, registrars’ and
paying agents’ fees and expenses, other reimbursements to registrars and paying
agents and publication and mailing of notices of redemption, rating agency
fees, the cost of funding a debt service reserve fund for the payment of the
principal of and interest on bonds, premiums for municipal bond insurance to
ensure the timely payment of the principal of and interest on bonds or to
ensure in lieu of funding a debt service reserve fund for bonds and fees for
letters of credit and other credit enhancements to secure the timely payment of
the principal of and interest on bonds. The city may elect to pay all or any
portion of such costs or any other such preliminary costs, or both, out of
available funds, or may assess all or any portion of such costs according to
the benefits arising therefrom and in the manner provided for apportioning
assessments for general improvements. Such costs, if advanced by the city, may
be reimbursed to the city from the proceeds of the sale of general obligation
bonds or improvement district bonds.
The city may also assume the following costs:
(1)   In the case of an improvement district that is assessed only on a
frontage basis, the cost assessable against the frontage of an adjoining or
cross street;
(2)   In the case of an improvement district that is assessed on an area basis
or an area and frontage basis, the cost of improving the surface area common to
both streets at the intersection of any cross street or one-half of the surface
area opposite the intersection of any adjoining street;
(3)   In improvement districts generally, 50 percent of the total cost of
general improvements (which is the cost of the entire improvement, excluding
such cost heretofore mentioned in the first sentence of this section as may be
paid by the city and the cost for the sanitary sewer system and driveway
aprons) upon or along all main or general thoroughfares, as hereinafter
defined, and upon or along all other highways;
(4)   In the case of an improvement district that is assessed on any other
basis permitted under this section, such common costs as the council shall
determine; and
(5)   In the case of a main or general thoroughfare, the city may pay out of
available funds the cost of all or any part of that portion of pavement in
excess of 28 feet in width. A main or general thoroughfare within the meaning
hereof is any highway as is subjected to more than ordinary traffic and travel
by the general public, or which serves as a generally necessary connecting
thoroughfare between substantially different or naturally separate localities
or sections of the district of Honolulu, or which serves as a generally
necessary connecting thoroughfare between districts of the city.
Notwithstanding subdivision (3), in improvement districts in which more than 50
percent of the households are low-income households, the city may assume up to
75 percent of the low-income households’ share of the total cost of general
improvements described in that subdivision.
For the purposes of this subsection, “low-income household” means a household
that owns and occupies a residence in an improvement district and whose income
(by family size) does not exceed 80 percent of the median income for the city,
as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development;
provided that income for this purpose refers to total income as shown on the
federal tax return and all nontaxable income, including but not limited to the
amount of capital gains excluded from total income, alimony, support money,
nontaxable strike benefits, cash public assistance and relief, the gross amount
of any pension or annuity benefits received (including Railroad Retirement Act
benefits and veterans’ disability pensions), all payments received under the
federal Social Security and State unemployment insurance laws, nontaxable
interest received from the federal government or any of its instrumentalities,
workers’ compensation, the gross amount of “loss of time” insurance, nontaxable
contributions to public or private pension, annuity or deferred compensation
plans, and federal cost of living allowances.
(b)   If the council determines that the interests of the city will be best
served by protecting the city from claims for damages from surface waters, the
council may provide for the collection and disposition of stormwaters by
proceeding independently of any other improvement. If the city does so, it may
pay the whole or any part of the cost thereof out of available funds. In the
event the city pays part of the cost of the storm drainage system, it shall
assess the remaining cost according to the benefits arising therefrom and in
the manner provided for apportioning assessments for general improvements. In
the event the storm drainage system is included as part of general
improvements, the cost thereof shall be allocated in accordance with subsection
(a)(3). It shall be lawful for the city to assume and pay out of such available
funds all or any part of the cost of acquiring any new land required for any
improvement under
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter.
(c)   Notwithstanding subsection (a):
(1)   The city shall not bear the costs of inspections requested to be made
during any hour after the normal working hours of the city in any workday, or
on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday; and
(2)   The costs of installing the lateral connections to utilities shall be
paid by the respective owners of the properties on which the lateral
connections are installed.
(Sec. 24-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 24,
§ 14-24.1) (Am. Ords. 90-91, 91-23)
§ 14-9.2 Costs of water system.
   If the improvement includes the improvement of a water system, the board of
water supply may assume and pay out of its funds available for such purpose the
cost of engineering, incidentals and inspection, and 50 percent of the total
cost of the improvement of such water system.
(Sec. 24-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 24,
§ 14-24.2) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
ARTICLE 10: PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSMENTS
Sections
   
14-10.1   Initial procedure
   
14-10.2   Petition of owners
   
14-10.3   Petition by all owners
   
14-10.4   Determination by council to create, define and establish improvement
district
   
14-10.5   Compliance with general plan and development plans
   
14-10.6   Contract—Bids—Contractor’s Bonds
   
14-10.7   Water system—Inspection and use by board of water supply
   
14-10.8   Assessment map and roll
   
14-10.9   Informalities or mistakes in names or notices not to invalidate
assessment or improvement district
§ 14-10.1 Initial procedure.
(a)   The council shall, by resolution, request the mayor to direct the
director to investigate and prepare a preliminary report to the council that
shall include:
(1)   Preliminary data concerning the highways, sanitary sewer system, storm
drainage system, water system, sidewalk, street lighting system, or other
public facility or improvement proposed to be opened or improved;
(2)   The general character and extent of improvements proposed to be opened or
improved;
(3)   Whether such improvements may be assessed on a frontage or area basis, or
some other method or basis of assessment;
(4)   Whether it will be necessary to acquire any new land, the estimated cost
of acquiring any such land and the proportion of such cost that may be borne by
the city;
(5)   The materials recommended to meet the conditions of the improvements;
(6)   The boundaries of the improvement district to be proposed and any
subdistricts or zones therein as to which different portions of the cost may be
charged;
(7)   The estimated cost of the improvements;
(8)   The portions of the cost to be borne by the city; and
(9)   The portions of the cost to be specifically assessed against the land
specially benefitted, with the estimated total amount of assessment to be made
against each property according to the method of assessment proposed.
Further, such resolution shall request the mayor to direct the director to
prepare and furnish all necessary preliminary surveys, maps, plans, drawings
and other data, details and specifications for the improvements and any other
matters intended to apply thereto.
(b)   The preliminary report, when so furnished and filed with the council,
shall also be provided to the neighborhood board or boards, if any, in the area
included within the proposed improvement district, and the director, or the
director’s representative, shall make a presentation to the board, or boards,
on the proposed improvement district.
(c)   If the work proposed to be done includes the improvement of a water
system or the laying or installation of conduits, pipes, hydrants, or any
appliance for supplying or distributing a water supply, the director shall
obtain from the board of water supply preliminary plans and estimates for such
proposed water system. The director shall then furnish the board of water
supply with preliminary plans of the proposed improvements that will enable the
board of water supply to make its plans and estimates for the proposed water
system. The director shall incorporate such preliminary plans and estimates of
the board of water supply in the director’s preliminary report to the council.
(Sec. 24-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 25,
§ 14-25.1) (Am. Ords. 90-91, 93-32, 00-06)
§ 14-10.2 Petition of owners.
(a)   If the owners and lessees, as specified herein, of not less than 60
percent of the frontage of a public highway to be assessed, or of not less than
60 percent of the area of land to be assessed in a proposed improvement
district designated by such persons, shall file with the council a petition,
duly acknowledged by such owners and lessees, requesting the improvement,
through an improvement district, of a public highway, a storm drainage system,
sanitary sewer system, sidewalk, water system, street lighting system, or other
public facility or improvement, together with the surveys, maps, plans, and
other preliminary data and estimates mentioned in §
14-10.1, the council may reject or accept the petition.
If the council accepts the petition, it shall proceed thereon in the same
manner as though the plan for such improvements had been initiated on its own
motion. The council shall not make any change or modification of the plans,
details, or specifications for the proposed improvements without the written
and duly acknowledged consent of the owners and lessees of not less than 60
percent of the frontage or area of the land to be assessed, except that the
council may delete or modify any part of the plans that contemplates payment by
the city for such part of the proposed improvements.
The cost of any one or more of the following: engineering, incidentals,
inspection, surveys, maps, plans, specifications, other engineering data, land
acquisition, publication of notices of hearing, mailing notices to owners and
lessees, services of bond counsel, printing of bonds, bond discounts,
preparation and printing of an official statement relating to the bonds,
publication and distribution of notice of sale of bonds, execution and delivery
of bonds, registrars’ and paying agents’ fees and expenses, other
reimbursements to registrars and paying agents and publication and mailing of
notices of redemption rating agency fees, the cost of funding a debt service
reserve fund for the payment of the principal of and interest on bonds,
premiums for municipal bond insurance to insure the timely payment of the
principal of and interest on bonds or to ensure in lieu of funding a debt
service reserve for bonds and fees for letters of credit and other credit
enhancements to secure the timely payment of the principal of and interest on
bonds, shall be included in the cost of the improvements.
A lessee must join in the petition with the lessor unless the lessor files with
the petition a duly acknowledged assumption of responsibility to pay the
proposed assessments and release the lessee from payment or reimbursement to
the lessor of such assessment.
No sidewalks shall be constructed independently of any other improvements under
any provision of
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter, unless the highway along which the construction of such
sidewalk is proposed shall have existing curbing, and the right-of-way width of
such highway shall be at least equal to the width, if indicated, in the general
plan or development plans of the city.
(b)   An improvement district under this section may be initiated by the
council on its own motion as an alternative to initiation by petition of the
owners and lessees as hereinabove provided. Under this alternative method the
duly acknowledged written consent of such owners and lessees of not less than
60 percent of the frontage or area of land to be assessed shall be obtained
before proceeding with the improvements.
(c)   No such improvements shall be approved by the council if the cost of the
proposed improvements exceeds the market value of the land; provided that the
improvements may be approved by the council upon the petitioners paying in cash
or by certified check the amount by which the cost of the proposed improvements
exceeds the market value of the land. The payment shall be applied against the
total cost of improvements.
(Sec. 24-3.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 25,
§ 14-25.2) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
§ 14-10.3 Petition by all owners.
   If all the owners and lessees of 100 percent of the frontage to be assessed
upon any public highway, or of 100 percent of the area of land to be assessed,
such frontage or area being designated by such persons as a proposed
improvement district, file a duly acknowledged petition requesting the type of
improvements mentioned in §
14-10.2, the council shall proceed in the manner specified in §
14-10.2 and all the provisions therein shall be applicable. In interpreting
such section, “100 percent” shall be substituted wherever “60 percent” appears.
If such a petition is filed, it shall be unnecessary to give notice of the
proposed improvements, provide the preliminary report and make a presentation
to the neighborhood board or boards, as provided in §
14-10.1(b), or call for a public hearing as provided in §
14-10.4. If all of such owners and lessees shall file a duly acknowledged
written consent to the amount and apportionment of the proposed assessments, it
shall be unnecessary to give the notice or to hold the hearing specified by §
14-11.1 and the council may immediately proceed to fix the assessments in the
manner provided by §
14-11.1.
(Sec. 24-3.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 25,
§ 14-25.3) (Am. Ords. 90-91, 00-06)
§ 14-10.4 Determination by council to create, define and establish improvement
district.
(a)   If the council determines to proceed with the improvement district, after
receipt of the preliminary report, it shall by resolution:
(1)   Create, define, and establish the improvement district;
(2)   Define the extent and describe the general details of the proposed
improvements, including the highways, sanitary sewer system, storm drainage
system, water system, sidewalk, street lighting system, or other public
facility or improvement to be opened or improved;
(3)   Describe each parcel of land to be acquired, including the approximate
size of the parcel, the landowners, if known, and the location of the parcel;
(4)   Declare the estimated total cost of the improvements and the part or
portion of the cost of improvements to be borne by the city;
(5)   Declare the method or basis of assessment, and the number of installment
payments;
(6)   Describe the general boundaries of the district, subdistricts, and zones
to be assessed, determine the land to be assessed and that such property to be
assessed is specially benefited, and declare the estimated total amount of
assessment and the amount of assessment against each property;
(7)   Describe the materials to be used;
(8)   Request the mayor to direct the director to prepare a map of the
improvement district showing the exact location of the proposed improvements
together with final details, plans and specifications for the work in a form to
call for and encourage competitive bidding, wherever feasible; and
(9)   Request that the director submit to the council the final report on the
proposed improvement district upon its completion.
The description and definition herein required may be set forth expressly in
such resolution or be incorporated therein by referring to the data of the
director theretofore filed with the council, including any plans and estimates
of the board of water supply.
If the proposed improvements include the construction or improvement of a water
system, the resolution shall request the board of water supply to furnish final
details, plans, and specifications for adequate and appropriate conduits,
pipes, hydrants, and other appurtenances, including reservoir and booster pumps
for such water system and shall also request the mayor to direct the director
to furnish the board of water supply with such copies of final surveys, maps,
and plans of the proposed improvements necessary for the preparation of the
final plans and specifications for such water system. The board of water supply
need not furnish such plans and specifications where the city has not
appropriated its share of the cost. No modification in the plans and estimates
furnished by the board of water supply shall be made without the board’s
consent. However, if the city and the board cannot agree on the board’s plans
and estimates, the water system, conduits, pipes, hydrants, and other
appurtenances for supplying and distributing water shall be omitted from the
proposed improvements.
In the final report to the council as required by the resolution, the data may
expressly be set forth in the report or may be incorporated therein by
referring to the data theretofore filed with the council by the director and
the board of water supply. The map of the improvement district showing the
exact location of the proposed improvements, and the final details, plans, and
specifications of the director and the board of water supply shall be used as
the basis for the calling for bids and awarding of contract.
(b)   Before the council meeting at which the resolution to create, define, and
establish the improvement district is to be heard, the city clerk shall cause a
notice of a public hearing to be published in the manner provided by applicable
State law or, if no State law applies, in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city. The published notice shall provide all owners and lessees of the land
proposed to be assessed or acquired, and all others interested, with the
general details of the proposed improvements, either by express description or
by reference to the data supplied by the director and theretofore filed with
the council. The notice shall also state the time and place of the public
hearing, which shall be at the same council meeting at which the resolution
herein described is first placed on the council’s agenda for adoption; provided
that the hearing shall occur before the adoption of the resolution. The notice
shall also state that the persons so notified may object to and suggest
modifications to the proposed improvements and may question the benefits of the
proposed improvements to their property and the amount of any assessment
thereon, and where the resolutions and any related reports and other data may
be seen and examined before the hearing. Not less than 10 days before the
public hearing, a notice thereof, stating the time and place of the hearing
where persons may object to and suggest modifications to the proposed
improvements and, where pertinent, reports and other data relating to the
proposed improvement district may be obtained, shall be mailed by the city
clerk to the several owners and lessees on record in the books and records of
the real property tax assessment division of the department of budget and
fiscal services by certified or registered mail with a request for a return
receipt. Affidavits of publication and mailing shall be filed with the council
at or before the hearing.
If, in a city-initiated improvement district, 100 percent of the owners and
lessees of the frontage to be assessed upon any public highway, or 100 percent
of the area of land to be assessed, file a duly acknowledged consent to the
creating, defining, and establishing of the improvement district, the public
hearing and mailed notice provided for in this subsection, shall not be
required.
(c)   If the improvements in the proposed improvement district require the
acquisition of any new land therefor, the city shall acquire the same before
final award of the contract. The acquisition shall be either by deed or other
voluntary conveyance from the owners thereof, or the council may, in the name
of the city, cause condemnation proceedings to be brought to acquire the same
as provided by law or in like proceedings when brought by the State. After the
filing of the petition in such proceedings, the final award of the contract may
be made. If the cost of acquiring such land exceeds the estimate therefor, the
council may provide for the excess cost by general appropriation.
(d)   If:
(1)   Land for improvement has been acquired by condemnation under HRS Chapter
101; and
(2)   In the award made on the condemnation there has been deducted, from the
compensation or damages otherwise payable to the landowners, any amount because
the land of such landowner not sought to be condemned would be benefited by the
improvements;
   then the deducted amount shall first be credited against such land’s
assessment.
(Sec. 24-3.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 25, §
14-25.4) (Am. Ords. 90-91, 93-32, 00-06)
§ 14-10.5 Compliance with general plan and development plans.
(a)   Notwithstanding any provisions of
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter to the contrary, the actual construction of any improvement
shall not be commenced, unless the improvement shall conform to, or shall not
be inconsistent with, the general plan and development plans of the city, the
Standard Details, department of public works, dated September 1984, and the
Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, department of public
works, dated September 1986; provided that the council may, by resolution,
waive or modify any of the standards and specifications specified in the
standard details and standard specifications in cases where compliance with
them would cause an undue hardship to property owners in an improvement
district. The council may waive such standards and specifications only if:
(1)   The waiver of or modifications from the standards and specifications are
listed in the resolution waiving or modifying them;
(2)   The property owners agree in writing to indemnify and hold harmless the
city from any injuries or damages arising directly or indirectly from the
waiver or modifications; and
(3)   The property owners agree in writing to pay all remedial costs if the
waiver or modifications must be remedied in the future. The foregoing executed
agreement shall be duly recorded at the bureau of conveyances and shall be
binding on all owners and their transferees and assignees.
For the purposes of this section, “undue hardship” shall include but not be
limited to the situation where the construction of improvements in accordance
with their applicable standards and specifications would necessitate the
demolition of homes.
(b)   Any improvement district project involving the improvement of any highway
shall include the improvement:
(1)   Of any portion of a highway shown on the development plans, which is
situated within the proposed improvement district and which will connect two or
more highways, existing or to be constructed under the proposed improvement
district, situated within such improvement district; and
(2)   Of any dead end street shown on the development plans that is situated
wholly within the proposed improvement district.
(Sec. 24-3.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 25,
§ 14-25.5) (Am. Ords. 90-91, 91-23)
§ 14-10.6 Contract—Bids—Contractor’s Bonds.
(a)   All improvements made under
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter shall be constructed under contract let in accordance with
the Hawaii Procurement Code, HRS Chapter 103D, and related provisions of the
Hawaii Administrative Rules.
(b)   Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, if the completion of the
contract will extend beyond the fiscal year in which the same is executed, the
contract may be let without the council appropriating the total amount the city
is obliged to pay towards the contract price under the following conditions.
If the contract will be completed during the next succeeding fiscal year, the
city shall have available and appropriated at the time of letting the contract
at least 50 percent of the amount the city is obliged to pay toward the
contract price. The balance shall be a first charge on the revenues of the city
for the next succeeding fiscal year.
If the contract will be completed beyond the next succeeding fiscal year, the
city must have available and appropriated at the time of letting the contract
at least 33-1/3 percent of the amount the city is obliged to pay toward the
contract price. The balance shall be a first charge on the revenues of each of
the next two succeeding fiscal years; provided that not less than 50 percent of
the balance shall be provided at the beginning of the first succeeding fiscal
year and the remainder at the beginning of the second succeeding fiscal year.
   The contract shall not be legal unless:
(1)   Before the contract is let, the council, by resolution, provides, to the
extent permitted by law, for the automatic appropriation, at the beginning of
the next succeeding fiscal years, of the amounts herein made a first charge on
the revenues of the city for such fiscal year; and
(2)   The director of budget and fiscal services certifies the availability of
the appropriations required by the resolution.
(Sec. 24-3.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 25,
§ 14-25.6) (Am. Ords. 90-91, 96-58, 98-64)
§ 14-10.7 Water system—Inspection and use by board of water supply.
   If an improvement or work includes the construction or improvement of a
water system, the board of water supply shall maintain an inspector over the
work to see that the plans and specifications that it has furnished have been
complied with. After the work has been completed and accepted, the water
system, pipes, conduits, hydrants, and other appurtenances for supplying or
distributing water so installed shall constitute a part of the water system of
the board of water supply and shall at all times thereafter be used, operated,
and maintained by it as a part of its water system.
(Sec. 24-3.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 25,
§ 14-25.7) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
§ 14-10.8 Assessment map and roll.
(a)   After the bid of the lowest responsive, responsible, and reliable bidder
has been received for the construction of the improvements, no additional
public hearing, except for the hearing provided for in §
14-11.1, shall be required if the director finds:
(1)   That the frontage or area to be assessed would not be substantially
changed;
(2)   That the total amount of assessments against all properties within the
improvement district, based on the bid, will not exceed by more than 10 percent
the initial total assessment against all properties specified in the resolution
creating, defining and establishing the improvement district; or
(3)   That the general character or plan of improvements, as provided in such
resolution, has not been materially altered.
If any one of the three conditions set forth in this subsection occurs, the
council shall hold an additional public hearing and mail a notice to the owners
and lessees in the manner provided in §
14-10.4(b). The public hearing notice and notice to the owners and lessees that
is mailed shall inform the owners and lessees of the change in any of the
conditions listed in this subsection. However, one or more areas of an
independent sanitary sewer improvement district embracing two or more separate
areas may be deleted without an additional public hearing.
(b)   The director shall thereupon proceed to prepare:
(1)   An assessment map similar to that required under §
14-10.4;
(2)   An assessment roll and description of properties to be assessed, showing
in detail the proportionate amount proposed to be assessed against the property
in the benefitted district or in the several subdistricts or zones thereof, if
any. If the assessment is to be made on a frontage basis, the roll shall show
the amount per front foot and the exterior boundaries of the lands subject to
the assessment. If the assessment is to be made on an area basis, the roll
shall show the rate per square foot and the area of the lands subject to the
assessment. If the assessment is to be made on any other basis, the roll shall
contain sufficient detail such that the owners or lessees of the lands subject
to the assessment may determine the proposed assessment on their respective
lands; and
(3)   A list of all owners and lessees on record in the books and records of
the real property tax assessment division of the department of budget and
fiscal services of the city of the land fronting upon such improved highways or
situated within the improvement district.
(Sec. 24-3.8, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 25,
§ 14-25.8) (Am. Ords. 90-91, 93-32, 00-06)
§ 14-10.9 Informalities or mistakes in names or notices not to invalidate
assessment or improvement district.
   No assessment against properties in an improvement district, as fixed by
ordinance in accordance with
Article 11, nor the validity of any improvement district shall be invalidated:
(1)   On account of a mere informality;
(2)   If the notice of publication or notice that is mailed, pursuant to §§
14-10.4 and
14-11.1, is in error because of a mistake in the name of an owner or lessee, or
supposed owner or lessee, of the property assessed; or
(3)   If the public hearing required by §§
14-10.4 and
14-11.1 is not scheduled at the same council meeting that the resolution to
create, define and establish the improvement district is first scheduled for
adoption, or is not scheduled at the same council meeting that the bill to
impose the assessment is first scheduled for second reading.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 25, § 14-25.9) (Added by Ord. 00-06)
ARTICLE 11: ASSESSMENTS
Sections
   
14-11.1   Hearing on assessments—Assessments fixed by ordinance
   
14-11.2   Notice and collection of assessments
   
14-11.3   Assessments—Payable when
   
14-11.4   Lien—New assessment
   
14-11.5   Payment of installments
   
14-11.6   Payment in bonds
   
14-11.7   Effect of failure to pay installment
   
14-11.8   Owner of undivided interest
   
14-11.9   Sale in case of default
   
14-11.10   Purchase at sale
   
14-11.11   Certificate by director of budget and fiscal services
   
14-11.12   Sale of land bid in by director of budget and fiscal services
   
14-11.13   Eligibility of property owners of record, procedure for, and
termination of, deferred payment of assessments
   
14-11.14   Deferred assessments—Lien
   
14-11.15   Payment of assessments upon sale
§ 14-11.1 Hearing on assessments—Assessments fixed by ordinance.
(a)   The council shall by advertisement and mailing in the same manner as that
provided in §
14-10.4, give notice of the total amount of the cost of the improvements based
upon the bid of the lowest responsive, responsible, and reliable bidder, the
method or basis and the rate of assessment proposed to be charged to the
benefitted district or subdistricts or zones, if any, and a statement that the
assessment map, assessment roll and description of properties are available for
examination at the office of the director during business hours at any time
before and including the date fixed for hearing. The notice shall also fix a
date and place for a public hearing at which the council will sit as a board of
equalization to receive complaints or objections respecting the total amounts
of the proposed several assessments. Except as provided herein, the hearing
shall be held at the same council meeting at which the assessment bill is first
placed on the council agenda for passage on second reading, and shall be held
before passage of the bill on second reading.
Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the council may give notice and
hold the assessment hearing before advertising for bids on any sanitary sewer
system improvements in which the total assessment is based on a rate fixed by §
14-8.2.
If, in a city-initiated improvement district, 100 percent of the owners and
lessees of the frontage to be assessed upon any public highway, or 100 percent
of the area of land to be assessed, file a duly acknowledged consent to the
amount and apportionment of the proposed assessments, it shall be unnecessary
to give the notice or hold the public hearing required by this subsection.
(b)   After the hearing required by subsection (a), the council may amend the
assessments as may seem equitable or just, or shall confirm the first proposed
assessments. Upon reaching a final decision, the council shall, by ordinance,
fix the portions of the cost to be assessed against the benefited properties
and against the owners thereof respectively, which ordinance shall incorporate
by reference the assessment roll as approved by the council. After the
effective date of such ordinance, the amounts of the several assessments so
listed, advertised and incorporated and not previously objected to shall be
conclusively presumed to be just and equitable and not in excess of the special
benefits accruing or to accrue by reason of the improvement to the specific
property assessed.
(Sec. 24-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 26,
§ 14-26.1) (Am. Ords. 90-91, 00-06)
§ 14-11.2 Notice and collection of assessments.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall notify the several owners
and lessees, on record in the books and records of the real property tax
assessment division of the department of budget and fiscal services of the
city, by either certified or registered mail with a request for a return
receipt, of the several amounts assessed on the respective properties and of
the date when such assessments are payable. Failure of any owner or lessee to
receive any such notice shall not invalidate the assessment or the proceedings
relating thereto, nor entitle the owner or lessee to an extension of time
within which to pay the assessment. The director of budget and fiscal services
shall also collect such assessment and set aside all moneys so collected in an
appropriate fund or funds.
(Sec. 24-4.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 26, §
14-26.2) (Am. Ords. 90-91, 00-06)
§ 14-11.3 Assessments—Payable when.
(a)   All assessments made pursuant to
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter shall be due and payable within 30 days after the date of
the effective date of the ordinance fixing such assessments. Any assessment
may, at the election of the owner of the land assessed, be paid in installments
with interest, at such rate or rates, or in accordance with such method of
determining the rate or rates, as may be established by the council. Failure to
pay the whole of any assessment within the period of 30 days shall be
conclusively considered an election on the part of all persons interested in
such assessment, whether under disability or otherwise, to pay in installments.
(b)   All persons so electing to pay in installments shall be conclusively
considered to have consented to the improvement and the assessment therefor.
Such election shall be conclusively considered as a waiver of any and all right
to question all power or jurisdiction of the city to make the improvement, the
regularity or the sufficiency of the proceedings or the validity or correctness
of the assessment. However, such waiver shall not apply to any person who has
properly filed an action in court, challenging the power or jurisdiction of the
city to make the improvement within 30 days after the effective date of the
ordinance fixing the assessments.
(Sec. 24-4.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 26,
§ 14-26.3) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
§ 14-11.4 Lien—New assessment.
(a)   All assessments made pursuant to
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter shall be a lien until paid against each lot or parcel of
land assessed from the effective date of the ordinance fixing the assessments
and shall have priority over all other liens except the lien of real property
taxes.
(b)   If a previously assessed lot or parcel of land is subsequently subdivided
or consolidated with any other lot or parcel (which need not be in the
improvement district), the owners or lessees of such lots or parcels may
petition the council to prorate or consolidate, as the case may be, the
original assessment. Upon receiving such petition, the council may so amend the
ordinance fixing the assessments. Before the introduction of the amendment to
the ordinance fixing the assessments, the subdivider or consolidators shall
deposit with the city legal tender or a certified check in a sufficient amount
to be used to cover the cost of making such reallocation of assessments and to
cover the assessment allocable to areas used or to be used for purposes that
are public in nature, such as but not limited to roadways, parks, school sites,
sewage treatment plant sites and reservoir sites, developed in connection with
the subdivision or consolidation.
(c)   The cost of making the reallocation of assessments, when determined by
the director and approved by the council, shall be paid into the general fund
of the city. The amount of assessment allocable to areas used or to be used for
purposes that are public in nature and developed in connection with the
subdivision or consolidation, as recommended by the director and approved by
the council, shall be credited to the appropriate fund.
(d)   The amended assessments shall be a lien upon the subdivided or
consolidated lot or parcel as of the effective date of the amended ordinance.
Such assessment shall be paid in installments equal in number to that remaining
under the original assessment and at the same rates of assessments and
interest. The subdivider shall be responsible for notifying the city of any
division of the assessed property into condominium interests.
(e)   No delay, mistake, error, defect, or irregularity in any act or
proceeding authorized by
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter shall prejudice or invalidate any assessment; but the same
may be remedied by subsequent or amended acts or proceedings and, when so
remedied, the same shall take effect as of the date of the original act or
proceeding. If in any court of competent jurisdiction any assessment made under
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter is set aside for irregularity in the proceedings, the
council may, upon notice as required in making an original assessment, make a
new assessment in accordance with
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter.
(f)   Upon completion of the improvements and the payment of the cost thereof,
the director shall certify to the council the actual cost of such improvements,
together with the amount of the assessments therefor. If the aggregate of the
assessments for improvements made pursuant to either §
14-10.2 or
14-10.3 exceeds the actual cost of the improvements by more than $5,000, the
council, by amendment of the ordinance fixing the assessments, may direct the
director of budget and fiscal services to proportionately refund or credit the
amount in excess of $5,000. However, no refund or credit shall be made if the
cost of effecting such refund or credit exceeds the amount of refund or credit
available.
(g)   If the assessment has been paid in full, then the refund of such excess
shall be made to the owners or lessees of the property, as appropriate, at the
time of the refund. If the assessment is still outstanding, then the refund
shall be applied to reduce the unpaid principal of the assessment outstanding.
If any amount of such excess, in the opinion of the director of budget and
fiscal services, cannot be applied as a refund, then such excess shall be
credited to the improvement district revolving fund of the city. In any case,
any amount of excess up to $5,000 or less shall be retained by the director of
budget and fiscal services to defray the cost of effecting any refund or credit
and all other costs of administering the improvement district from which such
amount is generated. Any amount in excess of $5,000 shall be proportionately
distributed subject, however, to the limitation relative to the cost of
distribution as stated hereinbefore. Any of the excess retained to cover
administrative costs shall be deposited in the general fund.
(Sec. 24-4.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 26,
§ 14-26.4) (Am. Ords. 90-91, 93-32, 00-06)
§ 14-11.5 Payment of installments.
(a)   In case of an election to pay any assessment in installments, subject
only to the limitation, if any, of the State constitution, the assessment shall
be payable in substantially equal annual or semiannual installments of
principal only, or of both principal or interest, as the council shall
determine. The number of such installments and period of payment and the rate
of interest on unpaid installments shall be as determined by the council.
(b)   The owner of any land assessed may, at any time after the expiration of
the first 30-day period, pay the entire unpaid principal of assessment, or any
portion of the unpaid principal, together with interest on the amount so paid
to the date for the payment of the next subsequent installment, plus a
prepayment premium, as established by the council, which shall not be less than
the premium payable on redemption of any bonds payable or reimbursable from
such assessment. Such owner shall no longer be liable for the interest that
would otherwise have accrued after such date on the amount of principal so
prepaid. Any prepayment of the unpaid principal of an assessment shall be
applied to reduce the unpaid principal of the assessment outstanding; shall be
credited against the outstanding principal installments in inverse
chronological order; and shall not relieve the owner of the land assessed from
the payment of the amount of the installment of principal and interest next
due.
(Sec. 24-4.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 26,
§ 14-26.5) (Am. Ords. 89-2, 90-91)
§ 14-11.6 Payment in bonds.
   In payment of any assessment, installment thereof, interest, penalty, cost,
expense, or any portion thereof, the director of budget and fiscal services may
accept, in lieu of cash, bonds of the subject improvement district issued
pursuant to §
14-12.1(a). Such bonds shall be valued in an amount equal to 100 percent of the
principal amount of such bonds, plus accrued interest on such bonds to the date
of acceptance of such bonds by the director of budget and fiscal services. Upon
the receipt of such bonds, the director of budget and fiscal services shall
forward the same to the registrar for such bonds for cancellation and credit
the improvement district with the amount allowed on such bonds.
(Sec. 24-4.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 26,
§ 14-26.6) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
§ 14-11.7 Effect of failure to pay installment.
   Failure to pay any installment or any part of an installment, whether of
principal or interest or both, when due, shall cause the whole of the unpaid
principal to become due and payable immediately. The delinquent installment or
installments or any delinquent part or parts thereof, whether of principal or
interest or both, shall thereafter bear penalty at the rate of 2 percent per
month or fraction of a month from the date of delinquency until the date of
sale as hereinafter provided. However, at any time before the day of sale, the
owner may pay the entire amount of the delinquent installment or installments
or delinquent part or parts, whether of principal or interest or both, with
penalty, and all costs and expenses accrued. Thereupon, such owner shall be
restored to the right thereafter to pay in installments in the same manner as
if default had not been made.
(Sec. 24-4.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 26,
§ 14-26.7) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
§ 14-11.8 Owner of undivided interest.
   The owner of any undivided interest in any land may pay the whole assessment
and may have a joint or several right of action against the other owners of any
interest in such land for their proportionate share of the assessment.
(Sec. 24-4.8, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 26,
§ 14-26.8) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
§ 14-11.9 Sale in case of default.
   In case of default in the payment when due of the principal of and interest
on any installment of any assessment, the director of budget and fiscal
services shall advertise and sell the property concerning which default is
made. The sale shall be for the whole of the unpaid principal amount of the
assessment thereon, interest and costs. Such sale and advertisement shall be
made by the director of budget and fiscal services in the same manner, under
the same conditions and penalties and with the same effect as provided by
general law for sales of real property for default in payment of property
taxes.
(Sec. 24-4.9, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 26,
§ 14-26.9) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
§ 14-11.10 Purchase at sale.
   At any sale for default in payment of any assessment, in payment for the
land so sold, the director of budget and fiscal services may accept, in lieu of
cash, bonds of the subject improvement district issued pursuant to §
14-12.1(a). Such bonds shall be valued at an amount equal to 100 percent of the
principal amount of such bonds, plus accrued interest on such bonds to date of
sale. Upon the receipt of such bonds, the director of budget and fiscal
services shall forward the same to the registrar for such bonds for
cancellation and credit the improvement district with the amount allowed on
such bonds.
(Sec. 24-4.10, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 26,
§ 14-26.10) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
§ 14-11.11 Certificate by director of budget and fiscal services.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall, on request, give a written
certificate showing the balance due on any individual assessment for
improvements for principal, with the date of the next installment payment, the
number of the installment payments and the amount to be due for the installment
payment, and particulars of interest and penalty on the next installment date
to be due and owing.
(Sec. 24-4.11, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 26,
§ 14-26.11) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
§ 14-11.12 Sale of land bid in by director of budget and fiscal services.
   Whenever any land has been bid in by the director of budget and fiscal
services at any sale for default of the owner thereof, the director of budget
and fiscal services, in making such sale thereof as may by law be authorized,
may sell the same upon the following terms and conditions:
(1)   At the time of sale, a down payment of 20 percent of the sale price shall
be provided;
(2)   The balance shall be payable in monthly installments of not less than 1-
1/3 percent of the total sale price, plus interest at the prevailing rate
established by the council for payment of the unpaid balance of the property
owner’s share of the cost of assessments within an improvement created and
established under §
14-10.1;
(3)   Failure for 30 days to pay any installment due shall effect an entire
forfeiture of the purchaser’s right, title and interest in such land and in any
payments previously made by the purchaser on account thereof;
(4)   Such building restrictions as the director of budget and fiscal services
may prescribe and shall be complied with; and
(5)   Such land when sold shall be subject to real property taxes.
(Sec. 24-4.12, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 26,
§ 14-26.12) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
§ 14-11.13 Eligibility of property owners of record, procedure for, and
termination of, deferred payment of assessments.
(a)   Property owners of record shall be eligible to defer the payment of
assessments if the following conditions are met:
(1)   The property shall be owned jointly or severally, either in fee simple or
leasehold;
(2)   The owners shall be required to pay improvement district assessments on
property situated within an improvement district;
(3)   The property shall serve as the only residence of one of the property
owners of record who has either:
(A)   Attained the age of 65 years; or
(B)   Is permanently and totally disabled as defined in HRS § 235-1, income tax
law; and
(4)   The owners’ family residing on the property is subject to financial
hardship by the assessments imposed as a result of the creation of the
improvement district. Prima facie evidence of hardship shall be a showing that
the average annual payment for all assessments levied against the subject
property exceeds 1 percent of the adjusted gross income of the property owner
of record residing upon the property, or that the income of the property owner
of record does not exceed $20,000 per year.
(b)   Any property owner of record who resides upon the property may apply for
deferral of assessment payments by filing a statement with the director of
budget and fiscal services on a form to be provided by the director of budget
and fiscal services accompanied by sufficient documentation to establish
eligibility. If an application is based upon permanent and total disability,
the application shall include a certification of the permanent and total
disability by the applicant’s physician.
   The application shall be filed within 20 days after the applicant has
received a notice of assessment.
The director of budget and fiscal services shall act upon an application within
30 days of filing by notifying the applicant of either the acceptance or
rejection of the application. All notifications of rejection shall state the
reasons therefor.
Upon acceptance of an application, the director of budget and fiscal services
shall offer to enter into a contract with the applicant. This contract shall be
on a form provided by the director of budget and fiscal services and shall
obligate the city to transfer from the capital projects fund to the improvement
district bond and interest redemption fund the principal and any interest due
on the assessment to the applicant’s property. In return, the applicant will
agree to pay to the city the amount of the deferred assessment, including
interest chargeable at the same rate as originally established by the council,
upon the termination of the deferral.
(c)   A deferral shall terminate when any of the following events occur:
(1)   A participant residing upon the property terminates the deferral by
giving written notice to the director of budget and fiscal services;
(2)   A participant residing upon the property dies and there are no other
participants residing upon the property at that time, in which case the amount
of deferral and interest shall be a claim against the property that is the
subject of the deferral;
(3)   The land that is the subject of the deferral is sold, or an agreement of
sale is executed, or some person other than the participant residing upon the
property becomes the owner;
(4)   The land that is the subject of the deferral is no longer the only
dwelling of the participant residing upon the property; or
(5)   The occupation of the structure on the property in the deferred
assessment program is terminated for any other reason.
(Sec. 24-4.13, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 26,
§ 14-26.13) (Am. Ords. 89-2, 90-91)
§ 14-11.14 Deferred assessments—Lien.
   Any deferral in the payment of assessments granted under §
14-11.13 shall be a lien as provided under §
14-11.4, and shall be recorded with the bureau of conveyances, State department
of land and natural resources.
(Sec. 24-4.14, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 26,
§ 14-26.14) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
§ 14-11.15 Payment of assessments upon sale.
   Any assessments made for low-income households pursuant to §
14-9.1(a)(5) that remain unpaid at the time of the sale of property owned by
low-income households shall become immediately due and payable in full with any
interest due upon the sale of the property. The original assessee shall agree
in writing when the assessment is made to pay the outstanding assessment, plus
interest due, upon the sale of the assessee’s property.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 26, § 14-26.15) (Added by Ord. 91-23)
ARTICLE 12: FINANCING FOR ASSESSMENTS
Sections
   
14-12.1   Improvement district bonds—General obligation bonds—Capital projects
funds—Advances from available funds
   
14-12.2   Special funds—Payment of improvement district and certain general
obligation bonds
   
14-12.3   Payment of principal, premium and interest on improvement district
bonds
   
14-12.4   Sale of improvement district bonds—Use of proceeds
   
14-12.5   Improvement district bonds not chargeable against general revenues
§ 14-12.1 Improvement district bonds—General obligation bonds—Capital projects
funds—Advances from available funds.
(a)   Improvement district bonds.
(1)   In the event of an election to pay all or any part of any assessment
imposed pursuant to
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter in installments, subject to subsection (b), the unpaid
amount of such assessment, including without limitation the cost of land
acquisition and the costs specified in §§
14-9.1(a) and
14-10.2(a) and the cost of funding a debt service reserve fund for the payment
of the principal of and interest on improvement district bonds, shall be
obtained by the issuance of sufficient improvement district bonds of the city.
However, if the aggregate of the assessment installments for all property
owners in the improvement district is less than $1,000 in each year, then
improvement district bonds need not be issued.
(2)   The improvement district bonds shall be authorized by resolution of the
council. The improvement district bonds shall:
(A)   Either be in coupon or registered form;
(B)   Bear the name of the benefited improvement district;
(C)   Be dated;
(D)   Be numbered;
(E)   Be in the appropriate denomination;
(F)   Bear interest at such rate or rates per year, but not more than 15
percent per year, payable at such time or times and at such place or places;
(G)   Mature at such time or times so as to cover the outstanding installment
payments determined upon, pursuant to
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter; and
(H)   Be subject to call at such price or prices and upon such terms and
conditions, and may be subject to tender by the holders thereof upon such terms
and conditions;
      all as determined by resolution by the council.
The improvement district bonds shall bear the facsimile signature of the
director of budget and fiscal services of the city and the seal of the city or
a facsimile thereof, shall be attested by the facsimile signature of the mayor
of the city, and shall bear a certificate of the authentication manually
executed by the registrar for the improvement district bonds. No improvement
district bond shall be valid or obligatory unless authenticated by the
registrar. Interest coupons, if any, shall bear a facsimile signature of the
director of budget and fiscal services of the city.
The director of budget and fiscal services of the city shall designate the
registrar, if any, for the improvement district bonds and the place of
registration and transfer of such improvement district bonds. The registrar
shall maintain such books of registry as shall be required by the resolution of
the council. The director of budget and fiscal services may serve as registrar.
(3)   The improvement district bonds shall be payable only out of the moneys
collected on account of assessments made for the improvements for which they
are issued and the city shall not otherwise guarantee payment of such bonds.
Interest payments may be advanced by the director of budget and fiscal services
out of moneys available in the improvement district revolving fund.
(b)   General obligation bonds—capital projects fund.
(1)   The council, in lieu of the issuance of improvement district bonds as
permitted by subsection (a), may in its sole discretion, issue general
obligation bonds of the city, or authorize payment of the required amount from
the capital projects fund of the city, or both, to pay the unpaid amount of any
assessment required to pay the contract price of the related improvement and
any other cost involved in the improvement, including without limitation the
cost of land acquisition and the costs specified in §§
14-9.1(a) and
14-10.2(a) and the cost of funding a debt service reserve fund for the payment
of the principal of and interest on general obligation bonds. The council shall
have power to issue general obligation bonds of the city for the purpose of
establishing, maintaining or replenishing the capital projects fund. All such
general obligation bonds shall be authorized, issued, and sold in accordance
with HRS Chapter 47, as amended.
(2)   Without limiting the generality of the foregoing sentence, the form,
name, date, denomination, numbers, maximum interest rate, method of execution
and all other details of such general obligation bonds shall be fixed and
determined in accordance with and as provided by such chapter. No right of
prior redemption need be reserved in the issuance of such bonds, nor shall
either the amounts or dates of the maturities of any such bonds be required to
conform in any way to the amounts and due dates of any assessments. The
validity of such general obligation bonds shall not be affected in any way by
any proceedings taken, contracts made, or acts performed in connection with any
improvement or any assessments for such improvements.
(3)   If general obligation bonds are issued as provided in this subsection,
except as otherwise provided herein, the council may subsequently direct all
moneys collected on account of assessments and interest to be applied to the
reimbursement of the general fund of the city for interest on and principal of
such general obligation bonds. Any amounts collected that are not so directed
by the council to be applied to such reimbursement, are in excess of the
amounts required for such reimbursement, or are collected on account of
assessments and interest for any improvement financed from the capital projects
fund, shall be appropriated to and become a part of the capital projects fund.
Sections
14-12.2(a) and §§
14-12.3,
14-12.4, and
14-12.5 shall not apply to such general obligation bonds and shall be
restricted in their application to improvement district bonds.
Article 13 shall not apply to such general obligation bonds, unless the
council, in its sole discretion, shall consent to the application of
Article 13 to such bonds. The refunding of any such general obligation bonds
shall not in any way affect the payment of assessment installments and the
interest thereon or the amounts and times of such payments, unless such
refunding is part of a plan consented to by the council and adopted under
 Article 17 of this chapter.
(c)   Advances from available funds. In the event of an election to pay all or
any part of any such assessment in installments, the amount required for
immediate use during the period before the issuance of improvement district or
general obligation bonds or the provision of funds from the capital projects
fund, to pay the contract price of the improvements or the installments of the
assessment therefor, from time to time as they fall due, may be advanced out of
any available funds. In connection with any improvements financed with the
proceeds of general obligation bonds of the city, proceedings for establishment
of an improvement district or districts or zones therein and imposition of
assessments may be undertaken at any time before or while such general
obligation bonds are outstanding to reimburse the city for the cost of such
improvements (and such related financing and administrative costs as the
council shall determine).
In the event of an election to pay all or any part of such assessments in
installments, improvement district bonds or general obligation bonds may be
issued in accordance with
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter for the purpose of making such reimbursement, including the
payment of any reasonable administrative fee or expense of the city associated
with the improvements, proceedings taken under
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter or the issuance or carrying of bonds, and any reasonable fee
that the city may impose for financing or refinancing the improvements from the
proceeds of general obligation bonds.
(d)   Term of bonds. Except as shall be limited by the State constitution, the
council may fix, or authorize the director of budget and fiscal services to
fix, the maturity or maturities of improvement district bonds and general
obligation bonds issued to budget and fiscal services improvements under
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter.
(Sec. 24-5.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 27,
§ 14-27.1) (Am. Ords. 89-2, 90-91)
§ 14-12.2 Special funds—Payment of improvement district and certain general
obligation bonds.
(a)   All moneys collected on account of assessments and interest for any
improvements after the issuance of any improvement district bonds shall be kept
by the director of budget and fiscal services in the improvement district bond
and interest redemption fund and applied solely to the payment of interest and
principal of such improvement district bonds until such bonds have been paid.
If general obligation bonds are issued pursuant to §
14-12.1(b) to pay the cost of any improvements, or any surplus remains in the
improvement district bond and interest redemption fund after the payment of
improvement district bonds chargeable against such fund, or any premium is
received on the sale of such improvement district bonds, all such moneys
collected on account of assessments and interest for any improvements or any
such surplus or premium shall be credited to and become a part of a fund to be
known as the “improvement district revolving fund.” However, any portion of the
assessment charged as the administrative fees or expenses of the city
associated with the improvements, including any fee that the city may impose
for financing the improvements from the proceeds of general obligation bonds,
shall be paid into the general fund.
Moneys in the improvement district revolving fund shall be available to:
(1)   Make up deficiencies in the proceeds of improvement district bonds sold
below par;
(2)   Cover deficiencies in interest and principal realized on account of
diminishing balances of installments outstanding;
(3)   Advance interest and principal due on improvement district bonds
outstanding before collection of annual assessments;
(4)   Reimburse the general fund for principal and interest on general
obligation bonds issued for assessable public improvements or issued to
establish, maintain, or replenish the capital projects fund in the event the
payment of assessments is late or insufficient;
(5)   Reimburse the general fund for administrative cost and expenses relating
to improvement district bonds;
(6)   Pay all expenses in connection with the sale of delinquent improvement
district lots; and
(7)   Pay the prices of such delinquent lots as are bid for and purchased for
the city by the director of budget and fiscal services. The director of budget
and fiscal services is authorized upon such purchase to transfer the proper
amounts so bid to the proper special funds for the respective improvement
district concerned.
(b)   Upon recommendation of the director of budget and fiscal services, the
council may by resolution, authorize the director of budget and fiscal services
to advance moneys in the improvement district revolving fund for:
(1)   Unpaid assessments for any improvements in lieu of the issuance of bonds
where the aggregate of the assessment installments for all property owners in
the improvement district is less than $1,000 for each year;
(2)   Any unpaid amount of the first installment of the assessments where
elections have been made to pay the assessments in installments; and
(3)   Any payment in connection with any improvements for which the issuance
and sale of improvement district bonds or general obligation bonds or
disbursement from the capital projects fund has been duly authorized.
After adoption by the council of the resolution creating, defining, and
establishing an improvement district pursuant to §
14-10.4, the council, upon recommendation of the director of budget and fiscal
services, may by resolution, authorize the director of budget and fiscal
services to advance moneys in the improvement district revolving fund for the
cost of land acquisition for improvements pursuant to §
14-10.4.
(Sec. 24-5.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 27,
§ 14-27.2) (Am. Ord. 89-2, 90-91, 96-58)
§ 14-12.3 Payment of principal, premium and interest on improvement district
bonds.
   The principal of and premium, if any, and interest on the improvement
district bonds shall be payable at such places as may be determined by
resolution of the council. Interest may be payable by check or draft mailed, or
wire sent, by the paying agent or paying agents for the improvement district
bonds to the registered owners thereof. In all cases, the improvement district
bonds and coupons, if any, shall recite the places of payment. If any
improvement district bonds are made payable elsewhere than in the city, the
director of budget and fiscal services shall remit the funds necessary to pay
the interest and principal and premium thereon when due of any such improvement
district bonds, with exchange, to the institution so designated after verifying
that such institution is then solvent. The director of budget and fiscal
services may serve as paying agent for improvement district bonds.
(Sec. 24-5.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 27,
§ 14-27.3) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
§ 14-12.4 Sale of improvement district bonds—Use of proceeds.
(a)   Improvement district bonds may be sold at public or private sale, and for
a price or prices as may be determined by resolution of the council to be in
the best interest of the city.
(b)   If the improvement district bonds are to be sold at public sale, the
director of budget and fiscal services shall publish and distribute a notice of
sale of such improvement district bonds on an all-or-nothing basis, in
accordance with the provisions hereof and the resolution authorizing the
issuance and sale of such bonds.
(Sec. 24-5.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 27,
§ 14-27.4) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
§ 14-12.5 Improvement district bonds not chargeable against general revenues.
(a)   No improvement district bonds issued under
Articles 8 through
14 shall be considered to be general obligation bonds of the city for purposes
of and within the meaning of HRS Chapter 47, as amended, nor shall the payment
of the same be a charge against the general revenues of the city.
(b)   Any improvement district bonds issued under
Articles 8 through
14 of this chapter shall be special obligations of the city and shall be
payable solely from the moneys received by the city from the payment of
assessments made under this section, the moneys attributable to the proceeds of
the improvement district bonds, and from the other sources specified in
Articles 8 through
14, and shall not be payable from any other fund or source. Unless the council
shall otherwise determine, the income and earnings derived from the temporary
investment of the proceeds of improvement district bonds, including from any
debt service reserve funds, shall be paid into the improvement district
revolving fund.
(c)   The improvement district bonds shall not constitute a general or moral
obligation of the city and the full faith and credit of the city shall not be
pledged to the payment of the principal of and premium, if any, and interest on
the improvement district bonds. The improvement district bonds shall not be
secured directly or indirectly by the general credit of the city or by any
moneys of the city other than the moneys specified in
Articles 8 through
14 . No owner of any improvement district bond issued under
Articles 8 through
14 shall have the right to compel any exercise of the taxing power of such city
to pay debt service on the improvement district bond.
(Sec. 24-5.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 27,
§ 14-27.5) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
ARTICLE 13: REFUNDING
Sections
   
14-13.1   Authorized
   
14-13.2   Initiation of refunding
   
14-13.3   Protest against refunding
   
14-13.4   Determination by council
   
14-13.5   Improvement district refunding bonds
   
14-13.6   Installments
   
14-13.7   Petition by all owners
   
14-13.8   Refunded improvement district bonds—Cancellation
   
14-13.9   Obligations unimpaired
§ 14-13.1 Authorized.
   The council may provide for the refunding of the outstanding indebtedness of
improvement districts located within the city, which were created according to
law after December 31, 1925, in the manner hereinafter provided. Unless
specified to be otherwise, as referred to in this article, outstanding
indebtedness may be in the form of outstanding improvement district bonds or
general obligation bonds.
(Sec. 24-6.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 28,
§ 14-28.1) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
§ 14-13.2 Initiation of refunding.
(a)   (1)   Subject to §
14-12.1(b), the owners or lessees of real property in any improvement district,
whose property represents 75 percent or more of the outstanding improvement
assessments at the time of the filing of the petition, may file with the
council a petition setting forth the indebtedness of the improvement district
requesting that the indebtedness be refunded, and stating the proposed method
of refunding the outstanding indebtedness.
The council shall thereupon by resolution request the mayor to direct the
director to investigate and report to the council:
(A)   The amount of unpaid assessments and the property subject to the same in
the improvement district;
(B)   The detail of any delinquent assessments and of any unpaid penalties;
(C)   Whether the petitioners own real estate representing 75 percent or more
of the unpaid assessments in the district;
(D)   The proposed method of reassessment of the lands subject to existing
assessments;
(E)   A new assessment roll showing the proposed new assessments;
(F)   The cost of the proposed refunding; and
(G)   Other details that may be necessary to carry into effect the proposed
refunding.
Such report of the director shall be filed with the council.
Within seven days after the filing of the director’s report, the petitioners
shall deposit with the director of budget and fiscal services a sum sufficient
to meet the cost of preparing the proposed refunding plan.
(2)   Thereafter, the council shall, by resolution, propose the adoption of the
suggested refunding plan specifying the outstanding indebtedness of the
improvement district, that the owners and lessees of land representing not less
than 75 percent of the unpaid improvement assessments have petitioned that the
outstanding indebtedness of the improvement district be refunded, the proposed
refunding plan in detail, and the proposed method of reassessment, including
the number of installment payments to be proposed, and the amount of assessment
that may include all costs of refunding. The resolution shall refer to and
incorporate by reference the assessment roll and such other data reported by
the director as shall be approved by the council. The resolution shall also fix
the date of a public hearing upon such plan, which date shall not be less than
15 days after the first publication of notice thereof in the manner provided by
applicable State law or, if no State law applies, in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city.
After the adoption of the resolution, the city clerk shall cause a notice to be
published and mailed as provided for in §
14-10.4 stating the time and place of the public hearing and where the
resolution, assessment roll, and other data may be seen and examined before the
hearing. Affidavits of publication and mailing shall be filed with the council
at or before the hearing.
(b)   The refunding of outstanding indebtedness under this article may be
initiated by the council on its own motion as an alternative to initiation by
petition of the owners and lessees as provided in subsection (a) and without
obtaining the prior approval of such owners and lessees. Notwithstanding that a
proposed refunding of outstanding indebtedness is initiated by the council on
its own motion, the report of the director required by subsection (a)(1) shall
be prepared, and the public hearing required by subsection (a)(2) shall be
held, in accordance with subsection (a).
In the event a proposed refunding is initiated by the council on its motion
pursuant to this subsection, the new assessments approved by the council
pursuant to §
14-13.4 shall not be greater in any year than the assessments for such year in
effect before the approval of such new assessments.
(Sec. 24-6.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 28,
§ 14-28.2) (Am. Ords. 90-91, 93-32, 00-06)
§ 14-13.3 Protest against refunding.
(a)   Any owner of property, the assessments on which to pay the outstanding
indebtedness have not been fully discharged, may, at any time before or at the
public hearing, file in writing with the council any protest, objection, or
suggestion as to the proposed refunding measure, stating briefly the reason
therefor, or may present the same in person orally at the public hearing. If
the owners of real property representing 30 percent or more of the outstanding
improvement assessments at the hearing, or prior thereto, file with the council
written protests duly acknowledged by such owners against the proposed
refunding plan or against any part of the plan therefor, the same shall not be
made contrary to such protest. If the protest is against the adoption of any
refunding plan, the same shall not be made, and the proceedings shall not be
renewed within one year from the date of closing the public hearing, unless
each owner protesting shall sooner withdraw the owner’s protest.
(b)   Any lessee of any property to be assessed under
Articles 8 through
14 shall be subrogated to all the rights of such owner to protest by filing
with the council before or at the hearing a certified copy of the lessee’s
lease, together with a citation of the book and page of the public record of
the same if it be recorded. Any lessor of such lessee, or any owner of property
to be assessed may, at any time before the closing of the public hearing, make
void the protest or the right of protest of any lessee of the property on
consideration of filing with the council a duly acknowledged waiver of the
stipulation in the lease that requires the lessee to pay the special
assessment, and a written agreement by the lessor or owner to pay the special
assessment to be made under the proposed improvement.
(c)   At the public hearing, the council shall sit as a board of equalization
to receive complaints or objections respecting the total amounts of the
proposed assessments.
(Sec. 24-6.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 28,
§ 14-28.3) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
§ 14-13.4 Determination by council.
(a)   After the hearing, the council shall consider any protests or suggestions
that may have been made or filed and whether sufficient valid protests have
been filed to compel it to abandon the proposed refunding plan. If the council
still has jurisdiction to continue, it shall then proceed to determine whether
the refunding plan shall be adopted as proposed, or adopted with modifications.
In the latter event, the city clerk shall be directed to give notice again of
the hearing as provided in §
14-13.2(a)(2). If after such initial and further advertisement and hearing, the
council determines to proceed with the refunding measure, it shall by ordinance
adopt the refunding measure.
(b)   Should the refunding plan provide for the issuance of new improvement
district bonds or general obligation bonds, the ordinance shall approve of the
assessment roll and incorporate the same by reference, which assessment roll as
provided in §
14-10.8, shall contain only the names of the property owners who have not fully
paid the assessments originally provided for the payment of the outstanding
improvement bonds and shall provide for the imposition of new assessments in
amounts sufficient to retire the improvement district refunding bonds or the
general obligation refunding bonds to be issued.
(c)   On the effective date of the ordinance, the amounts of the several
assessments so listed, advertised, or incorporated, not previously objected to,
shall conclusively be presumed to be just and equitable and not in excess of
the special benefits accruing or to accrue by reason of the original
improvements. On the effective date of the ordinance as provided above, all
assessments therein made shall be a lien in the same manner and to the same
extent as provided in §
14-11.4. However, in no case shall this new assessment constitute a lien on
property that has been discharged from the payment of the original assessment.
(Sec. 24-6.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 28,
§ 14-28.4) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
§ 14-13.5 Improvement district refunding bonds.
(a)   Improvement district refunding bonds issued for the refunding of the
outstanding improvement district bonds of any improvement district shall bear
the name of the improvement district for which they are issued, shall be in the
form and issued and sold and subject to call and under all the other conditions
and terms as prescribed by §§
14-12.1 to
14-12.5, except as otherwise prescribed in
Articles 8 through
14.
(b)   A lower rate of interest than that authorized in the original issue of
improvement district bonds may be prescribed and the improvement district
refunding bonds may be authorized to run for a term not to exceed 30 years
after the final stated maturity of the improvement district bonds being
refunded.
(c)   General obligation refunding bonds issued for the refunding of
outstanding general obligation bonds issued to finance improvements within an
improvement district shall be authorized, issued and sold in accordance with
HRS Chapter 47, as amended. Such general obligation refunding bonds may be
authorized to run for a term not to exceed 25 years after the final stated
maturity of the general obligation bonds being refunded.
(Sec. 24-6.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 28,
§ 14-28.5) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
§ 14-13.6 Installments.
   The provisions of §§
14-11.5 to
14-11.7, relating respectively to the payment of the assessments in
installments and the effect of failure to pay installments, are incorporated in
§§
14-13.1 to
14-13.9 by reference. The maximum number of installments in which the
assessment as provided for in §§
14-13.1 to
14-13.9 may be paid shall be dependent upon the term of the improvement
district refunding bonds or the general obligation refunding bonds.
(Sec. 24-6.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 28,
§ 14-28.6) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
§ 14-13.7 Petition by all owners.
(a)   If the petition requesting refunding of outstanding indebtedness is filed
and acknowledged by the owners of land representing 100 percent of the unpaid
assessments in any improvement district, and by all lessees of any property to
be assessed (unless the lessor of such lease files with the petition a duly
acknowledged waiver of the stipulation in the lease that requires the lessee to
pay such special assessments, and also a written agreement by the lessor or
owner to pay the assessments to be made under the proposed refunding plan),
then the council, upon the payment by the petitioners to the director of budget
and fiscal services of the cost of preparing the proposed refunding plan, as
estimated by the director or chief engineer, shall proceed as provided above to
have a hearing on the proposed new method of assessment and the assessment
roll.
(b)   If the owners of 100 percent of land, consent, in writing, to the amount
and apportionment of the proposed assessments under the refunding plan, it
shall be unnecessary to give the notice or to hold any of the hearings
specified above and the council may immediately proceed to fix the assessment
in the manner provided.
(Sec. 24-6.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 28,
§ 14-28.7) (Am. Ords. 90-91, 93-32)
§ 14-13.8 Refunded improvement district bonds—Cancellation.
   Upon payment and retirement of the outstanding bonds of the improvement
district, the refunded improvement district bonds shall be forwarded to the
registrar for cancellation.
(Sec. 24-6.8, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 28,
§ 14-28.8) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
§ 14-13.9 Obligations unimpaired.
   Nothing in §§
14-13.1 to
14-13.8 shall be construed as giving the council or any improvement district
authority to impair the obligations of the improvement district under any
outstanding improvement district bonds.
(Sec. 24-6.9, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 28,
§ 14-28.9) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
ARTICLE 14: LIMITATION ON TIME TO SUE
Section
   
14-14.1   Limitation on time to sue
§ 14-14.1 Limitation on time to sue.
   No action or proceeding to review any acts or proceedings or to question the
validity or enjoin the performance of any act or the issue or payment of any
improvement district bonds, or the imposition or collection of any assessments
authorized by
Articles 8 through
14, or for any other relief against any acts or proceedings, done or had under
Articles 8 through
14, whether based upon irregularities or jurisdictional defects or otherwise,
shall be maintained unless begun within 30 days after the performance of the
act or the passage of the resolution or ordinance challenged.
(Sec. 24-7.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 29,
§ 14-29.1) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
ARTICLE 15: SEVERABILITY
Section
   
14-15.1   Severability
§ 14-15.1 Severability.
   If any provision of
Articles 8 through
14 or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the
chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application,
and to this end,
Articles 8 through
14 are declared to be severable.
(Sec. 24-8.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 30,
§ 14-30.1) (Am. Ord. 90-91)
ARTICLE 16: GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR MAINTENANCE BY ASSESSMENTS
Sections
   
14-16.1   Method
   
14-16.2   Procedure
   
14-16.3   Protests—Objections—Suggestions
   
14-16.4   Determination by council
   
14-16.5   Assessment—Lien against property
   
14-16.6   Collection of assessments
   
14-16.7   Payment of installment
   
14-16.8   Financing
   
14-16.9   Levy of annual assessments
   
14-16.10   Exemption
   
14-16.11   Termination of maintenance district
   
14-16.12   Limitation on time to sue
   
14-16.13   Severability
§ 14-16.1 Method.
(a)   Upon request by the council, administration, or owners of property to be
benefited that a special maintenance district be created, the chief engineer
shall fully consider such a proposal.
(b)   Whenever the chief engineer finds that the cleaning and maintenance of
specially improved sidewalks and streets, as defined in §
13-1.1, and malls, as defined in §
13-10.2, or any public open space, require effort exceeding such that which the
normal city services can provide, the cost of such maintenance shall be
assessed against the land specially benefited, either on the frontage basis or
according to area of land or building floor area or real property tax
assessment on the value of the land and improvements thereon within a
maintenance district or any combination of the methods of assessment; provided
that whenever assessment basis is mentioned in sections and provisions
contained in this article, the same valuation method shall be used.
(c)   The owners of the lands specially benefited by any proposed assessments
for the maintenance of a sidewalk, street, or mall or such open space may
establish a committee to represent the landowners that, if so established,
shall constitute an advisory committee to the city with respect to all matters
relating to the proposed assessments for that district, including but not
limited to matters relating to the estimated cost of maintenance for the
assessment year, the scope and the specifications for and performance standards
contained in any maintenance contract to be let by the city for the district,
and the renewal of any maintenance contracts for the district.
(d)   The maintenance contract for a district may include the maintenance and
management of operations of the district when the council, in consultation with
the advisory committee, finds that it is to the benefit of the district to so
contract.
(e)   Nothing in this article shall prevent the city from accepting a proposal
from the owners that such maintenance shall be achieved under a private
agreement. Such proposal shall meet the maintenance standard to be adopted for
the maintenance district.
(f)   Notwithstanding
Articles 12 through
20,
Article 5 shall apply to property that may be affected by this chapter to the
extent that the responsibility for cleaning and maintaining of sidewalks has
not been assumed by the maintenance district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.1) (Added by Ord. 88-97; Am. Ord. 96-58)
§ 14-16.2 Procedure.
(a)   The chief engineer shall prepare a resolution, requiring one reading for
its adoption, defining the boundaries of the maintenance district, scope of
work to be performed concerning such maintenance, which may include but not be
limited to:
(1)   The repair, removal, or replacement of any part of the improvement;
(2)   The estimated cost of maintenance for the assessment year that shall be
for a period of 12 months commencing on the date when the assessment is due;
(3)   The method of assessment;
(4)   The portions of cost to be specifically benefited, with the estimated
total amount of assessment to be made against each property according to the
method of assessment proposed; the necessary surveys, maps, plans, drawings,
and other data;
(5)   Details for the maintenance;
(6)   The comments and recommendations of the advisory committee with respect
to such report; and
(7)   Any other matters or details intended to apply thereto.
The resolution shall also fix the date for a public hearing upon the proposed
maintenance district. Such resolution shall be submitted to the council for
action.
(b)   The city clerk shall cause a notice of the public hearing to be published
twice a week for two consecutive weeks (four publications in all) in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city, giving notice generally to all
owners and lessees of land proposed to be assessed and to all others interested
in the general details of the proposed maintenance district as adopted by the
council, either by expressed description or by reference to data supplied by
the chief engineer and stating the time and place of the public hearing wherein
such persons may object to and suggest modifications to the proposed
maintenance district and may question the benefits of the proposed maintenance
district to their property and the amount of any assessment thereon, and where
the resolution and other data may be seen and examined before the hearing. Not
less than 10 days before the public hearing, a notice thereof, stating the time
and place of the hearing where persons may object to and suggest modifications
to the proposed maintenance district and where pertinent data relating to the
proposed maintenance district may be obtained, shall be mailed to the several
owners and lessees on record at the department of budget and fiscal services,
to their addresses on record at the department, by certified or registered mail
with a request for a return receipt. Affidavits of publication and mailing
shall be filed with the council at or before the hearing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.2) (Added by Ord. 88-97)
§ 14-16.3 Protests—Objections—Suggestions.
   Any owner of property proposed to be assessed may at any time before or at
the public hearing file in writing with the council any protest, objection, or
suggestion as to the proposed maintenance district, stating briefly the reason
therefor, or present the same in person, orally, at the public hearing. If
owners representing 55 percent of the total assessment value, at the hearing or
prior thereto, file with the council written protests, duly acknowledged by
such owners, against the proposed maintenance district, the same shall not be
made, unless by a two-thirds vote of all members of the council. If the protest
against the proposed maintenance district is sustained, the same shall not be
made, and the proceedings shall not be renewed within six months from the date
of closing of the public hearing, unless each and every owner protesting shall
sooner withdraw the protest.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.3) (Added by Ord. 88-97)
§ 14-16.4 Determination by council.
   After the hearing provided in §
14-16.2, the council shall determine whether the proposed maintenance district
shall be created and whether it shall be created with or without modification.
No modification shall be made without public hearing as provided for in §
14-16.2, which would substantially reduce the properties to be assessed or
increase the proposed assessment beyond 10 percent of the estimated total
amount of assessment against all properties as specified in the resolution
proposing the maintenance district, or materially alter the general character
or plan of maintenance advertised. If, after such initial or further hearing,
the council determines to proceed with the maintenance district, it shall adopt
the resolution creating, defining, and establishing the maintenance district,
approving the method of assessment and confirming the amount of assessment.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.4) (Added by Ord. 88-97)
§ 14-16.5 Assessment—Lien against property.
   Each assessment shall be a lien upon the land against which it is made,
paramount to all other liens, except liens for prior assessments and property
taxes, including late charges, if any, or by redemption of the land after sale
for delinquency.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.5) (Added by Ord. 88-97)
§ 14-16.6 Collection of assessments.
   After the enactment of the assessment resolution, the director of budget and
fiscal services shall promptly mail out notices of assessment to the owners of
the assessed properties. All assessments so made shall be due and payable
within 30 days after the date of the notice; provided that any assessment may,
at the election of the owner of the land assessed, be paid in semiannual
installments with interest, as hereinafter provided. Failure to pay the amount
assessed when due shall thereafter bear penalty at the rate of 2 percent per
month or fraction of a month from the date of delinquency until such time when
the assessment, together with penalty, has been paid in full.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.6) (Added by Ord. 88-97)
§ 14-16.7 Payment of installment.
   In case of an election to pay an assessment in installments made pursuant to
§
14-16.6, payment shall be made within 30 days of the date of notice of payment.
Interest shall be paid on the unpaid principal at a rate not exceeding 10
percent per year. The rate of interest shall be determined by the council.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.7) (Added by Ord. 88-97)
§ 14-16.8 Financing.
(a)   Upon receipt of moneys representing assessments collected for the
maintenance district, the director of budget and fiscal services shall deposit
the moneys in a special fund for the maintenance district for which they were
collected, and the moneys shall be expended only for the maintenance authorized
for such district.
(b)   If there is a surplus or a deficit in the special fund of a maintenance
district at the end of any assessment year, the surplus or deficit shall be
carried forward to the next annual assessment to be levied within such district
and applied as a credit or a debit, as the case may be, against such
assessment.
(c)   If there is a deficit in the special fund of a maintenance district
during any assessment year, the council, by resolution requiring not more than
one reading for its adoption, from any available and unencumbered funds, may
provide for:
(1)   A contribution to the special fund; and
(2)   A temporary advance to the special fund and direct that the advance be
repaid from the next annual assessment levied and collected within the
maintenance district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.8) (Added by Ord. 88-97)
§ 14-16.9 Levy of annual assessments.
(a)   At least 90 days before the end of the preceding assessment year, the
chief engineer shall prepare and submit a report to the council for the next
assessment year. The report shall include the anticipated surplus or deficit
from the preceding assessment year as well as the proposed new rate of
assessment.
(b)   If the proposed assessment does not exceed 10 percent of the preceding
year’s total amount of assessment against all properties in the district, the
new assessment shall take effect upon the new assessment year.
(c)   If the proposed assessment exceeds 10 percent of the preceding year’s
total amount of assessment against all properties in the district, the council
shall review comments and recommendations of the advisory committee and conduct
a public hearing as provided for in §
14-16.4 on the issue of the assessment only. Thereafter, the council shall
adopt by resolution the new rate of assessment as determined from the outcome
of the public hearing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.9) (Added by Ord. 88-97)
§ 14-16.10 Exemption.
   Exemption from improvement assessments as provided in HRS § 46-74.1 shall
apply to maintenance assessment.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.10) (Added by Ord. 88-97)
§ 14-16.11 Termination of maintenance district.
(a)   Owners representing 55 percent of the total assessment value may petition
the council for termination of a maintenance district at the end of the term of
a maintenance contract for the maintenance of such district.
(b)   When such a petition is before the council, the continuation of the
maintenance district shall require two-thirds vote of all members of the
council to reject the petition.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.11) (Added by Ord. 88-97)
§ 14-16.12 Limitation on time to sue.
   No action or proceeding to review any acts or proceedings or to question the
validity or enjoin the performance of any act or the levy or collection of any
assessments authorized by this article, or for any other relief against any
acts or proceedings done or had under this article, whether based upon
irregularities or jurisdictional defects or otherwise, shall be maintained,
unless begun within 30 days after performance of the act or the passage of the
resolution or ordinance complained of.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.12) (Added by Ord. 88-97)
§ 14-16.13 Severability.
   If this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is
held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications
of the article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end, the provisions of the article are declared to be
severable.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.13) (Added by Ord. 88-97)
ARTICLE 17: MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE STREETS AND ROADS
Sections
   
14-17.1   Definitions
   
14-17.2   Surface maintenance
   
14-17.3   Street lighting
   
14-17.4   Rule-making authority
§ 14-17.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Director and Chief Engineer. The director and chief engineer of facility
maintenance.
Persons Having the Right to Control the Use. The person or persons having the
legal right to make decisions as to the use, improvement, and repair and
maintenance of a street, road, or other property, sign agreements with respect
thereto, and bind all other persons having rights in or to such street, road,
or other property, whether such other persons are owners of the fee title to
the street, road, or other property, are holders of roadway easements, or have
some other interest in the street, road, or other property.
Private, Nondedicated, and Nonsurrendered Streets and Roads. Streets, roads,
highways, ways, or lanes used for purposes of vehicular traffic that are owned,
in whole or in part, by persons other than governmental entities and which have
not been dedicated or surrendered to the city in accordance with HRS § 264-1(c)
(1) and (2). The term private, nondedicated and nonsurrendered streets and
roads includes any associated bridges and bicycle lanes as the latter term is
defined in HRS § 291C-1, but does not include any trail or other nonvehicular
right-of-way or any alley or bicycle path as those terms are defined in HRS §
291C-1.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 32, § 14-32.1) (Added by Ord. 96-73)
§ 14-17.2 Surface maintenance.
(a)   Subject to the availability of appropriations, the department of facility
maintenance may maintain by either remedial patching, resurfacing, or paving
those portions of private, nondedicated, and nonsurrendered streets and roads
that have been determined by the chief engineer, with the approval of the
director of transportation services and the director of planning and
permitting, to meet the following criteria:
(1)   The street or road has not been dedicated or surrendered to the city or
any other governmental entity, and is not otherwise owned by the city or any
other governmental entity;
(2)   The street or road is not maintained by any governmental entity other
than the city pursuant to this article;
(3)   The street or road is open to, serves, and benefits the general public;
(4)   The street or road is not signed, marked, delineated, fenced, barricaded,
or otherwise designed, constructed or operated to exclude access by the general
public, in whole or in part, which may be through such means as signs
indicating that the street or road is a “private” street or road, or any
restrictions on parking that are not applicable to all persons except as
otherwise provided by law;
(5)   The street or road directly serves:
(A)   Six or more parcels;
(B)   Six or more residential structures; or
(C)   A parcel of land which has one or more condominium buildings or apartment
buildings that contain six or more condominium or apartment units;
(6)   The street or road is not part of a cluster housing development, planned
development, or similar type of development;
(7)   Maintenance of the street or road by the city will be practicable and
safe;
(8)   The street or road is not a private street or road within the meaning of
Chapter 22 or the rules adopted pursuant thereto;
(9)   The developer or subdivider of the street or road has not agreed to
maintain the street or road in perpetuity;
(10)   An association of apartment owners or homeowners association does not
maintain the street or road;
(11)   Maintenance of the street or road surface is necessary to protect the
safety of motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians, or is otherwise in the public
interest; and
(12)   The street or road does not suffer such design defects as to make use of
the street or road hazardous to the general public.
(b)   (1)   If they wish a private street or road to be maintained by the city,
the persons collectively owning a 60 percent or greater interest in the fee
title or an appropriate roadway easement in the street or road may initiate and
submit a written request to the chief engineer for the maintenance of the
street or road. If the chief engineer determines that the private street or
road satisfies the criteria set forth in this subsection, the chief engineer
may, subject to the availability of appropriations, proceed to maintain the
street or road; provided that the persons having the right to control the use
of the street or road submit their written approval of the maintenance work.
(2)   The persons having the right to control the use of the street or road
must agree to such terms, conditions, and covenants as may be determined by the
chief engineer to be for the convenience and protection of the city and the
public, including the granting of necessary easements; provided that two of the
conditions the persons having the right to control the use of the street or
road must agree to are that they shall, for as long as the city maintains the
street or road surface or for the period of time specified in the agreement,
whichever is longer.
(A)   Keep the street or road open to the general public; and
(B)   Keep the street or road, and any adjacent sidewalk areas, free of
obstructions and clear of debris that would prevent the safe passage of
motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians.
(3)   The requirement for a written request, approval and agreement will not
apply, however, to:
(A)   A street or road over which the department of facility maintenance
exercises surface maintenance responsibilities on the day prior to December 19,
1996; or
(B)   A street or road which the chief engineer, with the approval of the
director of transportation services and the director of planning and
permitting, determines has been dedicated by implication to public use for
roadway purposes.
(4)   Nothing contained herein will be construed as prohibiting the chief
engineer from requiring a written approval and agreement for new maintenance
work on streets or roads over which the department of facility maintenance
exercises surface maintenance responsibilities on the day prior to December 19,
1996 if the chief engineer determines that such an agreement is in the best
interests of the city.
(c)   (1)   Paved roads shall be maintained by remedial patching. Remedial
patching shall be with like materials, for example:
(A)   Asphalt concrete shall be used for asphalt concrete paved roads; and
(B)   Portland cement concrete or asphalt concrete, as determined by the
director and chief engineer, shall be used for Portland cement concrete paved
roads.
(2)   If the director and chief engineer determines that the pavement is in
such poor condition that remedial patching is impractical and not cost
effective, resurfacing may be provided.
(3)   Unpaved roads shall be maintained by remedial patching. Remedial patching
shall be with like materials, for example: coral for coral; and crushed rock
for crushed rock. If the director and chief engineer determines that the street
or road surface is in such poor condition that remedial patching is not cost
effective and does not serve the best interests of motorists, bicyclists, and
pedestrians, paving with asphalt concrete material may be provided.
(4)   The decks of bridges associated with private, nondedicated, and
nonsurrendered streets and roads may be maintained by remedial repairs.
Remedial repairs shall be with like materials, for example, deteriorated wood
planks shall be replaced with wood planks. If the director and chief engineer
determines that the deck is in such poor condition that remedial repairs are
impractical and not cost effective, the deck may be replaced with like
material. The director and chief engineer may also provide for the maintenance,
repair, or replacement of railings.
(5)   Maintenance work to be performed by the city pursuant to this section
shall not include installation or maintenance of curbs, shoulders, gutters,
drainage facilities, or similar infrastructure; provided that antispeed bumps
that are removed as part of the city’s maintenance of private streets and roads
may be reinstalled by the city if the department of transportation services
determines that the conditions for installation in §
15-24.18 have been met. Prior to the removal of anti-speed bumps as part of the
city’s maintenance of private streets and roads, the director and chief
engineer must notify persons residing within the immediate vicinity and persons
having the right to control the use of the portion of the private street or
road on which the anti-speed bumps are located of the removal of the anti-speed
bumps and explain in writing to such persons conditions under which the city
may reinstall the anti-speed bumps. For the purposes of this section only,
“anti-speed bump” means a convex mound, approximately 3 feet wide at the base
and approximately 4 inches in height at the apex, placed across the width of a
private, nondedicated, and nonsurrendered street or road for the purpose of
controlling the speed of vehicular traffic.
(d)   The director and chief engineer, with the approval of the director of
transportation services, shall discontinue maintenance of specific private,
nondedicated and nonsurrendered streets and roads, when the director and chief
engineer determines that such streets and roads no longer meet all criteria set
forth in subdivisions (1) through (12) of subsection (a), or when requested in
writing by the persons having the right to control the use of the street or
road. Prior to discontinuing maintenance of any private, nondedicated and
nonsurrendered street or road, the director and chief engineer shall provide
each owner and roadway easement holder of record of the street or road with 30
days’ written notice of such proposed action. Where maintenance is discontinued
because the street or road is signed, marked, delineated, fenced, barricaded,
or otherwise designed, constructed, or operated to exclude the general public,
in whole or in part, the director and chief engineer is authorized, in the
director and chief engineer’s discretion and to the extent legally and
economically feasible, to:
(1)   Recover removable fixtures or materials, if any, installed by the city,
and to recover from the owners or roadway easement holders of the street or
road, as may be appropriate, the value of the fixtures or materials left in
place; and
(2)   Recover from the owners or roadway easement holders the total cost
incurred by the city for paving or other maintenance work done pursuant to this
section within the five-year period preceding the closure of the street or road
to the public. The owners or roadway easement holders of the street or road may
avoid liability for the costs by making signage, design, construction,
operational, or other changes, or any necessary combination thereof, to again
open the street or road to the general public and meet all criteria set forth
in subdivisions (1) through (12) of subsection (a).
(e)   Nothing contained in this section and no action undertaken pursuant to
this section shall be construed as adoption, acceptance, or approval of a
private, nondedicated and nonsurrendered street or road as a public highway.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 32, § 14-32.2) (Added by Ord. 96-73; Am. Ords. 14-37,
16-24, 17-8, 18-45)
§ 14-17.3 Street lighting.
(a)   Subject to the availability of appropriations, the department of
transportation services may install and maintain new street lights or maintain
existing street lights on those portions of private, nondedicated, and
nonsurrendered streets and roads that have been determined by the director of
transportation services, with the approval of the director and chief engineer
and the director of planning and permitting, to meet the criteria set forth in
subdivisions (1) through (11) of §
14-17.2(a) and, with respect to existing street lighting systems, to meet the
city’s then current standards for design, construction, installation,
equipment, and materials.
Before the city undertakes any street lighting work or assumes any energy
costs, all persons having the right to control the use of the portion of the
street or road and any other property on which the street lights are or will be
located, shall initiate and submit a written request to the director of
transportation services for the installation or maintenance of street lights,
or both, agreeing to such terms, conditions, and covenants as may be determined
by the director of transportation services to be for the convenience and
protection of the city and the public, including the granting of necessary
easements; provided that one of the conditions persons having the right to
control the use of the portion of the street or road and any other property
shall agree to is the condition that they keep the street or road open to the
general public for as long as the city maintains the street lights on the
street or road or for the period of time specified in the agreement, whichever
is longer. The requirement for a written request and agreement does not apply,
however, to a:
(1)   Street or road over which the department of transportation services
exercises street lighting maintenance responsibilities on the day before
December 19, 1996*; or
(2)   A street or road that the director of transportation services, with the
approval of the director and chief engineer and the director of planning and
permitting, determines has been dedicated by implication to public use for
roadway purposes; provided that nothing contained herein is construed as
prohibiting the director of transportation services from requiring a written
agreement for new maintenance work on streets or roads over which the
department of transportation services exercises street lighting maintenance
responsibilities on the day before December 19, 1996* if the director of
transportation services determines that such an agreement is in the best
interests of the city.
(b)   Maintenance work to be performed by the city pursuant to this section
shall include but not be limited to replacing and upgrading street light
fixtures, photoelectric cells, and bulbs as necessary and paying energy costs
applicable to such street lights.
(c)   The director of transportation services, with the approval of the
director and chief engineer, shall discontinue maintenance of street lighting
systems for specific private, nondedicated, and nonsurrendered streets and
roads, including the payment of energy costs, when the director of
transportation services determines that such streets and roads no longer meet
the criteria referred to in subsection (a), or when requested in writing by the
persons having the right to control the use of the portion of the street or
road or of the other property on which the street lights are located. Before
discontinuing maintenance of street lighting systems or payment of energy costs
for any private, nondedicated, and nonsurrendered street or road, the director
of transportation services shall provide each owner and roadway easement holder
of record of the street, road, or property with 30 days’ written notice of such
proposed action. Where maintenance is discontinued because the street or road
is signed, marked, delineated, fenced, barricaded, or otherwise designed,
constructed, or operated to exclude the general public, in whole or in part,
the director of transportation services is authorized, in the director’s
discretion and to the extent legally and economically feasible, to recover any
removable standards, fixtures, photoelectric cells, or bulbs installed by the
city, or to recover from the owners or roadway easement holders of the street,
road, or other property, as may be appropriate, the value of the standards,
fixtures, photoelectric cells, or bulbs left in place.
(d)   Nothing contained in this section and no action undertaken pursuant to
this section shall be construed as adoption, acceptance, or approval of a
private, nondedicated, and nonsurrendered street or road as a public highway.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 32, § 14-32.3) (Added by Ord. 96-73)
Editor’s note:
   * “December 19, 1996” is substituted for “the effective date of this
article.”
§ 14-17.4 Rule-making authority.
   In accordance with HRS Chapter 91, the director and chief engineer and
director of transportation services may adopt rules having the force and effect
of law for the implementation, administration, and enforcement of §§
14-17.2 and
14-17.3, respectively.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 32, § 14-32.4) (Added by Ord. 96-73)
ARTICLE 18: COMPLETE STREETS
Sections
   
14-18.1   Definitions
   
14-18.2   Complete streets policy; principles
   
14-18.3   Administration; implementation
   
14-18.4   Exceptions
   
14-18.5   Annual report; performance standards
   
14-18.6   Training
§ 14-18.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Accessibility. The ability to reach desired destinations for all transportation
system users.
Complete Streets Features. Include but are not limited to sidewalks,
crosswalks, accessible curb ramps, curb extensions, raised medians, refuge
islands, roundabouts or mini-circles, traffic signals and accessible pedestrian
signals such as audible and vibrotactile indications and pedestrian countdown
signals, shared-use paths, bicycle lanes, paved shoulders, street trees,
planting strips, signs, pavement markings, including multi-modal pavement
striping, street furniture, bicycle parking facilities, public transportation
stops, and facilities, including streetscapes, dedicated transit lanes, and
transit priority signalization.
Context Sensitive Solution. A process in which a full range of stakeholders are
involved in developing complete streets transportation solutions that identify
and incorporate appropriate complete streets features designed to fit into,
enhance, and support the surrounding environment and context, including land
use.
Directors. The directors of transportation services, design and construction,
planning and permitting, and facility maintenance.
Multi-Modal. The movement of people and goods by more than one method of
transportation. A street that accommodates walking, bicycling, mobility
devices, transit, and driving is multi-modal.
National Industry Best Practices. Guidelines established by national industry
groups on complete streets best policy and implementation practices, including
but not limited to reports by the American Planning Association and the
National Complete Streets Coalition.
Transportation Facility or Project. The planning, design, construction,
reconstruction, maintenance, or improvement of public highways, roadways,
streets, sidewalks, traffic control devices and signage, and all facilities or
improvements related to public transit.
Users. Motorists, bicyclists, individuals dependent on mobility devices,
transit riders, pedestrians, and others who depend on the transportation system
to move people and goods.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 33, § 14-33.1) (Added by Ord. 12-15)
§ 14-18.2 Complete streets policy; principles.
(a)   There is established a complete streets policy and principles for the
city to guide and direct more comprehensive and balanced planning, design, and
construction of city transportation systems. Under this policy, the city
expresses its commitment to encourage the development of transportation
facilities or projects that are planned, designed, operated, and maintained to
provide safe mobility for all users. Every transportation facility or project,
whether new construction, reconstruction, or maintenance, provides the
opportunity to implement complete streets policy and principles. This policy
provides that a context sensitive solution process and multi-modal approach be
considered in all planning documents and for the development of all city
transportation facilities and projects.
(b)   Complete streets principles consist of the following objectives:
(1)   Improve safety;
(2)   Apply a context sensitive solution process that integrates community
context and the surrounding environment, including land use;
(3)   Protect and promote accessibility and mobility for all;
(4)   Balance the needs and comfort of all modes and users;
(5)   Encourage consistent use of national industry best practice guidelines to
select complete streets design elements;
(6)   Improve energy efficiency in travel and mitigate vehicle emissions by
providing nonmotorized transportation options;
(7)   Encourage opportunities for physical activity and recognize the health
benefits of an active lifestyle;
(8)   Recognize complete streets as a long-term investment that can save money
over time;
(9)   Build partnerships with stakeholders and organizations statewide; and
(10)   Incorporate trees and landscaping as integral components of complete
streets.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 33, § 14-33.2) (Added by Ord. 12-15)
§ 14-18.3 Administration; implementation.
(a)   The directors shall, based on a context sensitive solution process,
employ a multi-modal approach and incorporate complete streets features in the
planning, design, construction, maintenance, and operation of transportation
facilities and projects, including but not limited to the reconstruction,
rehabilitation, or resurfacing of any transportation facility under the
jurisdiction of the directors.
(b)   Within six months of the enactment of this ordinance, the directors shall
jointly create, adopt, and publish a single complete streets checklist and
associated procedures to be used by the directors and their staffs when
performing any one or more of the following: initiating, planning, designing,
revising, implementing, or reviewing any transportation facility or project.
The complete streets checklist shall be jointly updated from time to time by
the directors as necessary to facilitate the implementation of complete
streets.
(c)   As used in this section, “complete streets checklist” means a tool to
collect data and information about the status of the roadway and the
surrounding area, as well as the details of the transportation facility or
project, with a goal of identifying specific elements that can be incorporated
to support and balance the needs of all users. Such specific elements shall be
part of an implementation procedure to be prepared in conjunction with
compilation of a checklist. Data and information complied in the checklist
include but are not limited to traffic volume, street classification, and type;
an inventory of sidewalk condition, transit facilities, and parking
restrictions; and recommendations from any existing neighborhood, bicycle,
pedestrian, transit, or other plan.
(d)   Complete streets features shall be incorporated into transportation
plans, projects, and programs following implementation procedures established
by the complete streets checklist.
(e)   Within one year of the enactment of this ordinance, the directors shall
evaluate and initiate updates of existing ordinances, codes, subdivision
standards, rules, policies, plans, and design guidelines to ensure their
consistency with the complete streets policy and principles. Design standards,
guidelines, and manuals shall incorporate national industry best practice
guidelines, and shall be updated from time to time by the directors as
necessary to reflect current best practices.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 33, § 14-33.3) (Added by Ord. 12-15)
§ 14-18.4 Exceptions.
(a)   A multi-modal approach and complete streets features are not required if
a director of an affected department determines, in writing with appropriate
documentation, before or during the design process, that:
(1)   Use of a street or highway by nonmotorized users is prohibited by law;
(2)   The cost would be excessively disproportionate to the need or probable
future use over the long term;
(3)   There is an absence of current or future need; or
(4)   The safety of pedestrian, bicycle, or vehicular traffic may be placed at
unacceptable risk.
(b)   Each written exception with accompanying documentation shall become a
public record and shall be published electronically or online on the official
website of the city, and shall be on file and available for public inspection
at the office of the city clerk and at the office of the department making the
determination.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 33, § 14-33.4) (Added by Ord. 12-15)
§ 14-18.5 Annual report; performance standards.
(a)   Before December 31 of each year following the enactment of this
ordinance, the directors shall submit to the council a report detailing their
compliance with the complete streets policy and principles during the prior
fiscal year, and listing the transportation facilities and projects initiated
during that year and the complete streets features incorporated therein. The
report shall include a list of exceptions made pursuant to §
14-18.4 for that year.
(b)   Within two years of the enactment of this ordinance, the directors shall
establish and publish performance standards with measurable benchmarks
reflecting the capacity for all users to travel with appropriate safety and
convenience along roadways under the jurisdiction of the city. Annual reports
for the year in which measurable performance standards are established, and all
years thereafter, shall include a report of each agency’s performance under
such measures, and where appropriate, shall identify problem areas and
suggested solutions, and provide recommendations to improve the process.
(c)   The annual reports required in this section may be part of the agency’s
annual reports required by Charter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 33, § 14-33.5) (Added by Ord. 12-15)
§ 14-18.6 Training.
   The directors shall require and provide training for their staffs in
complete streets policies, principles, and implementation procedures that may
be applicable to the performance of their duties.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 33, § 14-33.6) (Added by Ord. 12-15)
ARTICLE 19: GLASPHALT PAVING
Sections
   
14-19.1   Definitions
   
14-19.2   Glasphalt specifications and use
   
14-19.3   Administration
§ 14-19.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Asphalt. A solid or semisolid mixture of bitumens (hydrocarbons from coal or
petroleum) used in paving, roofing, or waterproofing. It can be mixed with sand
or crushed stone gravel and used for paving.
Cullet. Crushed glass.
Glasphalt. Asphaltic concrete for street paving made from crushed glass as a
partial substitute for the aggregate (sand or crushed stone) in the mix.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 8, § 9-8.1) (Added by Ord. 92-39)
§ 14-19.2 Glasphalt specifications and use.
(a)   Notwithstanding the Standard Specifications For Public Works Construction
dated September1986, glasphalt, if available, shall be used in city road
construction and paving projects in accordance with the following requirements:
(1)   Glasphalt may be used in the surface mix on roads with a 40 mph speed
limit or less; provided that such glasphalt shall have a maximum 10 percent
cullet;
(2)   Glasphalt shall be used in the subsurface mix on all roads, irrespective
of the speed limit for those roads; provided that such glasphalt shall have a
maximum 10 percent cullet;
(3)   The cullet may be fine to coarse; provided that no piece shall be greater
than 0.375 inch sieve size;
(4)   Cullet may consist of clean or contaminated mixed color glass, but shall
not contain any biodegradable material such as paper; and
(5)   Glasphalt may contain recycled asphalt.
(b)   All bid specifications for city road construction and paving projects
shall require that the glasphalt and cullet, if available, be used in the roads
that meet the requirements set forth in subsection (a).
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 8, § 9-8.2) (Added by Ord. 92-39)
§ 14-19.3 Administration.
   This article shall be administered by the department of environmental
services.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 8, § 9-8.3) (Added by Ord. 92-39; Am. Ord. 99-32)
ARTICLE 20: BANNERS DISPLAYED FROM LAMPPOSTS
Sections
   
14-20.1   Declaration of legislative intent
   
14-20.2   Definitions
   
14-20.3   Powers and duties
   
14-20.4   Application required—Compliance
   
14-20.5   Application process and fees
   
14-20.6   Submittal to commission on culture and the arts
   
14-20.7   Denial of banner application
   
14-20.8   Revocation of approval
   
14-20.9   Rules
§ 14-20.1 Declaration of legislative intent.
(a)   While it is in the public interest to foster sightliness and physical
good order within the city, it is also in the public interest to promote public
festivals that can bring the residents of the city and their visitors together
and promote ethnic traditions, customs, historical or cultural events, or
athletic competition, and foster the development of tourism.
(b)   The attractive decoration of public places and festivals complement one
another. Organizers of festivals such as Aloha Week may be allowed to apply to
the city requesting that attractive banners be displayed from public lampposts
on authorized streets at the expense of the community organization to promote
the public interest.
(Sec. 13-43.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 22,
§ 41-22.1)
§ 14-20.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Authorized Street. Within the City and County of Honolulu, so much of Kalakaua
Avenue between its intersection with Ala Moana Boulevard and its intersection
with Kapahulu Avenue; so much of Ala Moana Boulevard between its intersection
with Atkinson Drive and its intersection with Kalakaua Avenue; so much of King
Street between its intersection with Bethel Street and its intersection with
Kapiolani Boulevard; and so much of Bishop Street between its intersection with
Queen Street and its intersection with Hotel Street.
Commission on Culture and the Arts. Has the same meaning as defined in
Chapter 3, Article 2.
Community Organization. A nonprofit corporation organized under HRS Chapter
414D.
Convention Center Zone Streets. The following portions of the following streets
within the City and County of Honolulu: the portion of Atkinson Drive between
its intersection with Kapiolani Boulevard and its intersection  with Kahakai
Drive; the portion of Kapiolani Boulevard between its intersection with
Kalakaua Avenue and its intersection with Atkinson Drive; and the portion of
Kalakaua Avenue between its intersection with Kapiolani Boulevard and its
intersection with Ala Wai Boulevard.
Director. The director of transportation services or the director’s designated
deputy.
Festival. A series of at least five public events sponsored by a community
organization, held within the city during a period of at least 10 consecutive
days.
Lamppost. Any pole erected solely for street lighting purposes on which there
are no externally attached overhead electric, telephone and communications
conductors, wires, and cables mounted thereon.
Public Event. An event that promotes ethnic, historical, or cultural values, or
athletic competition, or is intended to be a general public gathering or
assembly in a public place, or an event that is held at the Hawaii Convention
Center.
(Sec. 13-43.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 22,
§ 41-22.2) (Am. Ords. 96-58, 98-53, 09-7)
§ 14-20.3 Powers and duties.
(a)   (1)   The director is authorized to approve or deny an application from
any community organization requesting the display of banners from public
lampposts situated on authorized streets during any festival in accordance with
this article. The director is further authorized to revoke any such approval
for noncompliance in accordance with this article.
(2)   The director is authorized to approve or deny an application from the
Hawaii Convention Center or the Hawaii Visitors Convention Bureau requesting
the display of banners from public lampposts on convention center zone streets
for a public event in accordance with this article or to revoke any such
approval for noncompliance in accordance with this article.
(3)   If the director approves:
(A)   An application from a community organization requesting the display of
banners during a festival that promotes a public interest by fostering ethnic
traditions, customs, historical or cultural events, or athletic competition,
and the development of tourism; or
(B)   An application from the Hawaii Convention Center or the Hawaii Visitors
Convention Bureau requesting the display of banners for a public event to be
held at the Hawaii Convention Center;
it shall be a public duty for the director of facility maintenance to then
fasten the banners to the designated public lampposts to promote the public
interest.
(b)   The commission on culture and the arts shall have, in addition to the
powers and duties set forth in
Chapter 3, Article 2, the power and duty to recommend to the director banners
of a design, manufacture, and aesthetic quality appropriate to be displayed
from lampposts situated on any authorized street or on a convention center zone
street in accordance with this article.
(Sec. 13-43.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 22,
§ 41-22.3) (Am. Ord. 98-53)
§ 14-20.4 Application required—Compliance.
(a)   No banner shall be displayed from a lamppost situated on an authorized
street or on a convention center zone street unless an application has been
submitted and approved by the director in accordance with this article and in
no event, shall the display of banners exceed a duration of 14 days.
(b)   The fastening, display, and removal of any banner shall be performed by
the department of facility maintenance and only after the application for the
banner has been approved by the director.
(Sec. 13-43.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 22,
§ 41-22.4) (Am. Ord. 98-53)
§ 14-20.5 Application process and fees.
(a)   A verified application by a community organization for approval to
display banners on lampposts situated upon authorized streets shall be executed
by the chief executive of the community organization and shall include but not
be limited to the following information:
(1)   The name and address of the applicant;
(2)   The names and addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant;
(3)   A copy of the charter of incorporation of the applicant;
(4)   A description of the festival, including the places, dates, and times of
each public event sponsored by the applicant;
(5)   A description of the number of banners to be displayed and the streets on
which and lampposts from which it is proposed that the banners will be
displayed;
(6)   The duration of the banner display;
(7)   The public purpose to be served by the banner display; and
(8)   Any other information required by the director and necessary to fully
evaluate the application.
(b)   A verified application from the Hawaii Convention Center or the Hawaii
Visitors Convention Bureau for approval to display banners on lampposts
situated upon convention center zone streets shall provide the information
required under subsection (a)(1) and subsections (a)(5) through (a)(8) only.
(c)   There shall also be submitted as part of the application, the following:
(1)   A specimen of the banner to be displayed, incorporating the identical
material, fasteners, and artwork to be used in all the banners to be displayed;
(2)   An agreement by the applicant that it shall bear the full expense of
producing the banners; and
(3)   An agreement by the applicant to assume the defense of and indemnify and
save harmless the city, its officers and employees from all suits, actions,
damages, or claims to which the city may be subjected resulting from the
display, maintenance, and removal of the banners from lampposts situated on
authorized streets or convention center zone streets. The city shall not be
held responsible for returning the banners to the community organization or the
Hawaii Convention Center or the Hawaii Visitors Convention Bureau in their
original condition.
(d)   Fees. Every applicant shall pay to the director of budget and fiscal
services a fee of $65 for each and every banner to be displayed. No banner
shall be displayed from any lamppost by the department of facility maintenance,
unless and until the full fee required has been paid in advance.
(Sec. 13-43.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 22,
§ 41-22.5) (Am. Ords. 98-53, 09-7)
§ 14-20.6 Submittal to commission on culture and the arts.
   The director shall, within five days of the receipt of the application,
submit a copy of the application to the commission on culture and the arts. The
commission on culture and the arts shall, within 30 days of the receipt of the
application, submit its findings or recommendations regarding the banner
design, manufacture, and aesthetic quality to the director.
(Sec. 13-43.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 22,
§ 41-22.6)
§ 14-20.7 Denial of banner application.
(a)   No application shall be approved by the director:
(1)   Except upon a finding by the director that the banner display during the
festival will promote the public interest by fostering ethnic traditions,
customs, historical or cultural events, athletic competition or the development
of tourism; provided that such a finding shall not be required of a banner
display on convention center zone streets for a public event at the Hawaii
Convention Center;
(2)   If the director believes that the public health, safety, or welfare will
be impaired at any time during the banner display; or
(3)   If the community organization or the Hawaii Convention Center or the
Hawaii Visitors Convention Bureau fails or refuses to comply with this article
or any other applicable statute, ordinance, or rule.
(b)   Written notice of the approval or denial of an application shall be
provided to the applicant as soon as practicable. If the application is denied,
the written notice shall state the reasons for denial.
(c)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the director to grant or deny an
application may appeal the decision of the director, and the appeal shall be
set for hearing in accordance with rules adopted by the director for such
hearings. Notice of the hearing and the conduct of the hearing shall comply
with HRS Chapter 91 (Administrative Procedure Act).
(Sec. 13-43.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 22,
§ 41-22.7) (Am. Ord. 98-53)
§ 14-20.8 Revocation of approval.
(a)   The director may revoke any approval of an application made under this
article at any time for but not limited to any of the following reasons:
(1)   Failure or refusal by the community organization or the Hawaii Convention
Center or the Hawaii Visitors Convention Bureau to comply with this article or
any other applicable statute, ordinance or rule;
(2)   Failure by the community organization or the Hawaii Convention Center or
the Hawaii Visitors Convention Bureau to promptly provide replacement of any
banner deemed by the director to be damaged, soiled, or in disrepair;
(3)   The public health, safety, or welfare is jeopardized; or
(4)   When any banner that by reason of its size, location, movement, content,
coloring, or manner of illumination constitutes a traffic hazard or a detriment
to traffic safety by obstructing the vision of drivers, or by obstructing or
detracting from the visibility of any official traffic control device or by
diverting or tending to divert the attention of drivers of moving vehicles from
the traffic movement on the public streets and roads.
(b)   Whenever the director revokes approval of the banner application under
the conditions set forth in subsection (a), the applicant may appeal the
revocation in accordance with the rules authorized.
(Sec. 13-43.8, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 22,
§ 41-22.8) (Am. Ord. 98-53)
§ 14-20.9 Rules.
   The director is authorized to adopt rules, pursuant to the procedures set
forth in HRS Chapter 91, as are necessary to implement, administer, and enforce
this article.
(Sec. 13-43.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 22, § 41-22.9)
ARTICLE 21: NEIGHBORHOOD WATCH SIGNS
Sections
   
14-21.1   Purpose
   
14-21.2   Definitions
   
14-21.3   Powers and duties
   
14-21.4   Request for approval
   
14-21.5   Rules
§ 14-21.1 Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide assistance to communities that
have organized a neighborhood watch program aimed at crime prevention and to
encourage the formation of neighborhood watch programs by other communities by
authorizing the department of transportation services to construct and install
neighborhood watch signs at appropriate locations on public property at the
county’s expense.
(Sec. 13-44.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 23,
§ 41-23.1)
§ 14-21.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Director. The director of transportation services.
Neighborhood Watch Program. A neighborhood program established in accordance
with the Honolulu neighborhood security watch program sponsored by the Honolulu
police department.
Neighborhood Watch Sign. A sign designed, constructed, and placed on public
property by the department of transportation services pursuant to this article.
Public Property. Any curbstone, lamppost, pole, parking meter, bridge, street
sign, or traffic light located on public property.
(Sec. 13-44.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 23,
§ 41-23.2)
§ 14-21.3 Powers and duties.
(a)   Pursuant to this article, the director is authorized to:
(1)   Design, construct, and place on public property signs indicating that the
area is protected by a neighborhood watch;
(2)   Grant or deny a request for the placement of neighborhood watch sign or
signs;
(3)   In consultation with the neighborhood watch program and a duly authorized
representative of the Honolulu police department, determine the number and
location of all neighborhood watch signs; and
(4)   Remove neighborhood watch signs located in neighborhoods where the
neighborhood watch program has terminated upon prior written notice to the
affected neighborhood.
(b)   If a request for the placement of neighborhood watch signs is approved by
the director, it shall be the duty of the director, within 60 days of the
approval date, to place or cause to be placed on public property neighborhood
watch signs at designated locations.
(c)   It shall be the duty of the director to comply with the applicable sign
provisions contained in the land use ordinance,
Chapter 21, Article 7.
(Sec. 13-44.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 23,
§ 41-23.3) (Am. Ord. 96-58)
§ 14-21.4 Request for approval.
(a)   Any neighborhood watch program wishing to have a neighborhood watch sign
or signs placed in the neighborhood shall submit a written request to the
director. The request shall include:
(1)   The geographical boundaries of the neighborhood for which the request is
being made;
(2)   The number of signs being requested; and
(3)   The approximate location of each sign.
(b)   Each request shall be signed by an authorized representative of the
neighborhood watch program for which the request is being made and by a duly
authorized police officer of the Honolulu police department.
(c)   No request for the placement of signs shall be approved by the director,
unless 60 percent of the homes within the boundaries of the designated
neighborhood participate in the neighborhood watch program.
(Sec. 13-44.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 23,
§ 41-23.4)
§ 14-21.5 Rules.
   The director is authorized to adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, as are
necessary to implement, administer, and enforce this article.
(Sec. 13-44.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 23,
§ 41-23.5)
APPENDIX 14-A: IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. No. Approval Date
                       Provides for cost of improvements in Improvement
88-82    6-19-1988     District No. 263, Nuuanu Valley Sewers, Section 3,
                       Nuuanu, Honolulu, Oahu, Hawaii, Job No. W12-87
                       Provides for cost of improvements in Improvement
88-99    8-10-1988     District No. 260, Kaneohe Sewers, Section 8, Kaneohe,
                       Koolaupoko, Oahu, Hawaii, Job No. W10-85
                       Provides for cost of improvements in Improvement
89-96    7-3-1989      District No. 264, Nanakuli Sewers, Section 2, Nanakuli,
                       Waianae, Oahu, Hawaii, Job No. W17-88
                       Amending Ord. 86-96, provides for cost of improvements
90-29    3-29-1990     in Improvement District No. 264, Nanakuli Sewers,
                       Section 2, Nanakuli, Waianae, Oahu, HI, Job No. W17-88
                       Provides for cost of improvements in Improvement
90-44    5-22-1990     District No. 262, Ewa Beach Sewers, Section 3,
                       Honouliuli, Ewa, Oahu, Hawaii, Job No. W13-87
                       Provides for cost of improvements in Improvement
90-67    7-25-1990     District No. 265, Makaha Sewers, Section 3, Makaha,
                       Waianae, Oahu, Hawaii, Job No. W18-89
                       Provides for cost of improvements in Improvement
91-63    8-21-1991     District No. 267, Kahaluu Sewers, Section 2, Kahaluu,
                       Koolaupoko, Oahu, Hawaii, Job No. W17-90
                       Provides for cost of improvements in Improvement
91-64    8-21-1991     District No. 266, Kahaluu Sewers, Section 1, Kahaluu,
                       Koolaupoko, Oahu, Hawaii, Job No. 16-90
                       Provides for cost of improvements in Improvement
92-15    3-10-1992     District No. 268, Leilehua Lane Sewers, Oahu, Hawaii,
                       Job No. W23-89
                       Provides for cost of improvements in Improvement
92-36    4-27-1992     District No. 266, Kahaluu Sewers, Section 1, Kahaluu,
                       Koolaupoko, Oahu, Hawaii, Job No. W16-90
                       Provides for cost of improvements in Improvement
92-37    4-27-1992     District No. 267, Kahaluu Sewers, Section 2, Kahaluu,
                       Koolaupoko, Oahu, Hawaii, Job No. W17-90
                       Provides for cost of improvements in Improvement
94-69    10-5-1994     District No. 270, Kaneohe Sewers, Section 9, Kaneohe,
                       Koolaupoko, Oahu, Hawaii, Job No. W3-93
                       Authorizing refunding of improvement district bonds
                       issued pursuant to Ord. 87-88 to finance the cost of
94-85    12-1-1994     improvements in Improvement District No. 261, Halawa
                       Business Park, Halawa, Ewa, Oahu, Hawaii, and the
                       issuance of refunding bonds therefor
                       Provides for cost of improvements in Improvement
95-60    10-4-1995     District No. 272, Kahaluu Sewers, Section 4, Kahaluu,
                       Koolaupoko, Oahu, Hawaii, Job No. W9-91 (Section 3 of
                       this ordinance was amended by Ord. 98-37)
                       Provides for cost of improvements in Improvement
97-48    7-1-1997      District No. 274, Makaha Sewers, Section 4, Waianae,
                       Oahu, Hawaii, Job No. W16-95 (Section 3 of this
                       ordinance was amended by Ord. 98-05)
                       Amends Ord. 97-48 relating to providing for the cost of
                       improvements in Improvement District No. 274, Makaha
98-05    2-12-1998     Sewers, Section 4, Waianae, Oahu, Hawaii, Job No. W16-
                       95, by amending Section 3 relating to the cost of
                       authorized improvements (Section 3 was amended by Ord.
                       98-51)
                       Amends Ord. 95-60 relating to providing for the cost of
                       improvements in Improvement District No. 272, Kahaluu
98-37    6-9-1998      Sewers, Section 4, Kahaluu, Koolaupoko, Oahu, Hawaii,
                       Job No. W9-91, by amending Section 3 relating to the
                       cost of authorized improvements
                       Amends Ord. 98-05 relating to providing for the cost of
                       improvements in Improvement District No. 274, Makaha
98-51    8-18-1998     Sewers, Section 4, Waianae, Oahu, Hawaii, Job No. W16-
                       95, by amending Section 3 relating to the cost of
                       authorized improvements
                       Provides for cost of improvements in Improvement
00-42    7-27-2000     District No. 273, Waimano Sewers, Pearl City, Oahu,
                       Hawaii, Job No. W17-93
                       Provides for cost of improvements in Improvement
01-59    11-26-2001    District No. 275, Kaneohe Bay Sewers, Kaneohe,
                       Koolaupoko, Oahu, Hawaii, Job No. W2-00
                       Provides for cost of improvements in Improvement
06-46    11-13-2006    District No. 276, Kailua Road Sewers, Kailua,
                       Koolaupoko, Oahu, Hawaii, Job No. W01-05
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, App. 14-A)
Editor’s note:
   Ordinances before 1988 may be found in Appendix E to the Revised Ordinances
1978 (1983 Edition) and in Appendix E to the Revised Ordinances, 1987
Supplement to 1983 Edition.
TITLE IV: TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
   Chapters
      
15.   TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
      
15A.   REGULATION OF VEHICLES
      
15B.   PUBLIC TRANSIT
CHAPTER 15: TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Articles
   
1.   Traffic Regulation
   
2.   Definitions
   
3.   Traffic Administration
   
4.   Enforcement and Obedience to Traffic Regulations
   
5.   Accident Reports
   
6.   Traffic Control Devices
   
7.   Speed Restrictions
   
8.   Starting, Stopping, and Turning—Signals
   
9.   Driving in No-Passing Zones and Divided Highways
   
10.   One-Way Streets
   
11.   Right-of-Way
   
12.   Special Stops
   
13.   Stopping, Standing, and Parking
   
14.   Stopping, Standing, or Parking Prohibited in Specified Places
   
15.   Stopping for Loading or Unloading Only
   
16.   Stopping, Standing, or Parking Restricted or Prohibited on Certain
Streets
   
17.   Pedestrians’ Rights and Duties
   
18.   Operation of Bicycles and Play Vehicles
   
19.   Equipment
   
20.   Inspection of Motor Vehicles
   
21.   Weight, Size, and Load
   
22.   Parking Meter Zones
   
23.   Off-Street Parking
   
24.   Miscellaneous Provisions
   
25.   Pedestrian Malls
   
26.   Penalties and Procedure on Arrest
   
27.   Designation of Certain County Highways as Closed to Large Passenger
Carrier Vehicles
   
28.   Public Transit Supportive Services
   
29.   Parking Space Reserved for Persons with Disabilities
   
30.   Restricted Parking Zones Program
   
31.   Shared Mobility - Micromobility Vehicle Parking
   
Table 15.0: Schedules
ARTICLE 1: TRAFFIC REGULATION
Section
   
15-1.1   Purpose of ordinance
§ 15-1.1 Purpose of ordinance.
   The provisions hereinafter set forth are to provide for the regulation of
traffic upon the public streets of the city; and such private streets,
highways, or thoroughfares that for six months or more have been continuously
used by the general public or that are intended for dedication to the public
use as provided in HRS § 264-1 and are open for public travel but have not yet
been accepted by the city, except private roads used primarily for agricultural
purposes; and for bicycle paths constructed on easements granted to the city,
and this chapter may be cited as the traffic code of the city.
(Sec. 15-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 1, § 15-1.1)
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
Sections
   
15-2.1   Definition of words and phrases
   
15-2.2   Abandoned vehicle
   
15-2.3   Anti-speed bump
   
15-2.4   Authorized vehicle
   
15-2.5   Bikeway
   
15-2.6   Curb loading zone—Tow-away zone
   
15-2.7   Explosives—Flammable substances
   
15-2.8   Gross weight
   
15-2.9   Mail box
   
15-2.10   Merging traffic
   
15-2.11   Mobility-handicapped passenger—Special transit service vehicle
   
15-2.12   Muffler
   
15-2.13   Noise, excessive or unusual
   
15-2.14   Official time standard
   
15-2.15   Parade
   
15-2.16   Parking meter
   
15-2.17   Peak traffic hours
   
15-2.18   Curb ramp
   
15-2.19   Public holiday
   
15-2.20   Safety glass
   
15-2.21   School—School zone
   
15-2.22   Stop line
   
15-2.23   Streets and related terms
   
15-2.24   Tire
   
15-2.25   Tractor
   
15-2.26   Traffic control device
   
15-2.27   Traffic violations bureau
   
15-2.28   Trailer
   
15-2.29   Vehicles and related terms
   
15-2.30   Yield right-of-way
   
15-2.31   Bicycle corral
   
15-2.32   Parklet
   
15-2.33   Bicycle and related terms
§ 15-2.1 Definition of words and phrases.
   The following words and phrases when used in this traffic code shall, for
the purposes thereof, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
article, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is
intended. Words not specifically defined herein shall have the meaning ascribed
to them under HRS Chapter 291C.
(Sec. 15-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.1)
§ 15-2.2 Abandoned vehicle.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Abandoned Vehicle. Any vehicle, including a moped, left unattended for more
than 24 hours on a public highway.
(Sec. 15-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.2) (Am.
Ord. 18-13)
§ 15-2.3 Anti-speed bump.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Anti-Speed Bump. A convex mound, approximately 3 feet wide at the base and
approximately 4 inches high in height at the apex, placed across the width of a
public street for the purpose of controlling the speed of vehicular traffic.
(Sec. 15-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.3)
§ 15-2.4 Authorized vehicle.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Authorized Emergency Vehicle. Any vehicle of the police and fire departments of
the city, or of a federal agency having similar functions of law enforcement
and fire protection as the police and fire departments of the city; any vehicle
privately owned by police officers designated and approved by the chief of
police to be used by them in the performance of their duties and any federal,
State, and city and county ambulance; and any vehicle used by the department of
the medical examiner in the performance of the department’s official duties. It
also means any other vehicle, including vehicles under private ownership, as
may be designated after inspection by and approval of the director of budget
and fiscal services with the exception of privately owned ambulances, which
shall be inspected and approved by the emergency medical services systems
branch of the State department of health.
Authorized Maintenance Vehicle. Any vehicle of the city, the State, and the
federal government that is used in street lighting, traffic signal, highway
construction, and highway repair and maintenance work. Also included in this
definition are all vehicles used in public utility construction, repair and
maintenance work by public utility corporations that are designated as
authorized maintenance vehicles by ordinance passed by the council and that are
registered as such with the police department. Authorized maintenance vehicle
also means a vehicle of the Fort Street Mall business improvement district
association or its contractor when operated for the purpose of cleaning or
maintaining Fort Street Mall.
Authorized Tow Vehicle. Any vehicle specially constructed for towing vehicles,
other than trucks and farm or road tractors, which is designated as an
authorized tow vehicle by the director of budget and fiscal services.
(Sec. 15-2.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.4) (Am.
Ords. 02-50, 05-031)
§ 15-2.5 Bikeway.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Bicycle Lane. That portion of a roadway set aside for the use of either one-way
or two-way bicycle traffic.
Bicycle Path. A pathway for bicycles and pedestrians, physically separated from
motor traffic.
Bikeway. A general term including bicycle lanes or bicycle paths.
(Sec. 15-2.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.5)
§ 15-2.6 Curb loading zone—Tow-away zone.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Curb Loading Zone. A space, adjacent to a curb, reserved for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers, materials, or
freight.
Freight Curb Loading Zone. A space, adjacent to the curb, for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight.
Passenger Curb Loading Zone. A place, adjacent to a curb, reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
Tow Zone or Tow-Away Zone. Any street or highway, or portion thereof,
designated by the council by ordinance as a tow or tow-away zone, whereon the
parking, stopping, or standing of vehicles is prohibited entirely or during
specific hours.
(Sec. 15-2.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.6)
§ 15-2.7 Explosives—Flammable substances.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Explosive. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or
intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and that contains any
oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions,
quantities, or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by
percussion, or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause
such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous
pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects or
of destroying life or limb; provided that the term explosives as defined herein
shall not include the following items:
(1)   Fireworks, as defined in §
20-6.1, as amended, including those articles excluded from the definition and
set forth in that section; and
(2)   Fixed ammunition for small arms.
Flammable Liquid. Any liquid that has a flashpoint of 70°F or less, as
determined by a Tagliabue or equivalent test device.
(Sec. 15-2.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.7)
§ 15-2.8 Gross weight.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Gross Weight. The combined weight of a vehicle and the weight of any load
thereon.
(Sec. 15-2.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.8)
§ 15-2.9 Mail box.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Mail Box. Any box, receptacle, or container placed along the public streets or
highways, owned, maintained, or used by the United States Postal Service for
the deposit, storage, or collection of mail.
(Sec. 15-2.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.9)
§ 15-2.10 Merging traffic.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Merging Traffic. A maneuver executed by the driver of a vehicle where separate
roadways or streams of traffic moving in the same general direction converge to
form a single stream of traffic and wherein the driver of each vehicle involved
is required to adjust such person’s vehicular speed and lateral position so as
to avoid a collision with any other vehicle.
(Sec. 15-2.10, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.10)
§ 15-2.11 Mobility-handicapped passenger—Special transit service vehicle.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Mobility-Handicapped Passenger. A passenger who is:
(1)   Certified as paratransit eligible under §
15B-4.2; or
(2)   A person with a disability as defined under §
15-29.1, whether or not holding an identification card for a person with a
disability issued under §
15B-2.2.
Special Transit Service Vehicle. A vehicle:
(1)   Of the special transit service operated by the transit management
services contractor under the authority of
Chapter 15B, Article 4. Such a vehicle shall not be required to have the permit
or decal issuable under §
15-24.21; or
(2)   On which is placed a valid decal issued under §
15-24.21.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.11) (Added by Ord. 89-58; Am. Ord. 96-30)
§ 15-2.12 Muffler.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Muffler. A device consisting of a series of baffle plates, or chambers, or
perforated tube or tubes with spun glass, spun steel, or other type of sandwich
packing, or of other mechanical design or construction, for the purpose of
receiving exhaust gas and effectively reducing exhaust noise from the motor of
a motor vehicle.
(Sec. 15-2.11, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.12)
§ 15-2.13 Noise, excessive or unusual.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Excessive or Unusual Noise. Noise in excess of the usual noise that would
necessarily result from the operation of a motor when reduced to the minimum by
a muffler such as is defined in this article.
(Sec. 15-2.12, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.13)
§ 15-2.14 Official time standard.
   Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they mean standard time or
daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city.
(Sec. 15-2.13, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.14)
§ 15-2.15 Parade.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Parade. Any march, procession, or assembly consisting of persons, animals,
bicycles, or other vehicles, or combination thereof, traveling on, over, or
across any public street, sidewalk, or alley, which does not comply with normal
and usual traffic regulations or controls.
(Sec. 15-2.14, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.15)
(Am. Ord. 25-10)
§ 15-2.16 Parking meter.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Parking Meter. A device located in the vicinity of a parking space for the
purposes of extending parking privileges to persons for a certain number of
minutes or hours upon the payment of the required charge by a method allowed by
the parking meter. The device shall record a certain number of minutes or hours
determining the period of time for which parking privileges have been extended.
The term parking meter includes a multi-space parking meter device located in
the vicinity of the parking spaces it regulates.
Parking Meter Space. Any space that is:
(1)   Within a parking meter zone;
(2)   Regulated by a parking meter; and
(3)   Duly designated by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb
or on the surface of the street or public parking area.
Parking Meter Zone. A street, portion of a street, or other public parking area
established by ordinance as a zone in which the parking of vehicles or other
uses authorized by law upon such street or other public parking area is
regulated by parking meters.
(Sec. 15-2.15, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.16)
(Am. Ords. 04-32, 16-2)
§ 15-2.17 Peak traffic hours.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Afternoon Peak Traffic Hours and Afternoon Peak Period. The hours of 3:30 p.m.
to 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays. Whenever the terms “3:00
p.m. to 6:30 p.m.” or “3:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.” appear in this code, the same
shall be amended to read “3:30 p.m. to 5:30 p.m.”
Morning Peak Traffic Hours and Morning Peak Period. The hours of 6:30 a.m. to
8:30 a.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays. Whenever the term “6:00 a.m.
to 9:00 a.m.” appears in this code, the same shall be amended to read “6:30
a.m. to 8:30 a.m.”
Peak Traffic Hours. The prescribed time limits during the morning and afternoon
hours, designated by official signs, during which the stopping, standing, or
parking of vehicles, even momentarily, would create a hazardous condition, or
would cause unusual delay to traffic or otherwise impede the flow of traffic.
Any regulation regarding the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles upon
any specific street, streets, or highways during such periods shall become
effective on the date of erection of appropriate signs indicating such
regulation.
(Sec. 15-2.16, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.17)
§ 15-2.18 Curb ramp.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Curb Ramp. A ramp designed for use by persons with disabilities that cuts
through or is built up to the curb.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.18) (Added by Ord. 17-51)
§ 15-2.19 Public holiday.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Public Holiday. All legal holidays now existing, or such as may be subsequently
specifically proclaimed by the governor of the State, and Sundays.
(Sec. 15-2.18, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.19)
§ 15-2.20 Safety glass.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Safety Glass. Any product composed of glass, so manufactured, fabricated, or
treated as substantially to prevent shattering and flying of the glass when
struck or broken, or such other similar product as may be approved by the chief
of police.
(Sec. 15-2.19, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.20)
§ 15-2.21 School—School zone.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
School. Any public or private organization giving regular instruction and
having an average daily attendance of 50 students or more.
School Crossing Zone. That portion of any street or public property or way
within or without any school zone that the director of transportation services
may designate for the crossing of those attending a school.
School Zone. Each and every street and all public property or ways within 1,000
feet of the boundaries of any school.
(Sec. 15-2.20, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.21)
§ 15-2.22 Stop line.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Stop Line. A clearly visible solid white line or lines extending across a
roadway or any portion thereof to indicate the point at which all vehicles of
whatever class are required to stop in compliance with the requirements of this
code.
(Sec. 15-2.21, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.22)
§ 15-2.23 Streets and related terms.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Acceleration Lane. A short supplementary traffic lane, immediately adjacent to
an intersection, by use of which vehicles may enter the intersecting roadway
and accelerate to the general speed of passing traffic thereon before emerging
onto the continuous lanes of such roadway.
Center of Intersection. The point of intersection of the centerlines of the
roadways of intersecting highways.
Center or Centerline. A continuous or broken line marked upon the surface of a
roadway by paint or by other traffic control devices to indicate each portion
of the roadway allocated to traffic proceeding in the two opposite directions;
and if the line is not so painted or otherwise marked or indicated, it is an
imaginary line in the roadway equally distant from the edges or curbs of the
roadway.
Channelized Intersection. The intersection of two or more streets whereat
traffic is directed by means of raised curbings or painted pavement markings
along a special lane or channel for right turns, left turns, or straight
through movements.
City Transit Bus Lane. A lane of a laned roadway, designated by the director of
transportation services as being restricted exclusively for city transit buses,
official city vehicles on authorized missions on or adjacent to the city
transit bus lane, authorized tow vehicles, and bicycles.
Deceleration Lane. A short supplementary traffic lane immediately adjacent to
an intersection by use of which vehicles may leave the continuous lanes of a
roadway and decelerate for a stop or a turn without retarding the flow of
traffic on the continuous lanes of the roadway.
Divided Highway. A highway divided into two or more separate roadways by medial
strips.
Express Bus Lane or Express Bus and Car Pool Lane. A designated lane of a laned
roadway, the use of such designated lane being restricted exclusively for
express city transit buses, official government vehicles on authorized missions
on or adjacent to such lane, authorized tow vehicles, and such other vehicles,
appropriately marked and operated to transport passengers, and authorized by
the director of transportation services of the city to use such lane; provided
that in the case of an express bus and car pool lane, in addition to the
foregoing vehicles, any vehicle carrying at least three persons shall be
permitted to use such lane designated as an express bus and car pool lane.
Limited-Access Highway. Has the same meaning as “controlled-access highway” as
defined in HRS Chapter 291C.
Medial Strip. A strip or area, lying along the middle and between the paved
portions of a highway, which is designed to divide vehicular traffic on such
highway into two opposite directions. The term does not include traffic lines
painted on a highway, nor the portion of such highway enclosed by traffic
lines.
Multiple-Lane Highway. Any public highway the roadway of which is of sufficient
width to reasonably accommodate four or more separate lanes of vehicular
traffic, two or more lanes in each direction, each lane of which shall be not
less than 8 feet in width and whether such lanes are marked and whether the
lanes of opposite bound traffic are separated by a neutral zone or other
centerline marking.
One-Way Street. A public highway that is designated under
Article 10 as a street or highway on which vehicular traffic moves only in one
direction.
Reversible Lane. A lane of a two or more laned roadway upon which traffic may
be directed to move in a direction opposite from its normal direction of
movement by means of lane-control signals or other devices, in conjunction with
official signs.
Signalized Intersection. An intersection where traffic is controlled by
official traffic-control signals.
Street or Highway. The entire width between the property lines of every way
publicly owned and maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel, or any private street, highway, or
thoroughfare that for six months or more has been continuously used by the
general public or that is intended for dedication to the public use as provided
in HRS § 264-1 and is open for public travel, but has not yet been accepted by
the city, except private roads used primarily for agricultural purposes.
Street Block. One side of any street, the length of such side extending between
two consecutive intersections; or, in the case of a dead-end street, one side
of such dead-end street, the length of such side extending between the dead-end
and the nearest intersection.
Through Street. Has the same meaning as “through highway” as defined in HRS
Chapter 291C.
Traffic Island. A defined area between traffic lanes, or a median or outer
separation within an intersection.
Two-Way Left Turn Lane. A traffic lane at or near the center of the highway
with a pair of yellow lines, one solid and one dashed, on each side, set aside
for use by vehicles making left turns in both directions from or into the
highway.
(Sec. 15-2.22, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.23)
(Am. Ord. 91-27, 94-78)
§ 15-2.24 Tire.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Metal Tire. Every tire the surface of which in contact with the highway is
wholly or partly of metal or other hard nonresilient material.
Pneumatic Tire. Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support the
load.
Solid Tire. Every tire of rubber or other resilient material that does not
depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.
(Sec. 15-2.23, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.24)
§ 15-2.25 Tractor.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Farm Tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm
implement for drawing plows, mowing machines, and other implements of
husbandry.
Road Tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles
and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either independently or any
part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
Truck Tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
(Sec. 15-2.24, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.25)
§ 15-2.26 Traffic control device.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Barricade. Every barrier, obstruction, or block placed upon or across any road,
street, highway, or sidewalk for the purpose of preventing or limiting the
passage of motor vehicles or pedestrians over such street, road, highway, or
sidewalk during a period of construction or repair to the street, road,
highway, or sidewalk.
Traffic Control Device. Has the same meaning as “official traffic-control
device” as defined in HRS Chapter 291C.
Warning Sign. Every sign, signal, marking, barricade, or device erected or
placed upon any street, road, highway, or sidewalk that is under construction
or being repaired, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding motor
vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or otherwise stating the conditions under
which traffic by motor vehicles or pedestrians may be had upon such street,
road, highway or sidewalk. A warning sign shall include but shall not be
limited to a flagger placed upon any street, road, or highway for the purpose
of directing traffic around or upon such street, road, or highway.
(Sec. 15-2.25, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.26)
§ 15-2.27 Traffic violations bureau.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Traffic Violations Bureau. The traffic violations bureau of the respective
district courts of the City and County of Honolulu.
(Sec. 15-2.26, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.27)
§ 15-2.28 Trailer.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Pole Trailer. Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by
another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach, or
pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and
ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads, such as
pipes, poles, or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining
themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
Semi-Trailer. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle, and so constructed that some part of its weight including that
of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
Trailer. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer,
drawn or designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle and designed to carry persons
or property, and so constructed that no appreciable part of its weight rests
upon the towing vehicle.
(Sec. 15-2.27, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.28)
(Am. Ord. 21-9)
§ 15-2.29 Vehicles and related terms.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
City Transit Bus. Has the same meaning as defined in §
15B-1.1; provided that if a bus is owned by a contractor with the city and used
in the city bus system, the bus is a city transit bus only during use its in
the city bus system.
Combination of Vehicles. Includes any combination of two or more vehicles or
any combination of a truck tractor with semi-trailer drawing one trailer,
coupled together.
Implement of Husbandry. Every vehicle designed and adapted exclusively for
agricultural, horticultural, or livestock raising operations, including farm
tractors, farm wagons, wagon trailers, or other vehicles used in connection
therewith, or for lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry.
Mechanical Street Sweeper. Any motor-driven device or equipment mounted on
wheels and used to sweep, clean, or flush streets.
Moped. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 291C-1. A moped is a vehicle
for the purposes of this chapter.
Motorcycle. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 291C-1. A motorcycle is a
motor vehicle for the purposes of this chapter.
Motor Vehicle. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 291C-1.
Pickup Truck. Every truck with a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds
or less.
Truck. Every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
Vehicle. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 291C-1.
(Sec. 15-2.28, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.29)
(Am. Ords. 89-130, 91-27, 95-69, 18-13, 19-31)
§ 15-2.30 Yield right-of-way.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Yield Right-of-Way. When required by an official sign, the act of granting
preference to another vehicle or pedestrian within the intersection, and to
such vehicles or pedestrians approaching from the right or left, to proceed in
a lawful manner, and proceeding into the intersection only when the roadway is
clear.
(Sec. 15-2.29, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.30)
§ 15-2.31 Bicycle corral.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Bicycle Corral. An on-street bicycle parking facility consisting of multiple
bicycle racks that form a cohesive bicycle parking area.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.31) (Added by Ord. 16-2)
§ 15-2.32 Parklet.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Parklet. A sidewalk extension over parking lanes or stalls that provides more
public space and amenities for people using the street.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.32) (Added by Ord. 16-2)
§ 15-2.33 Bicycle and related terms.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Bicycle. The same as defined in HRS § 291C-1.
Bicycle Docking Station. A facility that is used for the parking, securing,
dispensing, and return of bicycles, and is owned or operated, or both, by a
bicycle sharing company.
Bicycle Sharing Company. A company, subject to a contract or formal agreement
with the city, which provides docked bicycles for use by the public.
Motor. As used in the terms “bicycle equipped with a motor,” “bicycles equipped
with motors,” “motorized bicycle,” and “bicycle with motor attached,” and for
the purposes of those terms only, an electric motor.
(Added by Ord. 21-15) (Am. Ord. 25-6)
ARTICLE 3: TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
Sections
   
15-3.1   Delegation
   
15-3.2   Additional duties and responsibilities of the director
   
15-3.3   Designation of authorized tow vehicles
§ 15-3.1 Delegation.
(a)   Council’s delegation.
(1)   In general. The council delegates to the director of transportation
services, hereinafter referred to as “director,” the authority to locate,
select, install, and maintain traffic control devices, including temporary
traffic control devices, as defined in this chapter.
(2)   Temporary traffic control devices.
(A)   Whenever the director finds (i) that there is an emergency requiring
traffic control devices or (ii) occasions requiring traffic control devices due
to circumstances or activities that are the exception rather than the rule that
affects the use of streets and highways (special occasions), the director may
locate, select, install, and maintain temporary traffic control devices.
In addition, where there is a traffic problem which may be alleviated by an
appropriate traffic control device, the director may conduct studies and
design, fabricate and determine temporary traffic control devices that, in the
director’s opinion, may alleviate, relieve, or eliminate the traffic problems;
provided that whenever such traffic control device is to be located, selected,
installed, or maintained, the director shall observe the procedures prescribed
in subsection (c); and provided further, that the schedule shall be entitled
“Temporary Traffic Control Device,” and made a part of
Article 6 of this chapter.
(B)   Any temporary traffic control device shall not be in use for more than 30
calendar days; provided that if any extension is necessary, the same procedures
prescribed in subsection (c) shall be observed with the publication thereof,
containing a statement that this is an extension of the temporary traffic
control device that was in effect on a specific date, including the cutoff
date; provided that at no time shall a temporary traffic control device be in
effect in excess of 365 days.
(C)   Whenever such traffic control device is to be made permanent, the
director shall repeat the procedure prescribed in subsection (c) by indicating
in the schedule that the schedule entitled “Temporary Traffic Control Device”
is superseded and that the new schedule is to be attached to and made a part of
Article 6.
(b)   Standards to be observed by the director.
(1)   As far as practicable, the director shall locate, select, install, and
maintain all traffic control devices pursuant to or in conformance with the
standards established or prescribed in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices compiled by the Federal Highway Administration, Revised Edition, 1978;
provided, that the director shall comply with HRS § 264-25, relating to
federal-aid highways, wherever applicable.
(2)   Whenever it is not practicable to follow the standards prescribed in
subdivision (1), the director may use, design, or fabricate traffic control
devices that would promote the safety of pedestrians or motorists using city
streets or highways or alleviate, relieve, or eliminate the traffic problem;
provided that such traffic control devices shall be uniform whenever the
traffic problem, conditions, terrain, or locale requiring such traffic control
devices is substantially similar.
(3)   (A)   This subdivision applies to a multiple-lane highway or one-way
street, the design of which commences after December 31, 1994 by:
(i)   The city; or
(ii)   A federal or State agency or private person, with the intent of
dedication or surrender to the city.
(B)   Except as otherwise provided under paragraph (C):
(i)   For a multiple-lane highway, the traffic lane markings shall be placed so
that each of the outside lanes is at least 14 feet wide. An “outside lane”
shall be the lane nearest an outside edge of the highway; and
(ii)   For a one-way street with at least two lanes, the traffic lane markings
shall be placed so that the extreme right lane is at least 14 feet wide. The
“extreme right lane” shall be the lane nearest the right edge of the street, as
determined when facing in the direction of vehicular traffic flow.
Each of the other lanes on a multiple-lane highway or one-way street shall be
at least 10 feet wide.
(C)   The traffic lane marking requirements of paragraph (B) shall not apply to
the portion of a multiple-lane highway or one-way street on which a bicycle
lane is designated in Schedule XXXIV and appropriately delineated.
(D)   The city shall not design, construct, take over, receive by dedication,
or otherwise accept a multiple-lane highway or one-way street that does not
comply with this subdivision.
(E)   A multiple-lane highway or one-way street, to which this subdivision is
not applicable, may be reconstructed or restriped to accommodate the traffic
lane markings of paragraph (B) if sufficient appropriations are available and
public safety will not be compromised.
(c)   Procedure for implementing.
(1)   The director shall amend existing schedules that are attached to and made
a part of
Article 6 by deleting therefrom or adding thereto traffic control devices that
are included in a schedule or adopt additional schedules that shall be attached
to and made a part of
Article 6 whenever the director determines that an amendment of an existing
schedule is not the proper vehicle for the location, selection, installation,
and maintenance of the traffic control devices including schedules that would
make temporary traffic control devices permanent.
(2)   The director shall file with the clerk an original or adopting schedule
and three copies of each type so they may be examined by the public.
(3)   The department of transportation services shall publish such schedules
once in a daily newspaper of general circulation. In addition, such schedule
shall also be published once in a newspaper for a particular locale within the
city, e.g., the Press publication, whenever such publication is available.
(4)   Any permanent traffic control device shall be shrouded before its
effective date, except those which are painted, laid, or marked on the pavement
or are temporary traffic control devices that have been located and installed.
(d)   Effective date of traffic control devices located, selected, installed,
or maintained under this section.
(1)   Any permanent or temporary traffic control device located, selected,
installed, or maintained as authorized by this article shall take effect 10
working days after the publication of the appropriate schedule in a daily
newspaper of general circulation or in a newspaper for a general locale,
whichever publication is later, except that:
(A)   A permanent traffic control device that is to be painted, laid, or marked
on the pavement shall take effect when so painted, laid, or marked. In no event
shall the permanent traffic control device be painted, laid, or marked within
10 working days of the publication of the appropriate schedule; and
(B)   A temporary traffic control device shall take effect on the day it is
located, selected, installed, or maintained.
(2)   Any permanent or temporary traffic control device located, selected,
installed, or maintained by the director pursuant to this article shall have
the full force and effect as if it were located, selected, installed, or
maintained by ordinance. Any person violating such traffic control device shall
be subject to the penalties provided in this article or HRS Chapter 291C.
(Sec. 15-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 3, § 15-3.1) (Am.
Ords. 91-27, 94-78)
§ 15-3.2 Additional duties and responsibilities of the director.
   The director shall cooperate with officers of the federal, State, and
neighbor island county governments whenever, in the director’s opinion, such
cooperation will promote, enhance, and protect pedestrians and motorists using
city streets and highways or promote, enhance, and protect property connected
with or related to the use of or adjacent to city streets and highways.
(Sec. 15-3.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 3, § 15-3.2)
§ 15-3.3 Designation of authorized tow vehicles.
(a)   The director of budget and fiscal services is authorized to designate any
vehicle specially constructed for towing vehicles, other than trucks and farm
or road tractors, as an authorized tow vehicle, subject, however, to the
following conditions:
(1)   A statement executed by the applicant shall accompany any application,
stating that the proposed authorized tow vehicle has been thoroughly inspected
and is safe to operate on the public streets. The date of such inspection shall
be included in the statement.
(2)   Each proposed tow vehicle shall have the necessary accessory equipment
for tow vehicles, including but not limited to the following requirements and
equipment: truck chassis, boom, lights, winch, and cables, on the day it is
inspected by the director of budget and fiscal services.
(3)   Any other reasonable conditions that may be deemed necessary by the
director of budget and fiscal services for the safety and welfare of the
pedestrians and motorists using the public streets while the authorized tow
vehicle carries out its assigned tasks on the public streets, pursuant to rules
adopted by the director of budget and fiscal services as prescribed in HRS
Chapter 91.
(4)   The tow vehicle shall be operated in conjunction with a vehicle storage
area of such size that is satisfactory to the director of budget and fiscal
services and located in an area properly zoned for such activity.
(b)   Procedure.
(1)   Application. Any person desiring a vehicle to be designated as a tow
vehicle by the director of budget and fiscal services shall file an application
therefor on a form issued by the director of budget and fiscal services, which
shall contain a request for information so as to meet the conditions contained
in this section.
(2)   Inspection. Before designation of a vehicle as a tow vehicle, the
director of budget and fiscal services shall inspect such vehicle to determine
whether it meets the conditions contained in this section.
(3)   If the director of budget and fiscal services is satisfied that the
vehicle can be designated as a tow vehicle, the director shall issue a
certificate therefor which shall be renewed annually on a common date
regardless of the date of initial approval; such date to be determined by the
director of budget and fiscal services for efficient administration of this
section.
(c)   Denial of application or renewal thereof; suspension or revocation of
certificate.
(1)   Denial or suspension or revocation of certificate.
(A)   The director of budget and fiscal services is authorized to deny an
application or renewal thereof to the owner or the owner’s authorized
representative or to suspend or revoke a certificate after a hearing.
(B)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall notify the applicant or
owner or such person’s authorized agent in writing of the director’s proposed
adverse decision together with reasons therefor. Such notice shall contain a
statement that the applicant or the owner or such person’s agent may appeal the
decision of the director of budget and fiscal services within 10 working days
from the date noted on the notice therein to indicate that the applicant or
owner or agent desires a hearing.
(2)   Notice of hearing.
(A)   Whenever the applicant or owner or such person’s agent requests a
hearing, the director of budget and fiscal services shall notify the mayor to
appoint a hearings officer and establish a date for such hearing with the
hearings officer.
(B)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall issue a written notice
of the date of hearing to the applicant or owner or such person’s agent and
such written notice may be personally served or sent by certified mail, return
receipt requested.
(3)   Hearings officer.
(A)   A hearings officer appointed by the mayor is authorized to conduct a
hearing pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, and after such hearing, affirm or dismiss
the proposed action of the director of budget and fiscal services.
(B)   If any decision is adverse to an applicant or owner or such person’s
agent, the hearings officer shall issue a written findings of fact, conclusions
of law, decision, and order.
(C)   Whenever the hearings officer’s decision is adverse to the applicant or
owner or such person’s agent, the hearings officer may authorize the director
of budget and fiscal services to suspend or revoke a certificate if the
director of budget and fiscal services submits a written report that operation
of a tow vehicle is inimical to public safety; otherwise, denial of an
application or renewal or suspension or revocation of a certificate shall take
effect upon the service of the findings of facts, conclusions of law, decision,
and order to the appropriate individuals.
(D)   The hearings officer shall adopt rules for the conduct of any hearing as
prescribed in HRS Chapter 91.
(d)   Judicial review. Any decision and order of the hearings officer may be
appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction as prescribed in HRS Chapter 91.
(Sec. 15-3.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 3, § 15-3.3)
ARTICLE 4: ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Sections
   
15-4.1   Authority of police and fire department officials
   
15-4.2   Obedience to police officers
   
15-4.3   Public officers and employees to obey traffic regulations
   
15-4.4   Exemptions to authorized emergency vehicles
   
15-4.5   Persons propelling push-carts or riding animals to obey traffic
regulations
   
15-4.6   Use of bicycles, skateboards, roller skates and similar devices
restricted
   
15-4.7   Reserved
   
15-4.8   Mechanical street sweepers may move in either direction on one-way
streets
   
15-4.9   Operation of slow-moving vehicles—Restrictions
   
15-4.10   Enforcement by special officers
   
15-4.11   Operation of motorized devices restricted
§ 15-4.1 Authority of police and fire department officials.
(a)   It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such
officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce this traffic code
and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city.
(b)   Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the
chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal
in conformance with this traffic code; provided that in the event of a fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of
the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require
notwithstanding the provisions herein.
(c)   Officers of the police department are authorized to display portable
signs within certain intersections forbidding vehicle drivers to perform
specific maneuvers. Such portable signs shall only be displayed at a specified
intersection during times of traffic congestion when, in the opinion of the
chief of police, such restrictions are necessary to expedite the movement of
traffic through the intersection.
(d)   Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct
or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
(e)   Police officers of the Honolulu police department shall be exempt from
payment of fees for parking meters and from time parking restrictions while in
the performance of their duty. This exemption shall also apply to employees of
the Honolulu police department while attending court in their official
capacity.
(Sec. 15-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 4, § 15-4.1) (Am.
Ord. 88-61)
§ 15-4.2 Obedience to police officers.
   It shall be a petty misdemeanor for any person to wilfully fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer, officers of
the fire department when authorized to direct traffic as provided herein, or
any other persons authorized to direct, control, or regulate traffic.
(Sec. 15-4.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 4, § 15-4.2) (Am.
Ord. 95-15)
§ 15-4.3 Public officers and employees to obey traffic regulations.
   This traffic code shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used
in the service of the United States government, the State of Hawaii and the
City and County of Honolulu, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to
violate this traffic code, except as otherwise permitted in this traffic code
or by any other city ordinance or by any federal or State law.
(Sec. 15-4.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 4, § 15-4.3)
§ 15-4.4 Exemptions to authorized emergency vehicles.
(a)   The provisions of this traffic code regulating the operation, parking,
and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles, as
previously defined except as follows: a driver, when operating any such vehicle
in an emergency, except when otherwise directed by a police officer may:
(1)   Park or stand notwithstanding this traffic code;
(2)   Proceed past a red light or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
(3)   Exceed the speed limits so long as the driver does not endanger life or
property; and
(4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions, so long as the driver does not endanger life or property.
(b)   The exemptions provided for in this section with reference to the
movement of an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of
such vehicle sounds a siren, bell, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably
necessary, and the vehicle displays a lighted red lamp, or in the case of the
Honolulu police department only, a lighted blue lamp, visible under normal
atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle
as a warning to others.
(c)   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any
such vehicle from the consequences of the driver’s ordinary negligence or
reckless disregard of the safety and property rights of others.
(Sec. 15-4.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 4, § 15-4.4)
§ 15-4.5 Persons propelling push-carts or riding animals to obey traffic
regulations.
   Every person propelling any push-cart or ricksha or riding an animal upon a
roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to
this traffic code applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions which by their very nature can have no application.
(Sec. 15-4.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 4, § 15-4.5)
§ 15-4.6 Use of bicycles, skateboards, roller skates and similar devices
restricted.
(a)   For purposes of this section, “Waikiki” means the Waikiki special
district as described in §
21-9.80-2.
(b)   No person upon a skateboard or roller skates, or riding in or by means of
any toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway, except while
crossing a street. When so crossing, such person shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.
(c)   No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard, or roller skates upon any
sidewalk in Waikiki. Subsection (b) notwithstanding, no person may ride a
skateboard or roller skates on any roadway in Waikiki.
(d)   The director of transportation services shall erect official signs on or
adjacent to sidewalks or roadways within Waikiki giving notice of the
prohibitions of this section. The absence of such signs shall not be a defense
to any prosecution for any violation of this section.
(e)   Any person committing a violation of this section shall be punished by a
fine of $25.
(f)   Police officers and any other authorized officers shall issue a citation
for any violation of this section, except they may arrest when the alleged
violator refuses to cease the illegal activity after being issued a citation.
Except as provided herein, the issuance and form of the citation shall be as
provided in HRS § 803-6.
(Sec. 15-4.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 4, §
15-4.6) (Am. Ords. 95-15, 96-58, 01-48)
§ 15-4.7 Reserved.
§ 15-4.8 Mechanical street sweepers may move in either direction on one-way
streets.
(a)   In the performance of the driver’s or operator’s duties, the driver or
operator of any mechanical street sweeper of the division of refuse collection
and disposal, department of facility maintenance, as well as those sweepers
being owned and operated by the State, may move such sweeper in either
direction on streets and lanes on which only one-way traffic is authorized by
Article 10 of this traffic code.
(b)   Such mechanical sweeper shall be equipped with a red flashing lamp on the
front thereof, for the purpose of warning oncoming traffic of its presence and
movement, when it is moving against the authorized direction or flow of traffic
on a one-way street or lane.
(Sec. 15-4.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 4, § 15-4.8)
§ 15-4.9 Operation of slow-moving vehicles—Restrictions.
(a)   No slow-moving vehicle, as defined in this section, shall be operated on
that portion of Kalakaua Avenue between the Ala Wai Boulevard and Kapahulu
Avenue, on Kuhio Avenue, on Kalia Road, or on Ala Wai Boulevard.
(b)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Bicycle. Any vehicle propelled solely by human power, upon which any person may
ride, having two tandem wheels.
Slow-Moving Vehicle. Any device, not propelled by motorized equipment, in,
upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon
a street or highway, including a device drawn by a horse, but excluding a
bicycle.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 4, § 15-4.9) (Added by Ord. 88-53)
§ 15-4.10 Enforcement by special officers.
(a)   The chief of police shall commission, in accordance with rules adopted by
the chief, special officers designated by the director of transportation
services to issue citations for all nonmoving traffic violations, including but
not limited to citations for:
(1)   Parking and tow zone violations;
(2)   Vehicles (as defined in HRS Chapter 286) parked on a public street or
highway without a current official certificate of inspection, in violation of
HRS Chapter 286; and
(3)   Vehicles (as defined in HRS Chapter 249) parked on a public street or
highway or in a public off-street parking facility without a current vehicle
tax tag or emblem, in violation of HRS Chapter 249.
(b)   The special officers shall be authorized to cause the removal of vehicles
parked in violation of this chapter in accordance with
Article 13.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 4, § 15-4.10) (Added by Ord. 88-50; Am. Ord. 95-48)
§ 15-4.11 Operation of motorized devices restricted.
(a)   No person shall operate a motorized device on any public sidewalk or
street.
(b)   For the purposes of this section, a “motorized device” means a device,
excluding a motorized assistive device used by a person with a disability, that
is:
(1)   Designed to allow operation while the operator is standing on the device;
and
(2)   Powered by an internal combustion engine that is capable of propelling
the device and operator without human propulsion.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 4, § 15-4.11) (Added by Ord. 03-06)
ARTICLE 5: ACCIDENT REPORTS
Sections
   
15-5.1   Subsequent reports of accidents
   
15-5.2   Accident report forms
   
15-5.3   Accident reports confidential
   
15-5.4   Police department to tabulate and analyze accident reports
   
15-5.5   Copies of reports to be furnished to department of transportation
services
§ 15-5.1 Subsequent reports of accidents.
(a)   In addition to the report required in HRS Chapter 291C, the driver of a
vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person
or in total property damage to an apparent extent of $300 or more shall, within
24 hours after such accident, report such accident in writing or in person to
the police department. This section shall not be applicable when the accident
has been investigated at the scene by a police officer while such driver was
present thereat.
(b)   The police department may require any driver of a vehicle involved in an
accident of which a report must be made as provided herein to file supplemental
reports whenever the original report is insufficient in the opinion of the
department and may require witnesses of accidents to render reports to the
department.
(c)   Every law enforcement officer who, in the regular course of duty,
investigates a motor vehicle accident of which report must be made as provided
herein, either at the time of and at the scene of the accident or thereafter by
interviewing participants or witnesses, shall, within 24 hours after completing
such investigation, forward a written report of such accident to the police
department.
(Sec. 15-5.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 5, § 15-5.1)
§ 15-5.2 Accident report forms.
(a)   The police department shall prepare and upon request, supply to garages
and other suitable agencies or individuals, forms for accident reports required
under this section, appropriate with respect to the persons required to make
such reports and the purposes to be served. The written reports to be made by
persons involved in accidents and by investigating officers shall call for
sufficiently detailed information to disclose with reference to such accidents
the causes, conditions then existing, and the persons and vehicles involved.
(b)   Every accident report required to be made in writing shall be made on the
appropriate form approved by the police department and shall contain all of the
information required therein unless unavailable.
(Sec. 15-5.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 5, § 15-5.2)
§ 15-5.3 Accident reports confidential.
   All accident reports in writing made by persons involved in accidents or by
garages shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and shall be
for the confidential use of the police department or other city agencies having
use for the records for accident prevention purposes, except that the police
department may disclose the identity of a person involved in an accident when
such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies the person’s
presence at the accident. No such report shall be used as evidence in any
trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident; except that the police
department shall furnish upon demand of any person who has made or claims to
have made the report, or upon demand of any court, a certificate showing that a
specified accident report has or has not been made to the police department
solely to prove a compliance or a failure to comply with the requirement that
such a report be made to the police department.
(Sec. 15-5.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 5, § 15-5.3)
§ 15-5.4 Police department to tabulate and analyze accident reports.
   The police department shall tabulate and may analyze all accident reports
and shall publish annually, or at more frequent intervals, statistical
information based thereon as to the number and circumstances of traffic
accidents.
(Sec. 15-5.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 5, § 15-5.4)
§ 15-5.5 Copies of reports to be furnished to department of transportation
services.
   The chief of police shall furnish true copies of all accident reports within
48 hours from the filing thereof to the department of transportation services.
(Sec. 15-5.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 5, § 15-5.5)
ARTICLE 6: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Sections
   
15-6.1   Official traffic control devices required—Exception
   
15-6.2   Installation of traffic signal lights
   
15-6.3   Right or left turns against a red signal
   
15-6.4   Warning lights at mid-block crosswalk
   
15-6.5   Obstruction of visibility of traffic sign or signal
   
15-6.6   Red and green illuminated signs near traffic signals
   
15-6.7   Traffic lane markings
§ 15-6.1 Official traffic control devices required—Exception.
   Any provision of this traffic code to the contrary notwithstanding, all
types of signs, signals, and markings, whether in conformity with the standards
of the American Association of State Highway Officials, installed by the
director of transportation services before April 11, 1967 and in use on the
date, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic, are approved
and designated as official traffic control devices.
(Sec. 15-6.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 6, § 15-6.1)
§ 15-6.2 Installation of traffic signal lights.
(a)   The installation and use of traffic signal lights is authorized at the
streets and intersections described in Schedule I attached to the ordinance
codified in this section and made a part hereof.*
(b)   The installation and use of traffic signal lights on federal-aid highways
is authorized at the streets and intersections described in Schedule II
attached to the ordinance codified in this section and made a part hereof.*
(Sec. 15-6.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 6, § 15-6.2)
Editor’s note:
   *See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
§ 15-6.3 Right or left turns against a red signal.
   Right or left turns against a red signal at the designated intersections
described in Schedule III, attached to the ordinance codified in this section
and made a part hereof, are prohibited, effective upon the erection of signs
indicating such prohibition.*
(Sec. 15-6.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 6, § 15-6.3)
Editor’s note:
   *See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
§ 15-6.4 Warning lights at mid-block crosswalk.
   Whenever distinctive amber colored lamps are placed at mid-block crosswalks,
they shall require vehicle drivers to exercise caution when approaching such
crosswalk.
(Sec. 15-6.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 6, § 15-6.4)
§ 15-6.5 Obstruction of visibility of traffic sign or signal.
   No person shall hang, suspend, place, or construct any awning, frame,
balcony, cornice, or any other projection so as to obstruct the visibility of
any traffic sign or signal placed or erected as authorized or required by law.
(Sec. 15-6.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 6, § 15-6.5)
§ 15-6.6 Red and green illuminated signs near traffic signals.
(a)   No person shall erect or maintain any red or green light or red or green
neon sign within 75 feet of any intersection where traffic is controlled by
signal lights without first obtaining a written permit from the director of
transportation services certifying that such light or sign at the specified
location does not constitute undue distraction to a vehicle driver acting in
obedience to the directions of the traffic signal lights.
(b)   The owner or operator of any existing red or green light or red or green
neon sign located within 75 feet of any intersection where traffic is
controlled by signal lights shall not renew or replace such light or sign
without first obtaining a written permit from the director of transportation
services certifying that such light or sign at the specified location does not
constitute undue distraction to a vehicle driver acting in obedience to the
directions of the traffic signal light.
(Sec. 15-6.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 6, § 15-6.6)
§ 15-6.7 Traffic lane markings.
(a)   When traffic cones are used by proper authority to establish temporary
lines or markings for the purpose of controlling the flow of traffic, such
lines or markings shall have the same regulatory effect as single solid or
double solid lines and shall not be crossed when such crossings or turns are
prohibited.
(b)   When a lane is designated a city transit bus lane in Schedule XXXI
attached to the ordinance codified in this section and made a part hereof* by
the use of pavement markings or signs reading “City Transit Bus Only,”
traversing, encroaching, parking, stopping, standing, loading, or unloading by
any vehicle is prohibited; except that:
(1)   City transit buses, official government or emergency vehicles on
authorized missions involving the performance of duties within or adjacent to
the city transit bus lane, authorized tow vehicles, or bicycles may travel in
or cross the city transit bus lane; and
(2)   Other vehicles may cross a city transit bus lane specifically to enter
into and exit from adjacent driveways or intersecting streets, or both, without
obstruction to city transit buses.
Vehicles left unattended within city transit bus lanes shall be towed away as
provided in §
15-13.9.
Any person committing a violation of the foregoing provision shall be subject
to a fine of at least $25.
(c)   When a lane is designated a two-way left turn lane in Schedule XXXII
attached to the ordinance codified in this section and made a part hereof* and
by the use of pavement markings, a vehicle shall not be driven thereon except
when preparing for or making a left turn from or into a highway. A left turn
shall not be made from any other lane where two-way left turn lanes have been
designated. This section shall not prohibit driving across a two-way left turn
lane.
(d)   Bicycle lane.
(1)   How designated or terminated.
(A)   The director of transportation services may designate a bicycle lane on a
city highway. The designation is made by adding the bicycle lane to Schedule
XXXIV, attached to the ordinance codified in this section and made a part
hereof. The director, however, shall not designate a bicycle lane on the Fort
Street Mall.
The director of transportation services also may terminate the designation of a
bicycle lane on a city highway. The designation is terminated by deleting the
bicycle lane from Schedule XXXIV.
(B)   Procedures for adding or deleting bicycle lane. Section 15-3.1 applies
when adding a bicycle lane to or deleting a bicycle lane from Schedule XXXIV. A
bicycle lane, after its addition to the schedule, will take effect in
accordance with §
15-3.1. A bicycle lane, after its deletion from the schedule, is terminated
when the bicycle lane marking is entirely removed from the city highway.
(C)   A bicycle lane on a city highway must be delineated by a white solid line
and the words “Bike Only.” The director of transportation services shall mark
each bicycle lane and may install other appropriate traffic control devices.
(D)   Notwithstanding any ordinance to the contrary, the director of
transportation services shall name the bicycle lanes along Ala Napunani Street
in memory of Zachary Manago. The director of transportation services shall also
erect appropriate signage reflecting the name of the bicycle lanes, and the
placement of such signage at the Zachary Manago bicycle lanes along Ala
Napunani Street is approved.
(2)   Prohibitions.
(A)   Except as otherwise provided under subdivision (3), a person shall not
operate, park, stop, or stand a vehicle, other than a bicycle, in a bicycle
lane.
(B)   A person shall not leave a vehicle, including a bicycle, unattended
within a bicycle lane.
(3)   Exceptions.
(A)   A person may operate, park, stand, or stop any of the following motor
vehicles in a bicycle lane:
(i)   An authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency;
(ii)   An official government vehicle when on an authorized mission involving
the performance of a duty within or adjacent to the lane;
(iii)   An authorized maintenance vehicle when necessary to perform repair or
maintenance work on a government or public utility facility near the lane;
(iv)   An authorized tow vehicle when necessary to tow another vehicle parked
in or adjacent to the lane; and
(v)   A city transit bus when necessary for the boarding or alighting of a
passenger at a bus stop.
(B)   A person may operate or stop a motor vehicle or moped in a bicycle lane
under the following circumstances:
(i)   The person may operate the motor vehicle or moped across the lane when
necessary to enter or exit a driveway or legal parking space adjacent to the
lane;
(ii)   The person may operate or stop the motor vehicle or moped across the
lane when necessary to turn into or turn from a street intersecting the lane;
or
(iii)   The person may operate or stop the motor vehicle or moped in the lane
when necessary to clear the way for an authorized emergency vehicle as required
under HRS § 291C-65.
(C)   A person, when operating, parking, stopping, or standing a motor vehicle
or moped in a bicycle lane as permitted under this subdivision, shall do so
with due regard for the safety of any bicyclist or pedestrian in the lane. This
paragraph should not be construed as protecting that person from the person’s
ordinary negligence or reckless disregard for the safety of a bicyclist or
pedestrian in the lane.
(4)   Penalty. Any person violating this subsection shall be subject to a fine
of at least $25.
(Sec. 15-6.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 6, § 15-6.7) (Am.
Ords. 90-77, 91-27, 94-78, 95-15, 96-58, 97-02, 02-50, 18-2)
Editor’s note:
   *See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
ARTICLE 7: SPEED RESTRICTIONS
Sections
   
15-7.1   Speed restrictions—Traffic calming measures
   
15-7.2   Speed limit zones
   
15-7.3   Speed limit signs
   
15-7.4   Minimum speed regulations
   
15-7.5   Special speed limits on elevated structures
   
15-7.6   When speed restrictions not applicable
   
15-7.7   Charging violations and rule in civil cases
   
15-7.8   Speed of certain vehicles restricted
§ 15-7.1 Speed restrictions—Traffic calming measures.
(a)   A person may not drive a vehicle on any roadway within public parks and
public school grounds at a speed greater than is reasonable or prudent, having
due regard for the traffic on, and the surface and width of, the roadway, and
in no event at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour on any roadway within
public parks, except that on Ala Moana Park Drive, on any roadway in Kailua
Beach Park, and on any roadway within public school grounds, the speed limit is
15 miles per hour.
(b)   The director of transportation services is authorized and directed to
erect and maintain sign posts indicating the speed limit herein established at
each roadway entrance into any public park and public school grounds. The
department of parks and recreation and the State department of education may
erect and maintain signs other than traffic control signs at appropriate places
along the roadways within their respective jurisdictions.
(c)   The director of transportation services is authorized and directed to
evaluate and implement the installation of traffic calming measures, including
speed humps and raised crosswalks, in school zones. The director shall use the
following criteria to determine if a traffic measure is appropriate:
(1)   Whether an area is identified as high-risk for pedestrian accidents or
where the speed limit is reduced to 20 miles per hour, especially during school
hours; and
(2)   Whether a comprehensive traffic safety assessment has been conducted that
considers factors such as pedestrian traffic, vehicle speed, and accident
history.
The director of transportation services shall notify the local community and
school administrations of planned installations and solicit feedback to ensure
that the community’s needs and concerns are addressed.
(d)   Further, a person may not in any parking area maintained within public
parks and public school grounds drive a vehicle recklessly or negligently or at
a speed or in such manner as to endanger or injure persons or property.
(e)   Whenever the director of transportation services determines upon the
basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that any maximum speed limit
hereinafter set forth is greater than is reasonable or safe under the
conditions found to exist upon any part of a highway, the director of
transportation services may post a recommended safe speed thereat which will
serve as a guide to vehicle drivers at all times when they are using the
highway and which will be effectively illuminated or reflectorized for
visibility at night.
(f)   Whenever the director of transportation services determines, either at
the director’s initiative or in response to a written request by a
representative of a school, that a roadway within 1,000 feet of a school is
utilized by students going to, moving within, or leaving the school, the
director may post a recommended safe speed thereat, which will serve as a guide
to vehicle drivers at all times when students are using the roadway.
(Sec. 15-7.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 7, § 15-7.1) (Am.
Ord. 24-32 )
§ 15-7.2 Speed limit zones.
   A person may not drive a vehicle on a public highway or street at a speed in
excess of the following speed limit zones established or hereafter established
therefor by ordinance of the council:
(a)   Fifteen miles per hour.
(1)   Any roadway 18 feet in width or less within the city; and
(2)   On those streets or portions thereof described in Schedule IV attached to
the ordinance codified in this section and made a part thereof; subject,
however, to the limitations and extensions set forth therein.
(b)   Twenty-five miles per hour. On those streets or portions thereof
described in Schedule V attached to the ordinance codified in this section and
made a part hereof;* subject, however, to the limitations and extensions set
forth therein.
(c)   Thirty miles per hour. On those streets or portions thereof described in
Schedule VI attached hereto and made a part hereof;* subject, however, to the
limitations and extensions set forth therein.
(d)   Thirty-five miles per hour. On those streets or portions thereof
described in Schedule VII attached to the ordinance codified in this section
and made a part hereof;* subject, however, to the limitations and extensions
set forth therein.
(e)   Forty-five miles per hour. On those streets or portions thereof described
in Schedule VIII attached to the ordinance codified in this section and made a
part hereof;* subject, however, to the limitations and extensions set forth
therein.
(f)   Fifty miles per hour. On those streets or portions thereof described in
Schedule IX attached to the ordinance codified in this section and made a part
hereof;* subject, however, to the limitations and extensions set forth therein.
(g)   Sixty-five miles per hour. On those streets or portions thereof described
in Schedule X attached to the ordinance codified in this section and made a
part hereof;* subject, however, to the limitations and extensions set forth
therein.
(h)   Fifty-five miles per hour. On those streets or portions thereof described
in Schedule XXXIII attached to the ordinance codified in this section and made
a part hereof;* subject, however, to the limitations and extensions set forth
therein.
(i)   Ten miles per hour. On those streets or portions thereof described in
Schedule XXXVII attached to the ordinance codified in this section and made a
part hereof;* subject, however, to the limitations and extensions set forth
therein.
(j)   Twenty miles per hour.
(1)   Any street or highway within the City and County of Honolulu where a
speed limit has not been otherwise established;
(2)   Any roadway bordering any school grounds, during the hours of 6:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m. on school days, unless otherwise specified by the department of
transportation services; and
(3)   On those streets or portions thereof described in Schedule attached to
the ordinance codified in this section and made a part hereof; subject,
however, to the limitations and extensions set forth therein.
(4)   Subdivision (2) does not apply to any roads owned by the State of Hawaii.
(k)   Forty miles per hour. On those streets or portions thereof described in
Schedule XXXVIII attached to the ordinance codified in this section and made a
part hereof; subject, however, to the limitations and extensions set forth
therein.
(Sec. 15-7.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 7, § 15-7.2) (Am.
Ords. 02-07, 24-32 )
Editor’s note:
   *See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
   *In accordance with Ord. 24-32, Schedule XL is substituted for the blank
schedule number in § 15-7.2(j) as adopted by the Department of Transportation
Services for roads with a speed limit of 20 miles per hour established in § 15-
7.2(j).
   *In accordance with Ord. 24-32, Schedule XXXVIII is substituted for the
blank schedule number in § 15-7.2(k) until roads with a designated speed limit
of 40 miles per hour are established by the Department of Transportation
Services.
§ 15-7.3 Speed limit signs.
   The speed restrictions set forth in §
15-7.2 on roadways, streets, highways, or boulevards, or portions thereof,
shall be ineffective unless legible signs are erected and maintained indicating
the maximum speed permissible thereon.
(Sec. 15-7.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 7, § 15-7.3)
§ 15-7.4 Minimum speed regulations.
(a)   The driver of a slow-moving vehicle shall drive the same as close as
possible to the right-hand edge of any roadway, laned or unlaned for traffic.
(b)   The driver, further, may not drive a motor vehicle at such a low speed as
to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when
so directed by a police officer or any other persons authorized to direct,
control, or regulate traffic, or when reduced speed is necessary for safe
operation, or compliance with the law.
(c)   Whenever any roadway is clearly marked for two or more lanes of traffic
moving in the same direction, a person driving a motor vehicle in the lane or
lanes other than the extreme right lane may not travel at a speed that is 5
miles per hour or more below the maximum stated speed, e.g., below 30 miles per
hour in a 35-mile-per-hour speed limit zone or below 40 miles per hour in a 45-
mile-per-hour speed limit zone, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer or any other persons authorized to direct, control, or regulate
traffic, or when a reduced speed is necessary for safe operation, or in
compliance with the law.
(d)   On any street or highway or portions thereof on which parking is
prohibited during the hours specified, during the morning peak traffic or
afternoon peak traffic hours, or both, a person may not drive, move, or tow,
nor may a registered owner knowingly cause or permit any person to drive, move,
or tow, during those hours on the street or highway or portions thereof, any
vehicle that cannot maintain a speed equal to the maximum stated speed, less 5
miles per hour, for the street or highway or portions thereof; provided that
the foregoing provisions have no force and effect on public holidays as defined
in §
15-2.19.
(Sec. 15-7.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 7, § 15-7.4) (Am.
Ord. 96-58)
§ 15-7.5 Special speed limits on elevated structures.
(a)   A person may not drive a vehicle over any bridge or other elevated
structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed that is greater than the
maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure,
when such bridge or structure is signposted as provided in this traffic code.
(b)   The director of transportation services, upon the director’s own
initiative, may conduct an investigation of any bridge or other elevated
structure constituting a part of a highway, and if the director thereupon finds
that such structure cannot with safety to itself withstand vehicles traveling
at the speed otherwise permissible under this traffic code, the director of
transportation services shall determine and declare the maximum speed of
vehicles that such structure can withstand, and shall cause or permit suitable
signs stating such maximum speed, to be erected and maintained at a distance of
100 feet before each end of such structure.
(Sec. 15-7.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 7, § 15-7.5)
§ 15-7.6 When speed restrictions not applicable.
   The speed restrictions set forth in this traffic code shall not apply to an
authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call, or when used
in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when
responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, and the driver thereof
sounds audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle, and when such
emergency vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting a red
or blue light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of
500 feet to the front of such vehicle. This provision shall not relieve the
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons using the street, nor shall it protect the
driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of such driver’s reckless
disregard of the safety of others.
(Sec. 15-7.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 7, § 15-7.6)
§ 15-7.7 Charging violations and rule in civil cases.
(a)   In every charge of violation of any speed regulation in this traffic code
the complaint, also the summons or notice to appear, shall specify the speed at
which the defendant is alleged to have driven, also the speed applicable within
the district or at the location concerned.
(b)   The foregoing provisions declaring speed limitations shall not be
construed to relieve the plaintiff in any civil action or case from the burden
of proving negligence on the part of the defendant as the proximate cause of an
accident.
(Sec. 15-7.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 7, § 15-7.7)
§ 15-7.8 Speed of certain vehicles restricted.
(a)   No vehicle equipped wholly or partly with solid rubber tires shall be
operated upon any highway at a speed in excess of 10 miles per hour.
(b)   No vehicle transporting any explosives as a cargo or part of a cargo
shall be operated upon any highway at a speed greater than that designated on
the permit issued by the State director of labor and industrial relations or as
indicated by the prevailing speed limit on that particular road; and these
vehicles shall be routed over the freeway system only when they are permitted
to travel at least at the minimum speed limit for the area.
(Sec. 15-7.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 7, § 15-7.8)
ARTICLE 8: STARTING, STOPPING, AND TURNING—SIGNALS
Sections
   
15-8.1   Required position and method of turning at intersections
   
15-8.2   Procedure at channelized intersections
   
15-8.3   Obedience to no-turn signs
   
15-8.4   Limitations on U-turns
   
15-8.5   No left turns into and out of driveways
   
15-8.6   Cutting corners
§ 15-8.1 Required position and method of turning at intersections.
(a)   Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where
traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the
driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall
approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to
traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle, and after entering
the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection
as nearly as practicable in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in the direction of travel upon the roadway being entered.
(b)   Left turns where both streets or roadways are one-way. The approach for a
left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable to the left-
hand curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise permitted by pavement
markings or other official traffic control devices.
(c)   In all cases where official marks, buttons, signs, or directional arrows
painted on the pavement are placed within or adjacent to intersections, no
driver of a vehicle shall execute a movement at such intersections otherwise
than as directed and required by such marks, buttons, signs, or arrows.
(Sec. 15-8.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 8, § 15-8.1)
§ 15-8.2 Procedure at channelized intersections.
   Where accelerating and decelerating lanes are provided for right or left
turns at intersections, vehicles shall proceed as follows:
(a)   Vehicles intending to turn right into a roadway, entrance to which is
gained by means of a right-turn accelerating lane, shall enter such roadway by
way of the accelerating lane so provided and shall merge with caution into the
right-hand traffic lane, unless otherwise instructed.
(b)   Vehicles intending to turn right from a roadway, exit from which is made
by means of a right-turn decelerating lane, shall enter the decelerating lane
and merge with caution into the right-hand traffic lane, unless otherwise
instructed.
(c)   Vehicles intending to turn left into the far roadway of a divided highway
shall come to a complete stop before crossing the near roadway of such highway,
and shall then proceed into the left-turn accelerating lane constructed in the
medial strip area and shall merge with caution into the left-hand lane of the
far roadway, unless otherwise instructed; provided that where no accelerating
lane exits, such left turn shall be made into the left-hand lane of the far
roadway.
(d)   Vehicles intending to turn left from a divided highway, exit from which
is made by means of a left-turn decelerating lane constructed in the medial
strip area, shall enter the decelerating lane and shall yield the right-of-way
to approaching vehicles before proceeding with caution across the intersection
and into the intersecting roadway, unless otherwise instructed; provided that
where no decelerating lane exists, such left turn shall be made with caution
from the lane nearest the medial strip.
(Sec. 15-8.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 8, § 15-8.2)
§ 15-8.3 Obedience to no-turn signs.
(a)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or
U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any
such sign, unless otherwise instructed by a police officer or any other persons
authorized to direct, control, or regulate the flow of traffic as provided in
this code.
(b)   The turning movements described in Schedule XI attached to the ordinance
codified in this section and made a part hereof are prohibited.*
(Sec. 15-8.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 8, § 15-8.3)
Editor’s note:
   * See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
§ 15-8.4 Limitations on U-turns.
   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in
the opposite direction upon any street in a business district, upon any highway
with three or more lanes, or at any intersection where traffic is controlled by
traffic signal lights, except as otherwise permitted by official signs and
markings.
(Sec. 15-8.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 8, § 15-8.4)
§ 15-8.5 No left turns into and out of driveways.
   The State director of transportation, in the case of State or federal-aid
highways, and the director of transportation services, in the case of city and
county highways, are authorized by the use of signs, markings, or other traffic
control devices to establish and indicate no left turns into and out of
driveways on any portion of a highway where such movements will create hazards
or impede the smooth flow of traffic when left turns are banned at
intersections. This provision shall not be enforced unless official signs,
markings, or other traffic control devices are placed or erected.
(Sec. 15-8.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 8, § 15-8.5)
§ 15-8.6 Cutting corners.
   No person shall operate or drive any vehicle on or across any sidewalk area
or through any driveway, parking lot, or any business entrance for the purpose
of making right or left turns from one street into another by avoiding
intersections or as a means of traveling from one street to another; provided
that this section shall not prohibit the use of such driveway, parking lot, or
business entrance for such purposes when such use is incidental to business to
be transacted on the premises.
(Sec. 15-8.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 8, § 15-8.6)
ARTICLE 9: DRIVING IN NO-PASSING ZONES AND DIVIDED HIGHWAYS
Sections
   
15-9.1   No-passing zones
   
15-9.2   Divided highways
§ 15-9.1 No-passing zones.
   The State director of transportation, in the case of State or federal-aid
highways, and the director of transportation services, in the case of city and
county highways, are authorized by the use of signs, markings, or other traffic
control devices to establish and indicate a “no-passing zone” on any portion of
a highway where the overtaking and passing of another vehicle or the driving to
the left of the centerline of the roadway would be hazardous. Such signs,
markings, or other traffic control devices shall clearly indicate the beginning
and ending of each no-passing zone. It is unlawful for any person to overtake
and pass another vehicle or to drive to the left of the centerline of the
roadway within any no-passing zone established and indicated as hereinabove
provided.
(Sec. 15-9.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 9, § 15-9.1)
§ 15-9.2 Divided highways.
   Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more separate roadways by
medial strips, every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway
and no vehicle shall be driven over, across, or within any such medial strips
except through an opening in such strips or at a crossover or intersection;
provided that a driver who enters such opening, crossover, or intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to approaching vehicles before emerging upon the
adjacent roadway of such divided highway, unless otherwise instructed.
(Sec. 15-9.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 9, § 15-9.2)
ARTICLE 10: ONE-WAY STREETS
Section
   
15-10.1   One-way streets
§ 15-10.1 One-way streets.
(a)   Vehicular traffic, on any street or highway or portions thereof
designated by the council by ordinance as a one-way street, shall move only in
the direction indicated by signs erected and maintained thereon.
(b)   The streets, highways, or portions thereof described in Schedule XII
attached to the ordinance codified in this section and made a part hereof are
designated one-way streets.*
(Sec. 15-10.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 10, § 15-10.1)
Editor’s note:
   * See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
ARTICLE 11: RIGHT-OF-WAY
Sections
   
15-11.1   Reserved
   
15-11.2   Vehicles to yield right-of-way
   
15-11.3   Designation of additional stop intersections
§ 15-11.1 Reserved.
§ 15-11.2 Vehicles to yield right-of-way.
(a)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches an intersection with a
“Yield Right-of-Way” sign facing such driver, the driver shall yield the right-
of-way to any pedestrian within a marked or unmarked crosswalk at such
intersection, or to any vehicle that is within such intersection or approaching
so closely thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
(b)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn right or left across a bicycle
lane shall yield the right-of-way to any bicycle that is approaching so closely
thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
(c)   Yield Right-of-Way intersections in addition to those already heretofore
established are established as described in Schedule XIII attached to the
ordinance codified in this section and made a part hereof.*
(Sec. 15-11.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 11, § 15-11.2)
§ 15-11.3 Designation of additional stop intersections.
   Stop intersections in addition to those already heretofore established are
established as described in Schedule XIV attached to the ordinance codified in
this section and made a part hereof.*
(Sec. 15-11.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 11, § 15-11.3)
Editor’s note:
   * See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
ARTICLE 12: SPECIAL STOPS
Sections
   
15-12.1   Through street designated
   
15-12.2   Stop when traffic obstructed
   
15-12.3   Duties of operators of vehicles used in agricultural work
§ 15-12.1 Through street designated.
   A through street shall be any street or highway as heretofore defined, or
portion thereof, so designated by the council. Through streets in addition to
those already heretofore established are established as described in Schedule
XV attached to the ordinance codified in this section and made a part hereof.*
(Sec. 15-12.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 12, § 15-12.1)
Editor’s note:
   * See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
§ 15-12.2 Stop when traffic obstructed.
   No driver of a vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked or unmarked
crosswalk, unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the
intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle such person is driving
without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians,
notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed.
(Sec. 15-12.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 12, § 15-12.2)
§ 15-12.3 Duties of operators of vehicles used in agricultural work.
   The driver, engineer, or person in charge of any vehicle, whether operated
on rails or roadways, used in agricultural work, shall not cause or permit such
vehicle to enter upon or cross any highway without first stopping and yielding
the right-of-way to any vehicle crossing or about to cross the intersection or
that is approaching so closely on such highway as to constitute an immediate
hazard, but having so yielded may proceed.
(Sec. 15-12.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 12, § 15-12.3)
(Am. Ord. 24-32 )
Editor’s note:
   * See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
ARTICLE 13: STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
Sections
   
15-13.1   Stopping, standing, or parking outside of business or residence
district
   
15-13.2   Officers authorized to remove illegally stopped vehicle
   
15-13.3   Parking stalls—Required parking therein
   
15-13.4   Reserved parking stalls
   
15-13.5   Standing or parking close to curb
   
15-13.6   Selling on highways restricted
   
15-13.7   Unattended postal service motor vehicles
   
15-13.8   Abandoned vehicles on streets or highways
   
15-13.9   Authority to store vehicles
   
15-13.10   Authority to dispose of unclaimed vehicles
   
15-13.11   Motorcycles, motor scooters, and mopeds
   
15-13.12   Parking on parade routes and on any special occasion
   
15-13.13   Parking placards
   
15-13.14   Stripping of motor vehicles—Citation—Penalty
   
15-13.15   Prohibition on parking a dangerous motor vehicle near preschool,
kindergarten, elementary, intermediate, middle secondary, or high school
§ 15-13.1 Stopping, standing, or parking outside of business or residence
district.
(a)   Upon any highway outside of a business or residence district, no person
shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, upon the paved or main traveled part of the highway, when it is
practical to stop, park, or to leave such vehicle off such part of the highway;
but in every event, an unobstructed width of highway opposite a standing
vehicle shall be left for free passage of other vehicles and a clear view of
such stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each
direction upon such highway.
(b)   The foregoing provisions shall not apply to the driver of a vehicle that
is disabled while on the paved or main traveled portion of a highway in such
manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position.
(Sec. 15-13.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.1)
§ 15-13.2 Officers authorized to remove illegally stopped vehicle.
(a)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in
violation of any of the foregoing provisions, such officer is authorized to
move the vehicle, or require the driver or other person in charge of the
vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or main traveled part of
such highway.
(b)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge or
causeway or in any tunnel where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, such officer is authorized to provide for the removal of such vehicle
to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(c)   The expense incurred in the removal of such vehicle shall be borne by the
owner of the vehicle.
(Sec. 15-13.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.2)
§ 15-13.3 Parking stalls—Required parking therein.
(a)   The director of transportation services is authorized and directed to
establish, mark, and designate, where there is an apparent need therefor, a
consecutive series of parking stalls for the parallel or angle parking of motor
vehicles or for other uses authorized in §
15-22.2 and in
Chapter 14, Article 18 upon any street.
(b)   Wherever parking stalls are so established, marked off, and designated,
the driver of any vehicle, excepting only single vehicles of a greater length
or width, shall park the vehicle completely within a designated stall.
(c)   Except as otherwise permitted by law, if on-street parking stalls or
spaces are established, marked off, and designated along any street block, it
is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to park the vehicle on any portion of
the street block, other than in a stall or space so established, marked off,
and designated for parking.
(d)   Except as otherwise permitted by §
15-13.11, wherever parking stalls are so established, marked off, and
designated, each stall is for the use of a single vehicle only and it is
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to park the vehicle in a stall already
occupied by another vehicle.
(e)   The term “street block” as used in this section means one side of any
street, the length of the side extending between two consecutive intersections;
or, in the case of a dead-end street, one side of the dead-end street, the
length of the side extending between the dead-end and the nearest intersection.
(f)   Except as otherwise permitted by law, if on-street parking stalls or
spaces are established, marked off, and designated along any street block, it
is unlawful for any person to obstruct the stall or space so established,
marked off, and designated for parking along the street block.
(Sec. 15-13.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.3)
(Am. Ords. 16-2, 23-27)
§ 15-13.4 Reserved parking stalls.
(a)   Any parking stall established as a “road taxi stand” as defined in
Chapter 36, Article 1, or as a “road pedicab stand” as defined in
Chapter 36, Article 5, as amended, or as a reserved parking stall must be used
only for the purpose or purposes for which it is established. All officially
established reserved parking stalls are authorized on those streets or portions
thereof described in Schedule XVI attached to the ordinance codified in this
section and made a part hereof.*
(b)   Whenever road taxi stands or road pedicab stands are established, the
following restrictions shall apply.
(1)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a taxicab in any officially
designated road taxi stand or pedicab in any officially designated road pedicab
stand, unless such taxicab or pedicab shall display on the right front bumper
of the taxicab or rear of the pedicab a valid decal issued by the licensing
division of the department of budget and fiscal services.
(2)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, other than a taxicab, in
a road taxi stand or a pedicab in a road pedicab stand that has been officially
designated and appropriately signed as such.
(3)   When official signs are erected designating a street or portions thereof
as a road taxi stand or a road pedicab stand within a tow or tow-away zone, no
person shall stop, stand, or park a taxicab or a pedicab, as applicable, even
momentarily, between the hours indicated on such signs.
(4)   No taxicab or pedicab shall be left unattended in any road taxi stand or
road pedicab stand, respectively.
(Sec. 15-13.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.4)
Editor’s note:
   *See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
§ 15-13.5 Standing or parking close to curb.
   Upon any roadway within a business or residence district, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle other than parallel with the edge of the roadway,
headed in the direction of traffic, and with the curb-side wheels of the
vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the roadway, except while parked wholly
within stalls marked or designated pursuant to §
15-13.3.
(Sec. 15-13.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.5)
§ 15-13.6 Selling on highways restricted.
(a)   Except as provided under subsection (c):
(1)   It is unlawful for any itinerant vendor, peddler, or huckster to carry on
or solicit business in one location on any street or on any public highway for
a period beyond the parking time limit set for such parking space, as
designated by official signs, or beyond three hours where there is no posted
time limitation for the space. Upon vacating one location, it is unlawful for
such itinerant vendor, peddler, or huckster to take up another location to
carry on or solicit business within 300 feet of such location or of any
location previously vacated within three hours;
(2)   It is required that every itinerant vendor, peddler, or huckster provide
a trash receptacle at every location where business is conducted; further, that
before leaving any location of business, the immediate vicinity be free of
litter caused by the selling of the goods; and
(3)   Any itinerant vendor, peddler, or huckster who carries on or solicits
business on any street or on any public highway shall comply with all other
statutes, ordinances and rules relating to traffic, parking, highway safety,
and peddling, including those relating to parking meters, parking meter zones,
and public places where peddling is prohibited.
(b)   Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
If any itinerant vendor, peddler, or huckster licensed under §
13-6.1 is convicted of violating this section and the conviction is within two
years of a prior conviction for violating this section, in addition to the
penalties provided by law for a petty misdemeanor, the licensee shall have the
license suspended for a period of not less than three months and not more than
two years.
(c)   This section shall not apply to a merchant of a store who, under the
authority of
Chapter 13, Article 6A, peddles on a portion of a Chinatown sidewalk or mall,
the College Walk Mall, or the Sun Yat Sen Mall.
(Sec. 15-13.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.6)
(Am. Ords. 88-19, 90-77, 95-15, 03-26, 12-6, 14-5)
§ 15-13.7 Unattended postal service motor vehicles.
   Any employee of the United States Postal Service, while actually engaged in
depositing mail in mail boxes placed along a street or highway as defined in
the traffic code, or while engaged in delivering and collecting mail therefrom,
may permit the postal employee’s motor vehicle to stand unattended with the
motor running; provided that such postal employee shall first effectively set
the brakes thereon; and provided further, that when the motor vehicle is left
standing unattended upon any grade the front wheels shall be turned to the curb
or side of the highway. This section shall have no application where such
employee leaves the highway for any purpose.
(Sec. 15-13.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.7)
§ 15-13.8 Abandoned vehicles on streets or highways.
(a)   No person may abandon any vehicle, including a trailer, on a public
street or highway. The chief of police or director of customer services is
authorized to remove or cause to be removed the abandoned vehicle from the
street or highway, and the person abandoning such vehicle shall be liable for
all reasonable expenses incurred by the city due to such removal. Leaving
vehicles unattended for more than 24 hours constitutes abandonment within the
meaning of this section.
(b)   A person who violates this section is subject to a fine of not less than
$150 nor more than $500.
(Sec. 15-13.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.8)
(Am. Ords. 89-94; 21-9)
§ 15-13.9 Authority to store vehicles.
(a)   Officers and employees of the Honolulu police department and department
of customer services are authorized to remove vehicles or cause them to be
removed from a street, highway, or pedestrian mall to a storage area or other
place of safety under any of the following circumstances:
(1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge or elevated
structure, viaduct, causeway, or left unattended in any tube or tunnel, where
such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic;
(2)   When any vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle
request the removal of the vehicle or are by reason of physical injury
incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for the vehicle’s
custody or removal;
(3)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is parked illegally
so as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of
traffic;
(4)   When any vehicle is left unattended or parked in a tow zone during the
time of restricted parking during the morning peak traffic hours designated by
official signs specifying the hours of restricted parking every day, except
Saturdays, Sundays, and public holidays, on the streets or portions thereof
described in Schedule XVII;*
(5)   When any vehicle is left unattended or parked in a tow zone during the
time of restricted parking during the afternoon peak traffic hours designated
by official signs specifying the hours of restricted parking every day, except
Saturdays, Sundays, and public holidays, on the streets or portions thereof
described in Schedule XVIII;*
(6)   When any vehicle is left unattended or parked in a tow zone during the
time of restricted parking during the morning or afternoon peak traffic hours,
or both, as designated by official signs specifying the hours of restricted
parking every day, except Saturdays, Sundays, and public holidays, on the
streets or portions thereof described in Schedule XIX;*
(7)   When any vehicle is left unattended or parked in a tow zone at all hours
of any day on the streets or portions thereof described in Schedule XX;*
(8)   When any vehicle is left unattended or parked in a tow zone during the
time of restricted parking designated by official signs specifying those times
of restricted parking on the streets or portions thereof described in Schedule
XXI;*
(9)   When any vehicle is left unattended or parked upon a street and is parked
in front of a public or private driveway so as to constitute an obstruction to
vehicular traffic using or attempting to use the driveway for purposes of
egress or ingress;
(10)   When any vehicle is left unattended on a street, or portion thereof, so
as to interfere with or impede any one or more of the following: construction,
demolition, repair, or maintenance work being done on, adjacent to, above, or
below the street; provided that a permit has been issued for the work by the
director of transportation services, and adequate regulatory signs are posted
designating the time of the prohibition;
(11)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street within 10 feet of a
fire hydrant;
(12)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street within 4 feet of
either side of a public or private driveway;
(13)   When any vehicle is left unattended or parked in a crosswalk, or within
20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection, or within 20 feet upon the approach
to any midblock crosswalk;
(14)   When any vehicle is left unattended at any time on the roadway portion
of any freeway; or when any vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle or
highway maintenance or construction equipment, is left unattended on the
median, shoulder, or any other portion, other than the roadway portion, of any
freeway for more than four hours;
(15)   When any bus, truck, truck-trailer, trailer, van, house trailer, or any
vehicle used for commercial purposes whose gross vehicle weight is 10,000
pounds or more, except vehicles of the public utilities and construction
equipment while engaged in repair or construction work, or vehicles actually
loading or unloading goods, wares or merchandise, is parked on any public
street for more than four consecutive hours;
(16)   When any vehicle is left unattended in a transit bus or an express bus
lane;
(17)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bicycle lane or bicycle
path;
(18)   When any vehicle is left unattended or parked in violation of the
pedestrian mall provisions of Article 25;
(19)   When any vehicle is left unattended or parked in an official bus stop as
described in Schedule XXV;*
(20)   When any vehicle is parked, stopped or left standing in violation of §
15-14.1(a)(21) to (a)(26);
(21)   When any vehicle is left unattended or parked on any public street,
road, or highway, and the vehicle has any one or more of the following:
(A)   No valid vehicle registration emblem or an expired vehicle registration
emblem;
(B)   No valid sticker affixed certifying a certificate of inspection as
required in HRS § 286-26 or an expired certificate of inspection sticker; or
(C)   No valid license plates.
For the purposes of this subdivision: “public street, road, or highway”
includes the entire width, including any berm or shoulder, of every road,
alley, street, way, lane, trail, highway, bikeway, or bridge when any part
thereof is open for use by the public;
(22)   When a vehicle is parked in a restrictive parking zone in violation of
Article 30 of this chapter;
(23)   When a vehicle is parked in a reserved car-sharing on-street parking
stall without a valid and current reserved car-sharing on-street parking stall
sticker in accordance with §
15-28.1(g);
(24)   When a vehicle is parked in a loading zone or an officially designated
bus stop without a valid and current decal or other approved device permitting
parking in loading zones and official bus stops in accordance with §
15-15.5;
(25)   When a shared micromobility vehicle is parked in a manner in violation
of any provision of §
15-31.5; and
(26)   When any vehicle, including a trailer, is left unattended on a public
street or highway for more than 24 hours.
(b)   Whenever an officer or employee of the department of customer services
removes a vehicle or causes a vehicle to be removed from a street or other
place as authorized in this section, and the officer or employee knows or is
able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle or otherwise the
name and address of the owner thereof, such officer or employee shall
immediately notify or cause notice to be given to the police department
dispatch office of the fact of such removal, of the reasons therefor, and of
the place to which the vehicle has been moved.
(c)   Whenever an officer or employee of the department of customer services
removes a vehicle or causes a vehicle to be removed from a street or other
place as authorized in this section and does not know and is not able to
ascertain the name of the owner as provided in subsection (b), and in the event
the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three days, then
and in that event, the officer or employee shall immediately send or cause to
be sent a written report of such removal by mail to the director of customer
services whose duty it is to register motor vehicles. The report shall include
a complete description of the vehicle, the date and time the vehicle was
removed, and the place from which it was removed, the reasons for its removal,
and the name of the garage or other place where the vehicle is stored.
(d)   The registered owner of a vehicle removed and stored as authorized in
this section shall be liable for all reasonable expenses incurred by the city
for such removal and storage.
(Sec. 15-13.10, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art.
13, § 15-13.9) (Am. Ords. 88-34, 90-12, 93-51, 01-49, 06-13, 19-1, 19-19, 19-
23, 19-29, 21-9, 23-27)
Editor’s note:
   * See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
§ 15-13.10 Authority to dispose of unclaimed vehicles.
(a)   The director of customer services may dispose of vehicles, including
trailers, that have been taken into custody by the chief of police or director
of customer services or their authorized subordinates as prescribed in §§
15-13.8,
15-13.9, or
15-13.15. Such vehicle may be disposed of in accordance with HRS § 290-10.
(b)   If no bid is received, the director of customer services shall offer such
vehicle to the division of automotive equipment services of the city for its
use or for salvage; and in the event the division rejects such offer, the
director of customer services shall dispose of such vehicle at the expense of
the city.
(Sec. 15-13.11, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.10)
(Am. Ords. 88-35, 07-3, 21-9)
§ 15-13.11 Motorcycles, motor scooters, and mopeds.
(a)   The following shall apply to on-street parking of motorcycles, motor
scooters, and mopeds in spaces marked for parallel parking on street blocks
where there are no designated parking spaces for motorcycles, motor scooters,
and mopeds as provided for in subsection (b):
(1)   More than one motorcycle, motor scooter, or moped, or a combination of
such motorcycle, motor scooters, or mopeds shall be permitted to park in spaces
marked for parallel parking.
(2)   Regardless of the number of motorcycles, motor scooters, or mopeds parked
within a metered parking space, the parking fee shall be the rate established
for such parking space.
(3)   Any motorcycle, motor scooter, or moped parked within any space marked
for parallel parking, shall be parked diagonally (at an angle of approximately
60 degrees to the curb line) with the front end facing the street and in the
direction which the vehicles in the near lane of traffic are traveling.
(4)   A minimum clearance of 3 feet at each end of the parallel parking space
shall be maintained; provided that only the vehicle parked within the 3-foot
area shall be in violation of the minimum clearance requirement.
(5)   No person shall prevent the parking of additional motorcycles, motor
scooters, or mopeds when space is available within any parallel parking space.
(6)   Any motorcycle, motor scooter, or moped parked within any parallel
parking space shall be entitled to the full parking time permitted by law;
provided that in any metered space each and every vehicle parked within such
space shall be parked illegally, if the meter displays a violation.
(b)   Nothing herein shall prohibit the director of transportation services
from establishing, marking and designating parking stalls specifically for the
parking of motorcycles, motor scooters, and mopeds upon any street.
(1)   Wherever parking stalls for motorcycles, motor scooters, and mopeds are
so established, marked off, and designated, the driver of such vehicle shall
park the vehicle completely within a designated stall.
(2)   If on-street parking stalls or spaces are established, marked off, and
designated for motorcycles, motor scooters, and mopeds along any street block,
it shall be unlawful for the driver of any motorcycle, motor scooter, or moped
to park such vehicle on any portion of such street block, other than in a stall
or space so established, marked off, and designated for parking motorcycles,
motor scooters, and mopeds along such street block.
(3)   Wherever parking stalls for motorcycles, motor scooters, and mopeds are
so established, marked off, and designated, it shall be unlawful for the driver
of any other vehicle to park in a stall designated for motorcycles, motor
scooters, or mopeds.
(4)   The term “street block” as used in this section means one side of any
street, the length of such side extending between two consecutive
intersections; or, in the case of a dead-end street, one side of such dead-end
street, the length of such side extending between the dead-end and the nearest
intersection.
(c)   Nothing herein shall prohibit the parking of a moped in a bicycle rack
located on a sidewalk where signage so permits, provided however, that no
person shall drive the moped on the sidewalk in violation of HRS § 291C-196(c).
For the purposes of this section, a “bicycle rack” means a device erected by
the city to be used for the parking of bicycles. This subsection shall not
apply to the parking of motorcycles or motor scooters.
(Sec. 15-13.12, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.11)
(Am. Ords. 90-76, 06-05)
§ 15-13.12 Parking on parade routes and on any special occasion.
   The director of transportation services is authorized, whenever the director
deems it necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of any vehicle on
either or both sides of any street or portion thereof constituting a part of
the route of a parade or a procession, or on any special occasion, and also
upon any street adjacent thereto, by the erection or placement of temporary
signs setting forth such restrictions. When such signs are erected or placed
before the parade, procession, or special occasion, it is unlawful to park or
leave unattended any vehicle in violation of such signs.
   The chief of police is authorized to remove or cause to be removed, at the
owner’s expense, any vehicle left unattended or parked in violation of such
signs.
(Sec. 15-13.13, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.12)
§ 15-13.13 Parking placards.
(a)   The director of transportation services may issue parking placards to the
following city officers: members of the council; the prosecuting attorney; the
mayor; the managing director; the deputy managing director; the heads and the
first deputies of departments of the executive branch, including the additional
first deputy of the Honolulu police department; and the manager and chief
engineer and deputy manager and chief engineer of the board of water supply.
(b)   The director of transportation services may issue parking placards to:
(1)   Federal, State, and city agencies to be used by agency employees when
driving vehicles while on official government business; and
(2)   Members of city boards and commissions on an as-needed basis in
conjunction with the discharge of their official duties and upon request to the
director of transportation services from:
(A)   The director of the department to which the board or commission is
administratively attached;
(B)   The presiding officer of the council, in the case of the salary
commission, charter commission, and reapportionment commission; or
(C)   The director and chief engineer of the board of water supply, in the case
of the board of water supply.
The director of transportation services shall adopt rules pursuant to HRS
Chapter 91 to carry out the purposes of this subsection.
(c)   (1)   Except as provided in subdivision (2), parking placards shall be
effective for a 12-month period, shall state the date of expiration, be
uniquely numbered, and be displayed in a location established by the director
of transportation services.
(2)   Placards issued to members of city boards and commissions may be issued
for periods of less than 12 months, as determined by the director of
transportation services.
(d)   The vehicles of city officers displaying valid parking placards issued
under subsection (a) may park without charge while on official city business:
(1)   In loading and unloading zones established under §
15-15.1(c) and (d);
(2)   In metered stalls established under §
15-22.1(a) and (b);
(3)   For periods longer than designated by official signs established under §
15-16.1; and
(4)   On any portion of a public street where on-street parking spaces are
marked off and designated as established under §
15-13.3(c).
(e)   The vehicles displaying valid parking placards issued under subsection
(b) may park without charge in the areas identified in subsections (d)(2) to
(d)(4) while on official government business.
(f)   Parking placards issued under this section shall not be effective during
a parade or special event when parking may be prohibited under §
15-13.12.
(g)   Any federal or State agency requesting a parking placard as authorized in
subsection (b)(1) shall pay to the director of transportation services a fee of
$100 per year for each parking placard issued to the agency.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.13) (Added by Ord. 01-05; Am. Ords. 01-56,
02-08)
§ 15-13.14 Stripping of motor vehicles—Citation—Penalty.
(a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally act to remove,
destroy, deface, or disguise any part of a motor vehicle parked on a public
street, highway, or pedestrian mall, except for repairs necessitated by an
emergency.
(b)   Any police officer may arrest without a warrant alleged violators of this
section by issuing a summons or citation to the alleged violator. Nothing in
this section shall be construed as barring any police officer from initiating
prosecution by warrant or such other judicial process as is permitted by
statute or rule of court.
(c)   The form and content of such summons or citation shall be as adopted or
prescribed by the administrative judge of the district court and shall be
printed on a form commensurate with the form of other summonses or citations
used in modern methods of arrest, so designated to include all necessary
information to make the same valid within the laws and regulations of the State
of Hawaii and the City and County of Honolulu.
(d)   In every case when a citation is issued, the original of the same shall
be given to the violator; provided that the administrative judge of the
district court may prescribe by giving to the violator a carbon copy of the
citation and provide for the disposition of the original and any other copies.
(e)   Every citation shall be consecutively numbered and each carbon copy shall
bear the number of its respective original.
(f)   Any person who violates subsection (a) shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.14) (Added by Ord. 06-11)
§ 15-13.15 Prohibition on parking a dangerous motor vehicle near preschool,
kindergarten, elementary, intermediate, middle secondary, or high school.
(a)   No motor vehicle shall be parked on any public roadway at anytime in a
school zone of any public or private preschool, kindergarten, elementary,
intermediate, middle secondary, or high school when:
(1)   Any exterior part of the motor vehicle is broken, exposed, or protruding
that is sharp, pointed, or jagged; or
(2)   Any windshield or window of the motor vehicle is broken or shattered; or
(3)   Any door is opened or unlocked, or any window opened that would permit
access to the interior of the vehicle having broken or damaged parts that are
sharp, pointed, or jagged.
School. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 712-1249.6.
School Zone. Has the same meaning as defined in §
15-2.21.
   A person who violates this subsection shall be fined at least $100, but not
more than $500.
(b)   When a police officer determines that a motor vehicle is parked in
violation of subsection (a), the police officer may issue a summons or citation
to the motor vehicle and immediately notify the department of customer
services.
Upon receipt of the notice from the police, the department of customer services
shall remove the cited motor vehicle or cause it to be removed as soon as
possible, but within 24 hours of receipt of the notice. If, however, the
department of customer services for some reason cannot remove or cause the
removal of the motor vehicle within the 24-hour period, the department of
customer services shall remove it as soon as possible thereafter.
(c)   Section 15-13.9(b), (c), and (d) shall apply when a motor vehicle is
removed in accordance with this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.15) (Added by Ord. 07-3)
ARTICLE 14: STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIC PLACES
Sections
   
15-14.1   Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places—No
signs required
   
15-14.2   Obstruction to sidewalk prohibited
   
15-14.3   Parking not to obstruct traffic
   
15-14.4   Railroad trains not to block street
   
15-14.5   Prohibited parking within the city
   
15-14.6   Parking prohibited during certain hours within the city
   
15-14.7   Parking for certain purposes prohibited
   
15-14.8   Parking prohibited in tow or tow-away zones
§ 15-14.1 Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places—No
signs required.
(a)   A person may not stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the law or the
directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the
following places:
(1)   On a sidewalk;
(2)   In front of a public or private driveway or within 4 feet of either side
of a public or private driveway;
(3)   Within an intersection, along the edges or curbsides around corners and
in channelized areas of any two intersecting streets;
(4)   Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant;
(5)   On a crosswalk;
(6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection or within 20 feet upon
the approach to any midblock crosswalk;
(7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon or stop sign
located at the side of a roadway;
(8)   Within 75 feet upon the approach to any traffic control signal;
(9)   On the far side of the street at any signalized intersection, within 30
feet of the curb line of the intersecting street. As used herein, the term
“signalized intersection” means an intersection at which traffic is controlled
by official traffic control signals;
(10)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points
on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless there is a
different length indicated by signs or markings;
(11)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
(12)   In front of a driveway entrance to any fire station; within 20 feet of
the driveway entrance to any fire station; and, on the side of a street
opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet of such entrance when
proper signs give notice of such restriction;
(13)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
(14)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb
of a roadway;
(15)   Upon or beneath any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway,
upon or beneath any highway viaduct or causeway, or within a highway tunnel or
tube, except that widened portion of 10th Avenue under the Lunalilo Freeway
overpass;
(16)   Any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
(17)   In front of the entrance of any theater during the hours moving pictures
or legitimate play productions are being exhibited or performed therein;
provided that this provision does not apply where the operator of a vehicle
stops temporarily before such entrance for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers;
(18)   On either side of any street with a roadway width of 18 feet or less,
when official signs are erected giving notice thereof;
(19)   On the medial strip of any divided highway;
(20)   On a traffic island;
(21)   On all ramps, connecting ramps, connecting roads, collector roads,
loops, overpasses, and underpasses of any federal-aid highway;
(22)   On the roadway portion of any freeway, or on the median, shoulder or any
other portion other than the roadway portion of any freeway, except in areas
designated by official traffic control devices for emergency parking;
(23)   On all ramps, loops, and collector roads on Moanalua Road located
between the Moanalua Bridge to its intersection with King Street;
(24)   On Kalihi overpass, ramps, and connecting roads;
(25)   In Wilson Tunnel, the Pali Highway Tunnels, Hirano Tunnel, Hospital Rock
Tunnel, Middle Street Tunnel, and Diamond Head Tunnel;
(26)   On any portion of Likelike Highway;
(27)   Within the turnaround area of any dead-end street; and
(28)   In front of any curb ramp with crosswalks.
(b)   A person may not move a vehicle not lawfully under the person’s control
onto any place enumerated in subsection (a) or move the vehicle away from a
curb and park, stop, or leave standing a vehicle at a distance from the curb as
is unlawful.
(c)   A person may not stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle, whether
attended or unattended, upon the completed section of the federal-aid highway
(unofficially called Nuuanu Highway) from Nuuanu Pali Drive (near Reservoir No.
4) to Kamehameha Highway (at the hairpin turn), except in areas set aside for
emergency parking and so designated by official traffic control devices.
(Sec. 15-14.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 14, § 15-14.1)
(Am. Ords. 95-42, 97-05, 01-49, 05-010, 17-51)
§ 15-14.2 Obstruction to sidewalk prohibited.
   A person may not stand or park a vehicle in such a manner that any portion
of the vehicle obstructs a sidewalk or portion thereof.
(Sec. 15-14.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 14, § 15-14.2)
§ 15-14.3 Parking not to obstruct traffic.
   A person may not park any vehicle upon a street or alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of
the street or alley for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
(Sec. 15-14.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 14, § 15-14.3)
§ 15-14.4 Railroad trains not to block street.
   It is unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad
train to direct the operation or to operate the same in such a manner as to
prevent the use of any street or highway for purposes of travel for a period of
time longer than five minutes, except that this provision does not apply to
trains in motion other than those engaged in switching. It is unlawful to stop
any railroad train within an intersection for the purpose of receiving or
discharging passengers or freight.
(Sec. 15-14.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 14, § 15-14.4)
(Am. Ord. 24-32 )
§ 15-14.5 Prohibited parking within the city.
(a)   When official signs are erected giving notice of the prohibition against
parking, a person may not stop, stand, or park a vehicle any longer than is
absolutely necessary to take on or discharge passengers or freight upon any of
the streets or portions thereof described in Schedule XXII attached to the
ordinance codified in this section and made a part hereof;* provided that when
requested for noncommercial or nonbusiness purposes only, the director of
transportation services may suspend for a period of not more than one week any
parking prohibition herein enacted pursuant to Article 3.
(b)   A vehicle may not stop, stand or park upon any of the streets or portions
thereof described in Schedule XXIII attached to the ordinance codified in this
section and made a part hereof* for any reason when official signs prohibiting
stopping, standing, loading, or unloading thereon are erected; provided that
when requested for noncommercial or nonbusiness purposes only, the director of
transportation services may suspend for a period of not more than one week any
parking prohibition herein enacted pursuant to
Article 3.
(Sec. 15-14.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 14, § 15-14.5)
Editor’s note:
   * See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
§ 15-14.6 Parking prohibited during certain hours within the city.
(a)   When official signs are erected giving notice thereof, a person may not
stop, stand, or park a vehicle any longer than is absolutely necessary to take
on or discharge passengers or freight, upon any of the streets or portions
thereof within the city, between the hours indicated on such signs; provided
that when requested for noncommercial or nonbusiness purposes only, the
director of transportation services may suspend for a period of not more than
one week any parking prohibition herein enacted pursuant to 
Article 3.
(b)   When official signs are erected specifying the hours of restricted
parking during the morning peak traffic or afternoon peak traffic hours, or
both, a person may not stop, stand, or park a vehicle, even momentarily, upon
any of the streets or portions thereof between the hours indicated on such
signs; provided that when requested for noncommercial or nonbusiness purposes
only, the director of transportation services may suspend for a period of not
more than one week any parking prohibition herein enacted pursuant to
Article 3.
(Sec. 15-14.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 14, § 15-14.6)
§ 15-14.7 Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
   A person may not park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose
of:
(1)   Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
(2)   Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated
by an emergency.
(Sec. 15-14.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 14, § 15-14.7)
§ 15-14.8 Parking prohibited in tow or tow-away zones.
(a)   When official signs are erected designating a street or portions thereof
as a tow or tow-away zone, a person may not stop, stand, or park a vehicle,
even momentarily, between the hours indicated on such signs; provided that:
(1)   During hours other than the morning and afternoon peak traffic hours as
defined in this code:
(A)   Stops may be made by a vehicle displaying a valid decal pursuant to §
15-15.5 for the expeditious loading or unloading of freight;
(B)   Stops may be made by a bus in an official bus stop for the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers; and
(C)   Stops, in other than an official bus stop, may be made by a special
transit service vehicle for the expeditious loading or unloading of a mobility-
handicapped passenger; and
(2)   At any time, the following may stop, stand, or park in an official bus
stop for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers:
(A)   A bus franchised by the public utilities commission to render regularly
scheduled bus service on routes specified by the public utilities commission
and operating as such;
(B)   A city transit bus; and
(C)   A bus when operated for the transportation of children to or from school.
(b)   In no case shall the stop for the loading or unloading of freight exceed
30 minutes, and for the loading or unloading of passengers, three minutes;
except that a special transit vehicle may stop, stand, or park for not more
than 15 minutes when loading or unloading a mobility-handicapped passenger.
(c)   When requested for noncommercial or nonbusiness purposes only, the
director of transportation services may suspend for a period of not more than
one week any parking prohibition herein enacted pursuant to
Article 3.
(d)   Nothing in this section permits the parking of any bus, other than a city
transit bus, in an officially designated bus stop in the Waikiki special
district, as defined in §
21-9.80-2.
(Sec. 15-14.8, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 14,
§ 15-14.8) (Am. Ords. 89-58, 91-27, 96-58)
ARTICLE 15: STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY
Sections
   
15-15.1   Standing in loading zones for loading or unloading only
   
15-15.2   Boarding or alighting from vehicle—Use of vehicle doors
   
15-15.3   Buses not permitted to stand or park except in officially designated
bus stops
   
15-15.4   Other vehicles not to be parked, stopped or permitted to stand in bus
stops
   
15-15.5   Permits and supplemental permits to park in loading zones and
official bus stops
   
15-15.6   Credit of annual fees
§ 15-15.1 Standing in loading zones for loading or unloading only.
(a)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period
of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in
any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the
regulations applicable to such passenger curb loading zones are effective, and
then only for a period not to exceed three minutes; except that a special
transit service vehicle may stop, stand, or park for a period not exceeding 15
minutes when loading or unloading a passenger who is ADA paratransit eligible
under § 15B-4.2.
(b)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or any
length of time in any space marked as a freight curb loading zone during the
posted times; provided that:
(1)   A vehicle displaying a valid decal issued by the licensing division of
the department of budget and fiscal services on its front right bumper or, in
the case of vehicles not required to have front bumpers, on the windshield or
on some other authorized place designated by the licensing division of the
department of budget and fiscal services pursuant to §
15-15.5, may be stopped or parked within such space while freight is being
loaded upon or is being unloaded from such vehicle. In no case shall such
standing, stopping, or parking for loading and unloading of freight exceed 30
minutes or be permitted during the restricted peak traffic hours in tow or tow-
away zones as provided in §
15-14.8;
(2)   A taxicab licensed under §
36-6.9 may stop, stand, or park in a freight curb loading zone for the purpose
of active loading and unloading of passengers or their personal property so
long as the taxicab is not stopped, standing, or parked for a period longer
than 30 seconds;
(3)   An armored vehicle may stop, stand, or park in a freight curb loading
zone for the purpose of active loading and unloading of money, securities,
negotiable instruments and other valuables and documents, so long as the
armored vehicle is not stopped, standing, or parked for a period longer than 10
minutes; and
(4)   A special transit service vehicle may stop, stand, or park in a freight
curb loading zone for the purpose of loading or unloading a passenger who is
ADA paratransit eligible under § 15B-4.2. In no case shall the special transit
service vehicle stand, stop, or park:
(A)   For a period exceeding 15 minutes; or
(B)   In a tow or tow-away zone during the restricted peak traffic hours as is
prohibited under §
15-14.8.
The chief of police is authorized to remove or cause to be removed, at the
owner’s expense, any vehicle parked, stopped, or standing in violation of this
subsection. The removal of a vehicle for such violation shall be in accordance
with§
15-13.9.
(c)   Whenever any curb markings are to be used to designate freight curb
loading zones, such markings shall be yellow in color. Whenever any curb
markings are to be used to designate passenger curb loading zones, including
bus stops, such markings shall be red in color. Whenever any curb markings are
to be used to designate combination freight and passenger curb loading zones,
such markings shall be alternatively colored yellow and red, and signs shall be
erected stating the specific days and times when each type of loading zone is
in effect.
(d)   The establishment, relocation, or abolishment of curb loading zones in
the manner provided by law is authorized at the locations described in Schedule
XXIV referenced in
Table 15.0 of this chapter. *
(Sec. 15-15.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 15,
§ 15-15.1) (Am. Ords. 89-58, 89-78, 90-77, 96-58, 97-05)
Editor’s note:
   * See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
§ 15-15.2 Boarding or alighting from vehicle—Use of vehicle doors.
   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in
motion, and no person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side toward
moving traffic, unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any
person leave a door of a vehicle open on the side toward moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
(Sec. 15-15.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 15, § 15-15.2)
§ 15-15.3 Buses not permitted to stand or park except in officially designated
bus stops.
(a)   The driver of a bus shall not stop, stand, or park such bus upon any
street at any place within any business district other than at an officially
designated bus stop, nor for any purpose or period of time other than when
actually engaged in the discharge of passengers or the pickup of passengers
then in readiness at the curb. The stopping, standing, or parking of such bus
shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more
than three minutes.
(b)   The chief of police may permit and direct the parking of buses at places
other than officially designated bus stops when large assemblages of people
create an unusually heavy demand for mass transportation facilities.
(c)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a bus used for charter or tour
service in any officially designated bus stop, unless such bus displays on the
right front bumper a valid decal issued by the licensing division of the
department of budget and fiscal services pursuant to §
15-15.5.
(d)   The locations of designated official bus stops are described in Schedule
XXV attached to the ordinance codified in this section and made a part hereof.*
The designations shall be made by the department of transportation services.
(e)   Nothing in this section shall permit the parking of any bus, other than a
city transit bus, in an officially designated bus stop in the Waikiki district,
as defined in §
21-9.80-2 of the land use ordinance.
(Sec. 15-15.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 15,
§ 15-15.3) (Am. Ords. 91-27, 97-02)
Editor’s note:
   * See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
§ 15-15.4 Other vehicles not to be parked, stopped or permitted to stand in bus
stops.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, other than a bus authorized
under §
15-15.3, in a bus stop that has been officially designated and appropriately
signed as such.
(Sec. 15-15.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 15, § 15-15.4)
(Am. Ord. 91-27)
§ 15-15.5 Permits and supplemental permits to park in loading zones and
official bus stops.
(a)   Except as provided in subdivision (3), the department of customer
services is authorized to issue, upon application therefor on forms furnished
by the department of customer services and upon the payment of annual fees as
hereinafter provided, permits for the parking of trucks as described in HRS §
249-1, as amended, in freight curb loading zones when freight is being loaded
upon or is being unloaded from such vehicles, and permits for the parking of
tour vehicles, as defined in HRS § 251-1, as amended, in officially designated
bus stops when passengers are being loaded upon or being unloaded from such
vehicles.
(1)   A permit, deemed granted upon approval of the application, expires on
December 31 of the year in which it is issued. However, an application for
renewal of such permit for the following year may be made on and after December
1 and approval thereof may be granted upon the payment of the permit fee. The
permit must be evidenced by an appropriate decal that is placed on the front
right bumper, or on a place to be designated by the department of customer
services in the case of vehicles not required to have front bumpers.
(2)   The department of customer services shall charge and collect an annual
fee of $60 for each permit and $10 for each decal, for a total annual charge of
$70; provided that where the application for such permit is made in any month
other than January, the permit fee will be reduced by one-twelfth of the annual
cost for each permit for each full month of the then calendar year that has
elapsed at the time of the application; and provided further, that where a
decal is mutilated, defaced, or lost, a replacement decal will be issued upon
payment of $10. The director of customer services is authorized, at the
discretion of the director of customer services, to establish and increase the
annual permit fee and the decal fee by no greater than 5 percent once per
calendar year; provided that the current fees are set forth in Schedule XXXIX,
which is to be provided by the director of transportation services subsequent
to January 1, 2020 and made a part hereof. The sums collected will be deposited
in the highway fund.
(3)   Permits issued pursuant to this section do not allow the permittee to
park in:
(A)   Officially designated city bus stops in the Waikiki special district, as
defined in §
21-9.80-2, as amended. Such bus stops are restricted for use by city transit
buses only; and
(B)   Freight curb loading zones and officially designated bus stops located
within the boundary of a transportation management special improvement district
established pursuant to Chapter 28.
(b)   The department of customer services is authorized to issue, upon
application therefor on forms furnished by the department of transportation
services and upon the payment of annual supplemental permit charges as
hereinafter provided, supplemental permits for the parking of trucks as
described in HRS § 249-1, as amended, and for the parking of tour vehicles, as
defined in HRS § 251-1, as amended, in loading zones when freight or passengers
are being loaded upon or being unloaded from such vehicles, for loading zones
within the boundary of a transportation management special improvement district
established pursuant to
Chapter 28.
(1)   A supplemental permit, deemed granted upon approval of the application,
expires on December 31 of the year for which it is issued. An application for
renewal of such supplemental permit for the following year may be made on and
after December 1, and approval thereof may be granted upon the payment of the
supplemental permit fee, decal fee, and the additional fee for each
transportation management special improvement district within which permission
to load and unload is requested. The supplemental permit must be evidenced by
an appropriate decal or other device as approved by the director of
transportation services which shall be placed on the front right bumper or such
other place on the vehicle as may be approved by the director of transportation
services.
(2)   The department of customer services shall charge and collect an annual
fee of $120 for each supplemental permit and $10 for each decal or other
approved device, for a total annual charge of $130; provided that where the
application for the supplemental permit is made in any month other than
January, the supplemental permit fee shall be reduced by one-twelfth of the
annual cost for each supplemental permit for each full month of the then
calendar year that has elapsed at the time of the application; and provided
further, that where a decal or other device is mutilated, defaced, or lost, a
replacement decal or approved device will be issued upon payment of $10.
(A)   Supplemental permits to authorize the loading and unloading of passengers
and freight in a transportation management special improvement district will be
subject to an additional fee for each transportation management special
improvement district within which permission to load and unload is requested.
The supplemental permit charge for each transportation management special
improvement district is $120.
(B)   The director of transportation services is authorized, at the discretion
of the director of transportation services, to establish and increase the
additional transportation management special improvement district fee and the
decal fee by no greater than 5 percent once per calendar year; provided that
the current fees are set forth in Schedule XXXIX, which is to be provided by
the director of transportation services subsequent to January 1, 2020 and made
a part hereof.
(C)   The sums collected from the supplemental fees must be deposited in the
transportation fund and must be allocated to defraying the cost of the
increased management and enforcement needs of the transportation management
special improvement district loading zones and the associated operational and
administrative costs.
(D)   The director of transportation services may enter into an agreement with
any entity or entities authorized by ordinance to manage freight and passenger
loading and unloading in a transportation management special improvement
district.
(c)   A person may not park a vehicle in a permitted loading zone or bus stop
unless there is affixed to the vehicle a valid and current decal or other
approved device permitting parking in loading zones and official bus stops in
accordance with this section and, for a loading zone or official bus stop in a
transportation management special improvement district, unless there is affixed
to the vehicle a valid and current decal or other approved device permitting
parking in loading zones and official bus stops in that transportation
management special improvement district. Any vehicle parked in a permitted
loading zone or bus stop without a valid and current decal or approved device,
or, for a permitted loading zone or bus stop within a transportation management
special improvement district, parked without a valid and current decal or
approved device permitting parking in a permitted loading zone or bus stop
within the applicable transportation management special improvement district,
is subject to being towed, and the owner of the vehicle is subject to a fine of
$100 for each offense.
(d)   Permits, decals, or other approved devices issued pursuant to this
section are not effective during a parade or special event or when parking is
otherwise prohibited pursuant to §§
15-13.12,
15-14.8,
15-15.1, and
15-15.3, or other applicable laws.
(e)   The director of customer services and the director of transportation
services may adopt rules, in accordance with HRS Chapter 91, having the force
and effect of law, for the implementation, administration, and enforcement of
this article, specifically including the adoption of rules limiting the number
of supplemental permits issued within, and specifying other provisions relating
to loading zones within, individual transportation management special
improvement districts.
(Sec. 15-15.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 15,
§ 15-15.5) (Am. Ords. 19-23, 20-19)
§ 15-15.6 Credit of annual fees.
   When an annual fee has already been paid on a vehicle and that vehicle is,
within the year, replaced by another vehicle, the unexpired portion of the
annual fee paid on the vehicle so replaced shall be credited to the annual fee
payable for the replacement vehicle. For the purposes hereof, the unexpired
portion of the annual fee shall be that amount that is equal to $2 for each
full month remaining in the current licensing year. In addition, whenever a
vehicle is replaced by another vehicle under the provisions hereof, the sum of
$5 shall be charged and collected to defray the administrative costs incurred
by the city.
(Sec. 15-15.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 15, § 15-15.6)
ARTICLE 16: STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR
PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS
Sections
   
15-16.1   Time limit parking within the City and County of Honolulu
   
15-16.2   Vehicles in limited parking area to be moved 50 feet
   
15-16.3   Parking within public parks and public school grounds restricted
   
15-16.4   Restricted parking on federal-aid highways
   
15-16.5   City Hall and satellite off-street parking
   
15-16.6   Storage parking of commercial vehicles prohibited—No signs required
   
15-16.7   Board of water supply off-street parking
   
15-16.8   Twenty-four-hour time limit parking within the City and County of
Honolulu
§ 15-16.1 Time limit parking within the City and County of Honolulu.
   When official signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stop,
stand, or park a vehicle for a period of time longer than the period of time
indicated on such sign, unless otherwise provided by law or by official permits
or decals upon any of the streets or portions thereof within the city as
described in Schedule XXVI attached hereto and made a part hereof.*
(Sec. 15-16.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 16, § 15-16.1)
(Am. Ord. 17-45)
Editor’s note:
   * See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
§ 15-16.2 Vehicles in limited parking area to be moved 50 feet.
   In construing §
15-16.1 a vehicle in a limited parking area shall be moved not less than 50
feet during the limited parking period or shall be deemed to have remained
stationary.
(Sec. 15-16.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 16, § 15-16.2)
(Am. Ord. 90-77)
§ 15-16.3 Parking within public parks and public school grounds restricted.
(a)   No person shall park a vehicle on any roadway within public parks and
public school grounds in such a manner as to leave available less than 10 feet
of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
(b)   No person shall stop, park, or leave standing a vehicle on any roadway
within public parks and public school grounds other than parallel with the edge
of the roadway heading in the direction of traffic and with the right-hand
wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the curb line or edge of the roadway,
except upon those roadways that have been marked or signed for angle parking,
upon which roadways vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated
by such marks or signs.
(c)   Wherever parking stalls for the parallel or angle parking of motor
vehicles are marked off and designated on any roadway or in any parking area
within public parks and public school grounds, each such parking stall shall
extend in width 8 feet and shall extend in length approximately 22 feet. The
driver of any vehicle, excepting only single vehicles of a greater length or
width, shall park such vehicle completely within the parking stall.
(d)   No person shall park a vehicle on any roadway or in any parking area
within public parks and public school grounds for the purpose of:
(1)   Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
(2)   Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except minor repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
(e)   Wherever any roadway or parking area within public parks and public
school grounds is kept open for vehicular use, no person shall park a vehicle
on any such roadway or in any such parking area for a period of time longer
than 60 minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.
(f)   No vehicle shall be operated or driven off the improved or paved portion
of any roadway within public parks and public school grounds, except to and
from a parking area maintained therein. Disabled vehicles may be driven off the
paved portion so as to prevent obstruction of traffic, until temporary repairs
are made or until power is obtained to remove them.
(g)   When official signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall,
after school hours, stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any parking facility
maintained on public school grounds. The parking prohibition contained herein
shall not apply to a person who is, after school hours, a guest or patron of or
an invitee to a function or activity approved by the proper school authorities.
(Sec. 15-16.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 16, § 15-16.3)
§ 15-16.4 Restricted parking on federal-aid highways.
(a)   No person shall park a vehicle within any off-street parking area of the
federal-aid highway system during the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m.; subject,
however, to the exceptions granted authorized emergency vehicles, pursuant to §
15-4.4.
(b)   No person shall park a vehicle within any such off-street parking area
for a period of time longer than 120 minutes during the hours of 5:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
(c)   No person shall, further, park a vehicle within any such off-street
parking area for the purpose of:
(1)   Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
(2)   Washing, greasing, wiping, or repairing such vehicle, except minor
repairs necessitated by an emergency.
(d)   The State director of transportation shall install appropriate signs
identifying the off-street parking areas and indicating their restricted use
for parking only.
(Sec. 15-16.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 16, § 15-16.4)
(Am. Ord. 96-58)
§ 15-16.5 City hall and satellite off-street parking.
(a)   It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in an unmetered parking
stall within the areas described in subsection (d), unless the vehicle has
affixed thereon a decal evidencing that a parking permit has been issued to the
person by the chief engineer of the department of facility maintenance or the
chief engineer’s authorized representative authorizing the person to park
within those areas.
(b)   It is unlawful for any person to:
(1)   Park a vehicle outside of a designated parking stall within the areas
provided for parking by city and county officials and employees, described in
subsection (d);
(2)   Disregard or violate any direction, instruction, or restriction indicated
by or on appropriate signs and markings posted in or about the areas described
in subsection (d); or
(3)   Travel at a speed in excess of 10 miles per hour within the areas
described in subsection (d).
(c)   Members of the police department and other persons authorized by the
chief of police are authorized to remove or cause to be removed any vehicle
parked within the areas described in subsection (d) when:
(1)   The vehicle does not display the decal required to be displayed under
subsection (a); or
(2)   The vehicle is not parked wholly within a designated stall and straddles
an adjoining stall.
(d)   Except as specified otherwise, the chief engineer of the department of
facility maintenance is authorized to designate by appropriate signs or
markings or both all parking areas described in this subsection for the
exclusive use of officials and employees of the city, employees of the city and
State whose offices are within the joint traffic management center, and
employees of the civic center child care facility. The chief engineer is
authorized to issue parking permits under this section, upon receiving
application therefor on forms furnished by the chief engineer and payment of
the applicable monthly permit fee described in subsection (e). The designated
parking areas are as follows:
(1)   Except for off-street parking areas serving fire stations and fire repair
facilities, all city off-street parking areas in the area bounded by Ward
Avenue, Kinau Street, Lusitana Street, H-1 Freeway, Nuuanu Stream, North Nimitz
Highway, South Nimitz Highway, and Ala Moana Boulevard. These parking areas are
under the jurisdiction of the department of facility maintenance. Included in
the city off-street parking area is the joint traffic management center parking
garage located at the Ewa corner of S. King and Kealamakai Streets, which
includes floors P-2, P-3, P-4, P-5, and P-6;
(2)   The Kapalama Hale parking facility located at the Ewa corner of
Dillingham Boulevard and Alakawa Street; and
(3)   The Alapai parking facility located at the Waikiki makai corner of Alapai
and Beretania Streets, which includes floors P-1, P-2, P-3, B-1, and B-2. These
parking areas are under the jurisdiction of the chief of police. The chief of
police of the city is authorized and directed to designate all parking areas by
appropriate signs or markings or both for the exclusive use of officials and
employees of the city. The chief of police is authorized to issue, upon receipt
of an application therefor on forms furnished by the chief of police and
payment of the applicable monthly parking fee, permits for parking in the
facility described in this subdivision.
The chief engineer and the chief of police may charge a fee of $15 for each
parking decal that is replaced due to being lost, stolen, misplaced, or not
returned.
(e)   Any city official or employee, including any elective or appointive
official, any employee of the city and State whose offices are within the joint
traffic management center, and any employee of the civic center child care
facility, who applies for and receives a parking permit under this section
shall pay a fee for parking in accordance with the following schedule:
(1)   Unassigned covered stall is the same rate as the fare for an adult
monthly pass as provided for in §
15B-2.1;
(2)   Assigned covered stall is $15 more than the unassigned covered stalls per
month;
(3)   Assigned covered stall assigned to an elected or appointed official or
employee of the city is $40 more than the rate for unassigned covered stalls
per month;
(4)   Assigned tandem covered stall is $10 less than the rate for unassigned
covered stalls per month;
(5)   Assigned uncovered stall is $5 more than the rate for unassigned covered
stalls per month;
(6)   Assigned uncovered stall assigned to an elected or appointed official or
employee of the city is $40 more than the rate for unassigned uncovered stalls
per month;
(7)   Unassigned uncovered stall is $10 less than the rate for unassigned
covered stalls per month;
(8)   Unassigned uncovered satellite stall with transit pass for commuting to
working place not less than 0.375 miles away is $15 less than the rate for
unassigned covered stalls per month;
(9)   Assigned tandem uncovered stall is $20 less than the rate for unassigned
covered stalls per month; and
(10)   Carpool unassigned covered or uncovered stalls:
(A)   Two occupants: 75 percent of specified rate;
(B)   Three occupants: 50 percent of specified rate; and
(C)   Four or more occupants: no charge.
(f)   Appointive members of boards and commissions are entitled to park free of
charge in areas that are set aside for such parking.
(g)   A city official or employee who is the primary driver of a vehicle
clearly identifiable on its exterior as a ridesharing vehicle provided under
the State department of transportation’s ridesharing program qualifies for the
applicable carpool fees established in subsection (e), based on the number of
passengers assigned to the vehicle under the State’s program. Other than the
primary driver of the vehicle, the other occupants need not be city officials
or employees.
(h)   The chief engineer and the chief of police shall also set aside areas
where city and county vehicles not assigned to specific city officials and that
are used for the conduct of daily city business (motor pool cars) are to be
parked. No fee will be assessed for parking these vehicles.
(i)   The chief engineer and the chief of police are also authorized and
directed to establish, mark, and designate metered and unmetered parking stalls
within the areas designated in subsections (d)(1), (d)(2), and (d)(3).
(j)   The chief engineer and the chief of police shall also post appropriate
signs in and about the parking areas under their respective jurisdictions to
indicate the type of parking in effect and in the case of metered parking
spaces, the times during which meter fees are in effect.
(k)   Bicycles, motorcycles, motor scooters, and mopeds. Notwithstanding the
foregoing provisions, portions of the parking facilities that are not
designated as parking stalls must be designated for the parking of bicycles,
motorcycles, motor scooters, and mopeds as defined in HRS § 291C-1, free of
charge.
(Sec. 15-16.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 16,
§ 15-16.5) (Am. Ords. 89-78, 92-24, 94-03, 95-30, 01-50, 04-21, 11-13, 12-36,
16-22, 21-7)
§ 15-16.6 Storage parking of commercial vehicles prohibited—No signs required.*
(a)   Except as provided in subsection (b), it is unlawful for the driver or
owner of any:
(1)   Bus, truck, truck-trailer, trailer, van, house trailer, or other vehicle
used for commercial purposes whose gross vehicle weight rating is 10,000 pounds
or more, or whose vehicle length from bumper to bumper is 20 feet or more; or
(2)   Any vehicle being rented as a car-sharing vehicle for which a vehicle
surcharge tax under HRS § 251-2.5 is being paid to or is required to be paid to
the State,
to park the same or permit the same to be parked, stand, or remain motionless
for a period in excess of four hours on any public street. Such vehicle shall
be subject to all parking limitations applicable thereto, unless otherwise
provided by law.
(b)   The following shall be excepted from subsection (a):
(1)   Construction equipment and public utility vehicles, but only when such
equipment and vehicles are actively being used for repair or construction work;
(2)   Vehicles actively being used for the loading of goods, wares, or
merchandise; and
(3)   Vehicles having a valid sticker for a reserved car-sharing on-street
parking stall designated by the director of transportation services pursuant to
§
15-28.1(b)(2).
(Sec. 15-16.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 16, § 15-16.6)
(Am. Ords. 96-58, 00-69, 22-4)
Editor’s note:
   * Ord. 00-69 shall take effect 180 days after its approval (6-6-2001).
§ 15-16.7 Board of water supply off-street parking.
(a)   No person shall park any vehicle in the parking areas located at the
board of water supply Beretania complex as shown on Exhibit 15-16.7 which
follows, and as described in subsection (e), who has not been specifically
authorized by the manager and chief engineer or the manager’s and chief
engineer’s authorized subordinate, or who is not on a business visit to the
board of water supply.
(b)   No person shall park any vehicle outside of the designated parking stall
or other spaces set aside for parking, as described in subsection (e).
(c)   No person shall park any vehicle contrary to any directions,
instructions, or restrictions indicated by or on official signs and markings
therein at any hour of the day or day of the week posted in or about the areas
described in subsection (e).
(d)   Any police officer or any person authorized by the chief of police is
authorized to issue a citation to any person who violates this section and to
remove or cause to be removed any vehicle parked within the areas described in
subsection (e), with removal costs to be borne by the violator or owner of the
vehicle that is parked in violation of this section.
(e)   Except as specified otherwise by appropriate signs or markings, or both,
the following parking areas are designated for the exclusive use of officials,
employees, guests, and customers of the board of water supply:
(1)   Area A, being that parcel of land located within the block bounded by
Lauhala Street, Lusitana Street, Lisbon Street and Beretania Street, more
particularly described as follows:
(A)   Beginning at the northerly corner of this lot, being also the westerly
corner of Lot E, and running by azimuths measured clockwise from true south:
 
1. 327°15' 265.61 feet
2. 57° 15' 65.00 feet
3. 147°15' 270.33 feet
4. 242°40' 65.29 feet to the point of beginning and containing an area of
            17,371 square feet
 
(2)   Areas B and C, being those parcels of land located within the block
bounded by Lisbon Street, Lusitana Street, Alapai Street, and Beretania Street,
more particularly described as follows:
(A)   Area B—Beginning at the northerly corner of this lot, being also the
westerly corner of Lot C, and running by azimuths measured clockwise from true
south:
 
1. 319°04' 124.67 feet
2. 47° 10' 42.12 feet
3. 21° 12' 4.58 feet
4. 138°30' 135.06 feet
5. 237°15' 47.98 feet to the point of beginning and containing an area of
            6,037 square feet
 
(B)   Area C — Beginning at the northerly corner of this lot, being also the
intersection of Lisbon Street and Lusitana Street, and running by azimuths
measured clockwise from true south:
 
1. 330°15' 98.46 feet
2. 47° 10' 143.28 feet
3. 139°04' 124.67 feet
4. 237°15' 163.96 feet to the point of beginning and containing an area of
            16,988 square feet
 
(3)   Areas D and E, being those parcels of land located within the block
bounded by Lauhala Street, Lusitana Street, Lisbon Street, and Beretania
Street, more particularly described as follows:
(A)   Area D—Beginning at the northeast corner of this lot, being also the
intersection of Lauhala Street and Lusitana Street, and running by azimuths
measured clockwise from true south:
 
1. 341°34' 7.96 feet
2. 335°55' 119.04 feet
3. 330°15' 51.10 feet
4. 57° 15' 230.00 feet
5. 147°15' 236.80 feet
6. 245°50' 238.87 feet
7. 293°42' 29.67 feet to the point of beginning and containing an area of
            52,437 square feet
 
(B)   Area E—Beginning at the northerly corner of this lot, being also the
westerly corner of Lot D, and running by azimuths measured clockwise from true
south:
1. 327°15' 266.80 feet
2. 57° 15' 215.00 feet
3. 147°15' 265.61 feet
4. 242°40' 10.55 feet
5. 243°29' 57.41 feet
6. 244°57' 43.51 feet
7. 245°42' 8.40 feet
8. 245°50' 97.09 feet to the point of beginning and containing an area of
            54,243 square feet
 
(4)   Area F, being that parcel of land located within the block bounded by
Lisbon Street, Lusitana Street, Alapai Street, and Beretania Street, more
particularly described as follows:
(A)   Beginning at the northerly corner of this lot, being also the westerly
corner of Lot B, and running by azimuths measured clockwise from true south:
1. 318°30' 135.06 feet
2. 21° 12' 252.20 feet
3. 68° 14' 61.48 feet
4. 115°17' 95.05 feet
5. 115°50' 26.94 feet
6. 119°34' 156.48 feet
7. 180°00' 33.64 feet
8. 237°15' 362.32 feet to the point of beginning and containing an area of
            78,564 square feet
 
Exhibit 15-16.7
Parking Layout at Board of Water Supply Beretania Complex
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-111.png]
(Sec. 15-16.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 16, § 15-16.7)
§ 15-16.8 Twenty-four-hour time limit parking within the City and County of
Honolulu.
(a)   When official signs are posted giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle in the same location for a period of time longer than 24 hours,
unless otherwise provided by law, upon any of the streets within the city. A
vehicle shall be deemed parked in the same location for more than 24 hours if
the vehicle has not been moved within the prescribed time period based upon
markings or other means as determined by a police officer or an authorized
representative of the department of transportation services. Every three hours
a vehicle remains parked in violation of this section after the first violation
occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
(b)   The director of transportation services shall designate, after holding a
public hearing on the matter, those streets in the city where parking is to be
limited to 24 hours in accordance with §
15-3.1.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 16, § 15-16.8) (Added by Ord. 90-73; Am. Ord. 90-77)
ARTICLE 17: PEDESTRIANS’ RIGHTS AND DUTIES
Sections
   
15-17.1   Establishment, removal, or relocation of marked crosswalks
   
15-17.2   Restrictions on pedestrians crossing roadways
   
15-17.3   Blind and crippled pedestrians’ right-of-way
   
15-17.4   Hitchhiking
   
15-17.5   Restrictions on freeways
   
15-17.6   Sitting, standing, or walking on railings of highway bridges or
overpasses
   
15-17.7   Restrictions on fishing and crabbing from certain bridges
   
15-17.8   Restrictions on operation of bicycle on pedestrian overpass and
underpass—Duties of dismounted operator
§ 15-17.1 Establishment, removal, or relocation of marked crosswalks.
(a)   In addition to marked crosswalks heretofore established, marked
crosswalks are established at the locations described in Schedule XXVII
attached to the ordinance codified in this section and made a part thereof as
the schedule may be amended by the director of transportation services
following the procedures set out in the rules of the department of
transportation services, or in the absence of a rule, the procedures for
amending traffic control devices as set out in §
15-3.1(c).*
(b)   Notwithstanding any ordinance to the contrary, the city may not remove or
relocate an established, marked crosswalk unless notice, an opportunity for
public input, and an offer made by the director of transportation services to
the chair of the affected neighborhood board to make a presentation before the
affected neighborhood board are provided in accordance with this section. The
opportunity for public input must be provided during the department of
transportation services’ planning process for the removal or relocation of the
crosswalk. Notice must be given in accordance with HRS § 1-28.5 prior to the
scheduled date of removal or relocation. In addition, written notice of the
proposed removal or relocation must be transmitted to the chair of the affected
neighborhood board and posted at both ends of the crosswalk identified for
removal or relocation. The notice, at a minimum, must include the following
information:
(1)   The proposed date of the crosswalk removal or relocation;
(2)   The public’s right to provide input relating to the scheduled crosswalk
removal or relocation;
(3)   The form, method, and procedure for providing public input; and
(4)   If relocated, the location where the new crosswalk will be established.
In addition, the written notice transmitted to the chair of the affected
neighborhood board must include but not be limited to the rationale for the
proposed change, viable options for the public to cross the roadway, and steps
incorporated to increase public safety.
(c)   The offer to the chair of the affected neighborhood board must, when
possible, specify that the director of transportation services, or the
director's designated subordinate, is available to make a presentation before
the affected neighborhood board within 60 days of the transmittal of the offer.
If a presentation cannot be made with 60 days of the transmittal of the offer,
the reasoning and justification for a delayed presentation, along with a
proposed subsequent time period for the presentation, shall be provided in
writing to the chair of the affected neighborhood board. The presentation must
include but not be limited to the rationale for the proposed change, viable
options for the public to cross the roadway, and steps incorporated to increase
public safety. The offer will be deemed satisfied if:
(1)   The director, or the director's designated subordinate, makes a
presentation including the required elements before the affected neighborhood
board within 60 days of the transmittal of the offer;
(2)   The neighborhood board fails to provide the director or the director's
designated subordinate with an opportunity to provide a presentation at a
meeting held within 60 days of the transmittal of the offer;
(3)   The neighborhood board provides the director with written notice that it
has no objection to the removal or relocation of the established, marked
crosswalk, or that no presentation of the project is necessary, or both; or
(4)   The director, or the director's designated subordinate, having previously
provided written reasoning and justification for a delayed presentation to the
chair of the affected neighborhood board, makes a presentation including the
required elements before the affected neighborhood board at an agreed-upon date
subsequent to the 60-day deadline of the transmittal of the offer.
(Sec. 15-17.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 17, § 15-17.1)
(Am. Ords. 18-43, 20-38)
Editor’s note:
   * See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
§ 15-17.2 Restrictions on pedestrians crossing roadways.
(a)   No pedestrian shall enter any marked or unmarked crosswalk or part
thereof when vehicular traffic is so close thereto as to constitute an
immediate hazard, nor shall any pedestrian enter any unmarked crosswalk where
traffic signs forbid such entry.
(b)   No pedestrian shall cross any roadway within any business district except
within a marked or unmarked crosswalk, nor any roadway in any residence
district within 200 feet of any intersection except within a marked or unmarked
crosswalk at such intersection.
(c)   No pedestrian shall enter upon or cross any roadway or portion of any
roadway designated by the council as closed to pedestrian traffic, except
within an authorized marked crosswalk, or upon a pedestrian overpass or through
a pedestrian tunnel.
(d)   The roadways or portions of roadways are designated as closed to
pedestrian traffic at the locations described in Schedule XXVIII attached to
the ordinance codified in this section and made a part hereof.*
(Sec. 15-17.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 17, § 15-17.2)
Editor’s note:
   * See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
§ 15-17.3 Blind and crippled pedestrians’ right-of-way.
   Except at intersections where the movement of traffic is being regulated by
police officers, the driver of a vehicle shall come to a stop and take such
precautions as may be necessary before proceeding so as to avoid injury to a
crippled pedestrian using crutches, or to a blind or partially blind pedestrian
carrying in full view a cane, white in color or white with red ends, or
accompanied by a guide dog, and blowing continually a whistle similar to the
type of whistle used by traffic officers. The failure of any such blind
pedestrian to signal shall not deprive such person of the right-of-way accorded
the person by other provisions of this code.
(Sec. 15-17.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 17, § 15-17.3)
§ 15-17.4 Hitchhiking.
   The solicitation of free rides (hitchhiking) shall be permitted at any
official bus stop of the city or in any open area where there are no official
bus stops within a reasonable distance; provided that the person soliciting
rides shall not stand for the purpose of such solicitation on the roadway; and
provided further, that no person shall attempt to intimidate, threaten, or
otherwise annoy passing motorists while so engaged in hitchhiking. Any person
violating this section shall be issued a citation according to the procedures
specified in
Article 26, unless such person refuses to provide suitable identification, in
which case the arresting officer shall take the person into custody according
to the prescribed procedure for physical arrest in HRS Chapter 803.
(Sec. 15-17.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 17, § 15-17.4)
(Am. Ord. 95-15)
§ 15-17.5 Restrictions on freeways.
(a)   The council may, by ordinance, with respect to freeways or designated
portions thereof under their jurisdiction to which all rights of access have
been acquired, prohibit or restrict the use of such freeways or any portion
thereof by pedestrians, bicycles, or other nonmotorized traffic or by any
person operating a motor-driven cycle.
(b)   Such prohibitory regulations shall be effective when appropriate signs
giving notice thereof are erected upon any such freeway and the approaches
thereto.
(Sec. 15-17.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 17, § 15-17.5)
§ 15-17.6 Sitting, standing, or walking on railings of highway bridges or
overpasses.
   No person shall sit, stand, or walk, or aid or assist any other person to
sit, stand, or walk upon the railing of any highway bridge or overpass in the
city.
(Sec. 15-17.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 17, § 15-17.6)
§ 15-17.7 Restrictions on fishing and crabbing from certain bridges.
   No person shall fish or crab from the areas described in Schedule XXIX
attached to the ordinance codified in this section and made a part hereof when
signs prohibiting such activity have been posted.*
(Sec. 15-17.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 17, § 15-17.7)
Editor’s note:
   * See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
§ 15-17.8 Restrictions on operation of bicycle on pedestrian overpass and
underpass—Duties of dismounted operator.
   No person shall operate a bicycle upon any portion of a pedestrian overpass
or underpass, except that bicycles with the operator dismounted may be
permitted on such structures for the purpose of crossing the highway and while
so doing, shall obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(Sec. 15-17.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 17, § 15-17.8)
ARTICLE 18: OPERATION OF BICYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES
Sections
   
15-18.1   License required
   
15-18.2   Attachment of license plate or license decal
   
15-18.3   Obedience to traffic control devices
   
15-18.4   Speed
   
15-18.5   Emerging from alley, bikeway, or driveway
   
15-18.6   Parking
   
15-18.7   Riding on sidewalks
   
15-18.8   Direction of travel along bicycle lanes
   
15-18.9   Reserved
   
15-18.10   Regulations applicable to bicycle paths constructed on dedicated
easements
   
15-18.11   Operating bicycle with motor
   
15-18.12   Bicycle docking stations
   
15-18.13   Safe driving of bicycles equipped with motors on public streets,
paths, or trails
   
15-18.14   Helmet requirement for minors operating bicycles equipped with
motors
§ 15-18.1 License required.
   No person who resides within the city shall ride or propel a bicycle on any
street, highway, alley, roadway, or sidewalk, or upon any public path set aside
for the exclusive use of bicycles, unless such bicycle has been licensed and a
license plate 2 x 3 inches in size, or a license decal, is attached thereto as
provided in this article.
(Sec. 15-18.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 18, § 15-18.1)
§ 15-18.2 Attachment of license plate or license decal.
   In the case of a license plate, it shall be firmly attached to the rear
mudguard or frame of the bicycle for which it is issued, in such position as to
be plainly visible from the rear. In the case of a license decal, it shall be
affixed to the upright post attached to the sprocket of the bicycle for which
it is issued, faced in the forward direction.
(Sec. 15-18.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 18, § 15-18.2)
§ 15-18.3 Obedience to traffic control devices.
(a)   Every person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer or any other persons
authorized to direct, control, or regulate traffic.
(b)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right turn or
left turn or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey
the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the
bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the
regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(c)   As provided under §
15-6.7, a bicycle lane designated in Schedule XXXIV* shall be used exclusively
for operating bicycles, except:
(1)   As otherwise provided in §
15-6.7; and
(2)   Where there is no adjacent paved sidewalk provided, a pedestrian may use
the bicycle lane as a walkway and a bicycle rider shall yield the right-of-way
to the pedestrian. When using a bicycle lane, a pedestrian shall walk as near
the outside edge as possible. When two or more pedestrians use a bicycle lane,
they shall walk in single file as near the outside edge as possible.
(Sec. 15-18.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 18, § 15-18.3)
(Am. Ord. 94-78)
Editor’s note:
   * See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
§ 15-18.4 Speed.
   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Sec. 15-18.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 18, § 15-18.4)
§ 15-18.5 Emerging from alley, bikeway, or driveway.
   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, bikeway, or
building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending
across such alley, driveway, bikeway, or building, yield the right-of-way to
all pedestrians approaching on such sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon
entering a bikeway, shall yield the right-of-way to all bicycles approaching on
such lane, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles or bicycles approaching on such roadway.
(Sec. 15-18.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 18, § 15-18.5)
§ 15-18.6 Parking.
   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb, or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle, or
against a building; and in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to
pedestrian traffic, or as allowed under §
15-22.2,
Chapter 15, Article 18, and
Chapter 14, Article 18, including complete streets features such as parklets
and bicycle corrals, or in bicycle docking stations that have met the
requirements of § 15-18.12.
(Sec. 15-18.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 18, § 15-18.6)
(Am. Ords. 16-2, 21-15)
§ 15-18.7 Riding on sidewalks.
(a)   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
(b)   The director of transportation services is authorized to erect official
signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by
any person, and when such signs are in place, no person shall disobey the same.
(c)   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal
before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
(d)   No person shall ride a bicycle equipped with a motor on any sidewalk.
(Sec. 15-18.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 18, § 15-18.7)
§ 15-18.8 Direction of travel along bicycle lanes.
   No person shall ride or operate a bicycle within a bicycle lane in any
direction except that permitted of vehicular traffic traveling on the same side
of the roadway; provided that bicycles may proceed either way along a lane
where arrows appear on the surface of the lane designating two-way traffic.
(Sec. 15-18.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 18, § 15-18.8)
§ 15-18.9 Reserved.
§ 15-18.10 Regulations applicable to bicycle paths constructed on dedicated
easements.
(a)   Within the limits of bicycle paths and their respective easements, such
easements having been granted to the city for purposes of providing bicycle
paths, no person shall:
(1)   Willfully or intentionally destroy, damage, or injure any property;
(2)   Climb onto any bridge, tree, wall, fence, or other structure;
(3)   Swim, bathe, wade in, pollute, or block the water of any natural stream;
(4)   Litter, throw, or dispose of any refuse or waste material;
(5)   Kindle, build, maintain, or use any fire;
(6)   Annoy, molest, kill, wound, chase, shoot, or throw missiles at any animal
or bird;
(7)   Distribute, post, or place any commercial handbill or circular, notice,
or other advertising device or matter, except as permitted by the terms of any
agreement relating to the use of the bicycle path and easement;
(8)   Operate any vehicle other than:
(A)   A bicycle without a motor; or
(B)   Authorized vehicles, where permitted by posted signs;
(9)   Park, wash, polish, or repair cars or other vehicles;
(10)   Cut or remove any wood, plant, grass, soil, rock, sand, or gravel;
(11)   Sell or offer for sale any merchandise, article, or thing, or engage in
any commercial operations;
(12)   Amplify music or use battery-operated loudspeakers;
(13)   Ride or drive any horse or any other animal;
(14)   Engage in any sports or recreational activities other than the riding of
bicycles;
(15)   Discharge firearms of any kind;
(16)   Place tents or other structures, or in any way inhabit the premises;
(17)   Park any bicycle or vehicle on the bicycle path except authorized
maintenance and security vehicles;
(18)   Drive any vehicle, including a bicycle, across the bicycle path without
first coming to a full stop;
(19)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to an authorized motor vehicle;
(20)   Possess or use intoxicating beverages;
(21)   Possess, use, store, transport, or dispose of hazardous materials, as
that term is defined in HRS § 286-2, or hazardous wastes, as that term is
defined in HRS § 342J-2; or
(22)   Enter or remain on any bicycle path during the hours that the bicycle
path is closed; provided that signs are posted indicating the hours that the
bicycle path is closed, except that a person may traverse a bicycle path using
the most direct route during bicycle path closure hours for the purpose of
going to, or from, the shoreline.
(b)   In addition to the prohibitions in subsection (a), no person shall fish
from any area within the limits of the Pearl Harbor Bike Path and its easement.
(Sec. 15-18.10, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 18, § 15-18.10)
(Am. Ord. 18-29)
§ 15-18.11 Operating bicycle with motor.
   No person less than 15 years of age shall operate a bicycle equipped with a
motor on any street or highway, nor shall more than one person at a time be
allowed to ride a bicycle equipped with a motor.
(Sec. 15-18.11, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 18, § 15-18.11)
§ 15-18.12 Bicycle docking stations.
(a)   Notwithstanding any ordinance to the contrary, the city may not install
or allow a bicycle sharing company to install a bicycle docking station on city
property unless notice, an opportunity for public input, and an offer made by
the bicycle sharing company to the chair of the affected neighborhood board to
make a presentation before the affected neighborhood board are provided in
accordance with this section. The opportunity for public input must be provided
during the department of transportation services' planning process for the
installation of the bicycle docking station or as soon thereafter as is
practicable. Written notice must be transmitted to the chair of the affected
neighborhood board prior to the scheduled date of installation. The notice, at
a minimum, must include the following information:
(1)   The proposed date and location of the installation of the bicycle docking
station;
(2)   The public's right to provide input relating to the scheduled
installation of the bicycle docking station; and
(3)   The form, method, and procedure for providing public input.
In addition, the written notice transmitted to the chair of the affected
neighborhood board must include but not be limited to the rationale and
justification for the proposed installation, alternate locations considered,
and steps incorporated to address potential motorist and pedestrian safety
issues.
(b)   The offer to the chair of the affected neighborhood board must, when
possible, specify that the bicycle sharing company is available to make a
presentation before the affected neighborhood board within 60 days of the
transmittal of the offer. If a presentation cannot be made within 60 days of
the transmittal of the offer, the reasoning and justification for a delayed
presentation, along with a proposed subsequent time period for the
presentation, shall be provided in writing to the chair of the affected
neighborhood board. The presentation must include but not be limited to the
rationale and justification for the proposed installation, alternate locations
considered, and steps incorporated to address potential motorist and pedestrian
safety issues. The offer will be deemed satisfied if:
(1)   The bicycle sharing company makes a presentation including the required
elements before the affected neighborhood board within 60 days of the
transmittal of the offer;
(2)   The neighborhood board fails to provide the bicycle sharing company with
an opportunity to provide a presentation at a meeting held within 60 days of
the transmittal of the offer;
(3)   The neighborhood board provides the bicycle sharing company with written
notice that it has no objection to the proposed installation, or that no
presentation of the project is necessary, or both; or
(4)   The bicycle sharing company, having previously provided written reasoning
and justification for a delayed presentation to the chair of the affected
neighborhood board, makes a presentation including the required elements before
the affected neighborhood board at an agreed-upon date subsequent to the 60-day
deadline of the transmittal of the offer.
(c)   This section shall not apply to temporary relocations of bicycle docking
stations on city property for periods not to exceed six months.
(Added by Ord. 21-15)
§ 15-18.13 Safe driving of bicycles equipped with motors on public streets,
paths, or trails.
(a)   Except as otherwise allowed by law, no bicycle equipped with a motor
exceeding 750 watts may be operated on any public street, highway, alley, path,
or trail, including a bikeway as defined by §
15-2.5.
(b)   A bicycle equipped with a motor may be operated only with all of the
bicycle’s wheels facing forward and in contact with the ground at all times,
and with the operator seated with one leg on each side of the seat; provided
that it is not a violation of this subsection if a wheel of the bicycle loses
contact with the ground briefly due to the condition of the road surface or
other circumstances beyond the control of the operator.
(c)   It is unlawful for an individual to operate a bicycle equipped with a
motor in an unsafe manner or engage in exhibition driving on any public street,
highway, alley, path, trail, or other public right-of-way; provided that this
subsection does not apply to an individual engaging in exhibition riding as
part of a parade, tournament, or other activity permitted by the city.
(d)   An individual operating a bicycle equipped with a motor may not:
(1)   Stand or kneel on any seat, ride on the bicycle’s handlebars, or engage
in any other non-standard riding position;
(2)   Perform a maneuver where one or more wheels are intentionally lifted from
the ground; or
(3)   Engage in any other maneuver that endangers the operator or any other
person.
(Added by Ord. 25-6)
§ 15-18.14 Helmet requirement for minors operating bicycles equipped with
motors.
   A person under 18 years of age may not operate a bicycle equipped with a
motor unless that person is wearing a helmet that:
(1)   Is specifically designed for that purpose;
(2)   Is equipped with a chin strap; and
(3)   Meets the helmet testing and design requirements of HRS § 291C-150(a).
(Added by Ord. 25-6)
ARTICLE 19: EQUIPMENT
Sections
   
15-19.1   Scope and effect of regulations
   
15-19.2   When lighted lamps required
   
15-19.3   New motor vehicles to be equipped with reflectors
   
15-19.4   Application of succeeding sections
   
15-19.5   Additional equipment required on certain vehicles
   
15-19.6   Clearance lamps, side marker lamps and reflectors—Color
   
15-19.7   Clearance lamps, side marker lamps and reflectors—Mounting
   
15-19.8   Clearance lamps, side marker lamps and reflectors—Visibility
   
15-19.9   Stop lamps required on new motor vehicles
   
15-19.10   Lamps on parked vehicles
   
15-19.11   Spot lamps
   
15-19.12   Auxiliary driving lamps
   
15-19.13   Signal lamps and signal devices
   
15-19.14   Additional lighting equipment
   
15-19.15   Head lamps
   
15-19.16   Multiple-beam road-lighting equipment
   
15-19.17   Use of multiple-beam road-lighting equipment
   
15-19.18   Single-beam road-lighting equipment
   
15-19.19   Number of driving lamps permitted
   
15-19.20   Lights not required where obscured from view
   
15-19.21   Head lamps on motorized scooters
   
15-19.22   Special restrictions on lamps
   
15-19.23   Selling or using lamps or devices
   
15-19.24   Brake equipment required
   
15-19.25   Performance ability of brakes
   
15-19.26   Maintenance of brakes
   
15-19.27   Horns and warning devices
   
15-19.28   Mufflers—Noise-controlling devices
   
15-19.29   Rear vision mirror required
   
15-19.30   Windshields to be unobstructed and equipped with wipers
   
15-19.31   Windshield, fenders and bumpers required on all vehicles
   
15-19.32   Mudguards required
   
15-19.33   Safety glass in motor vehicles
   
15-19.34   Reserved
   
15-19.35   Display of warning devices when vehicle is disabled
   
15-19.36   Display of warning devices by passenger buses when disabled
   
15-19.37   Vehicles transporting explosives and flammable liquids
   
15-19.38   Reserved
   
15-19.39   Television in motor vehicle
   
15-19.40   Trucks equipped with lift tail gates
   
15-19.41   Safety chain (stay chain or cable) required
   
15-19.42   Movement of forklifts upon the public highway
   
15-19.43   Sound vehicles
§ 15-19.1 Scope and effect of regulations.
(a)   It is a misdemeanor for any person to drive or move or for a registered
owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any
vehicle or combination of vehicles that is in such unsafe condition as to
endanger any person, or which does not contain those parts or is not at all
times equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and
adjustment as required in this article, or for any person to do any act
forbidden or fail to perform any act required under this article.
(b)   Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prohibit the use
of additional parts and accessories on any vehicle not inconsistent with this
article.
(c)   This article, with respect to equipment on vehicles, shall not apply to
implements of husbandry, road machinery, road rollers, or farm tractors, except
as herein made applicable.
(Sec. 15-19.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.1)
§ 15-19.2 When lighted lamps required.
   Every vehicle upon a highway at any time from 30 minutes after sunset to 30
minutes before sunrise, and at any other time when there is insufficient light
to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance
of 200 feet ahead, shall display lighted lamps and illuminating devices as
hereinafter respectively required for different classes of vehicles, subject to
exceptions with respect to parked vehicles as hereinafter stated; provided that
every vehicle upon a highway within a tunnel shall, at all hours display
lighted lamps, illuminating devices, and tail lamps in addition to any other
equipment required for that class of vehicle by this section.
(Sec. 15-19.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.2)
§ 15-19.3 New motor vehicles to be equipped with reflectors.
(a)   Every new motor vehicle sold and operated upon a highway, other than a
truck tractor, shall carry on the rear, either as a part of the tail lamps or
separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements hereinafter set forth;
except that vehicles of the type mentioned in §
15-19.5 shall be equipped with reflectors as required therein.
(b)   Every such reflector shall be mounted on the motor vehicle at a height
not less than 24 inches nor more than 60 inches above the ground on which the
vehicle stands, and shall be of such size and characteristics and so maintained
as to be visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to 50 feet from
such vehicle; except that visibility from a greater distance is hereinafter
required of reflectors on certain types of vehicles.
(Sec. 15-19.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.3)
§ 15-19.4 Application of succeeding sections.
   The sections immediately following relating to clearance and marker lamps,
reflectors, and stop lights apply as stated in those sections to vehicles of
the type therein enumerated, and such vehicles, when operated upon any highway,
shall be equipped as required and all lamp equipment required shall be lighted
from 30 minutes after sunset until 30 minutes before sunrise, except that
clearance and side marker lamps need not be lighted on any such vehicles when
operated in the city where there is sufficient light to render clearly
discernible persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of 500 feet.
(Sec. 15-19.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.4)
§ 15-19.5 Additional equipment required on certain vehicles.
   In addition to other equipment required in this article, the following
vehicles shall be equipped as herein stated under the conditions stated in §
15-19.4:
(1)   On every bus or truck, whatever its size, there shall be the following:
on the rear, two reflectors, one at each side, and one stop light;
(2)   On every bus or truck 80 inches or more in overall width, in addition to
the requirements in subsection (a):
(A)   On the front, two clearance lamps, one at each side;
(B)   On the rear, two clearance lamps, one at each side;
(C)   On each side, two marker lamps, one at or near the front and one at or
near the rear; and
(D)   On each side, two reflectors, one at or near the front and one at or near
the rear;
(3)   On every truck tractor:
(A)   On the front, two clearance lamps, one at each side; and
(B)   On the rear, one stop light;
(4)   On every trailer or semi-trailer having a gross weight in excess of 3,000
pounds:
(A)   On the front, two clearance lamps, one at each side;
(B)   On each side, two side marker lamps, one at or near the front and one at
or near the rear;
(C)   On each side, two reflectors, one at or near the front and one at or near
the rear; and
(D)   On the rear, two clearance lamps, one at each side; also two reflectors,
one at each side, and one stop light;
(5)   On every pole trailer in excess of 3,000 pounds gross weight:
(A)   On each side, one side marker lamp and one clearance lamp that may be in
combination, to show to the front, side, and rear; and
(B)   On the rear of the pole trailer or load, two reflectors, one at each
side; and
(6)   On every trailer, semi-trailer, or pole trailer weighing 3,000 pounds
gross or less: on the rear, two reflectors, one on each side. If any trailer or
semi-trailer is so loaded or is of such dimensions as to obscure the stop light
on the towing vehicle, then such vehicle shall also be equipped with one stop
light.
(Sec. 15-19.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.5)
§ 15-19.6 Clearance lamps, side marker lamps and reflectors—Color.
(a)   Front clearance lamps and those marker lamps and reflectors mounted on
the front or on the sides near the front of a vehicle shall display or reflect
an amber color.
(b)   Rear clearance lamps and those marker lamps and reflectors mounted on the
rear or on the sides near the rear of a vehicle shall display or reflect a red
color.
(c)   All lighting devices and reflectors mounted on the rear of any vehicle
shall display or reflect a red color, except the stop light or other signal
device, which may be red, amber, yellow, or green, and except the light
illuminating the license plate or the light emitted by a back-up lamp, which
shall be predominantly white.
(Sec. 15-19.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.6)
§ 15-19.7 Clearance lamps, side marker lamps and reflectors—Mounting.
(a)   Reflectors shall be mounted at a height not less than 24 inches and not
higher than 60 inches above the ground on which the vehicle stands, except that
if the highest part of the permanent structure of the vehicle is less than 24
inches, the reflector at such point shall be mounted as high as that part of
the permanent structure will permit.
(1)   The rear reflectors on a pole trailer may be mounted on each side of the
bolster or load.
(2)   Any required red reflector on the rear of a vehicle may be incorporated
with the tail lamp, but such reflector shall meet all the other reflector
requirements of this article.
(b)   Clearance lamps shall be mounted on the permanent structure of the
vehicle in such a manner as to indicate its extreme width and as near the top
thereof as practicable. Clearance lamps and side marker lamps may be mounted in
combination, provided illumination is given as required with reference to both.
(Sec. 15-19.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.7)
§ 15-19.8 Clearance lamps, side marker lamps and reflectors—Visibility.
(a)   Every reflector upon any vehicle referred to in §
15-19.5 shall be of such size and characteristics and so maintained as to be
readily visible at nighttime from all distances within 300 feet to 50 feet from
the vehicle when directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps.
Reflectors required to be mounted on the sides of the vehicle shall reflect the
required color of light to the sides, and those mounted on the rear shall
reflect a red color to the rear.
(b)   Front and rear clearance lamps shall be capable of being seen and
distinguished under normal atmospheric conditions, when lights are required, at
a distance of 200 feet from the front and rear, respectively, of the vehicle.
(c)   Side marker lamps shall be capable of being seen and distinguished under
normal atmospheric conditions, when lights are required, at a distance of 200
feet from the side of the vehicle on which mounted.
(Sec. 15-19.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.8)
§ 15-19.9 Stop lamps required on new motor vehicles.
   It is unlawful for any person to sell any new motor vehicle in the City and
County of Honolulu or for any person to drive any such new motor vehicle on the
highways, unless it is equipped with a stop lamp meeting the requirements of §
15-19.13.
(Sec. 15-19.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.9)
§ 15-19.10 Lamps on parked vehicles.
   Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped on a street during the time between
30 minutes after sunset and 30 minutes before sunrise, there shall be displayed
upon the rear thereof a red light visible not less than 200 feet from the rear
thereof; provided that no lights need be displayed upon any such vehicle when
there is attached upon the rear of such vehicle a red reflector so maintained
as to be visible from all distances within 300 feet to 50 feet from such
vehicle.
(Sec. 15-19.10, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.10)
§ 15-19.11 Spot lamps.
   No vehicle, other than authorized emergency vehicles as previously
described, shall use any spotlight while in motion upon any street or highway
within the city.
(Sec. 15-19.11, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.11)
§ 15-19.12 Auxiliary driving lamps.
   A motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three auxiliary driving
lamps mounted on the front at a height not more than 42 inches above the level
surface upon which the vehicle stands, and every such auxiliary driving lamp or
lamps shall meet the requirements and limitations set forth in this article.
(Sec. 15-19.12, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.12)
(Am. Ord. 08-3)
§ 15-19.13 Signal lamps and signal devices.
(a)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped and, when required under this article,
shall be equipped, with the following signal lamps or devices:
(1)   A stop lamp or lamps on the rear, that shall emit a red light and that
shall be actuated upon application of the service (foot) brake and that may,
but need not, be incorporated with a tail lamp;
(2)   A lamp or lamps or mechanical signal device capable of clearly indicating
any intention to turn either to the right or to the left, and that shall be
visible both from the front and rear; and
(3)   Lamps for the purpose of warning the operators of other vehicles of the
presence of a vehicular traffic hazard requiring the exercise of unusual care
in approaching, overtaking, or passing. The lamps used to display such warning
to the front shall be at least two in number, mounted at the same level and as
widely spaced laterally as practicable, and shall display simultaneously
flashing white or amber lights, or any shade of color between white and amber.
The lamps used to display such warning to the rear shall be at least two in
number, mounted at the same level and as widely spaced laterally as
practicable, and shall display simultaneously flashing amber or red lights, or
any shade of color between amber and red. The warning lights shall be visible
for a distance of 1,500 feet under normal atmospheric conditions at night.
(b)   A stop lamp shall be plainly visible and understandable from a distance
of 100 feet to the rear, both during normal sunlight and at nighttime, and a
signal lamp or lamps indicating an intention to turn shall be visible and
understandable during daytime and nighttime from a distance of 100 feet both to
the front and rear. When a vehicle is equipped with a stop lamp or other signal
lamps, such lamp or lamps shall at all times be maintained in good working
condition. No stop lamp or signal lamp shall project a glaring or dazzling
light.
(c)   All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminated when in use
during the time between 30 minutes after sunset and 30 minutes before sunrise.
(Sec. 15-19.13, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.13)
§ 15-19.14 Additional lighting equipment.
(a)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two side cowl or
fender lamps that shall emit an amber or white light without glare.
(b)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one running-board
courtesy lamp on each side thereof, which shall emit a white or amber light
without glare.
(c)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with a back-up lamp either separately
or in combination with another lamp; but such back-up lamp shall not be lighted
when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.
(Sec. 15-19.14, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.14)
§ 15-19.15 Head lamps.
(a)   Every motor vehicle operated upon a highway, other than a motorcycle or
motorized scooter or bicycle, shall be equipped with at least two multiple-beam
or single-beam head lamps, one at each side of the front thereof, which shall
conform to the requirements and limitations prescribed herein; provided that
this subsection shall not apply to trucks with restrictive stickers as
prescribed in §
15-19.5.
(b)   Every motorcycle operated upon a highway shall be equipped with at least
one and not more than two multiple-beam or single-beam head lamps on the front
thereof, which shall conform to the requirements and limitations prescribed
herein.
(Sec. 15-19.15, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.15)
§ 15-19.16 Multiple-beam road-lighting equipment.
   Except as hereinafter provided, the head lamps, or the auxiliary driving
lamps, or combinations thereof, on motor vehicles shall be so arranged that the
driver may select at will between distributions of light projected to different
elevations, subject to the following requirements and limitations.
(a)   There shall be an uppermost distribution of lights or composite beam, so
aimed and of such intensity as to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of
at least 200 feet ahead for all conditions of loading.
(b)   There shall be a lowermost distribution of light, or composite beam, so
aimed that:
(1)   When the vehicle is not loaded, none of the high-intensity portion of the
light that is directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side
of the vehicle shall, at a distance of 25 feet ahead, project higher than a
level of 8 inches below the level of the center of the lamp from which it
comes;
(2)   When the vehicle is not loaded, none of the high-intensity portion of the
light that is directed to the right of the prolongation of the extreme right
side of the vehicle shall, at a distance of 25 feet ahead, project higher than
a level of 3 inches below the level of the center of the lamp from which it
comes; and
(3)   In no event shall any of the high-intensity of such lowermost
distribution of light or composite beam project higher than a level of 42
inches above the level on which the vehicle stands at a distance of 75 feet
ahead.
(c)   Where one intermediate beam is provided, the beam on the left side of the
road shall be in conformity with subsection (b)(1).
(d)   All road-lighting beams shall be so aimed and of sufficient intensity to
reveal a person or vehicle at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead.
(e)   Every new motor vehicle registered in the city that has multiple-beam
road-lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator, which shall be
lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the head lamps is in
use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. Such indicator shall be so designed
and located that when lighted, it will be readily visible without glare to the
driver of the vehicle so equipped.
(Sec. 15-19.16, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.16)
§ 15-19.17 Use of multiple-beam road-lighting equipment.
   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder adjacent
thereto during the time between 30 minutes after sunset and 30 minutes before
sunrise, the driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam,
directed high enough and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles
at a safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following
requirements and limitations.
(a)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle within
500 feet, such driver shall use a distribution of light or composite beam so
aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming
driver, and in no case shall the high-intensity portion that is projected to
the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle be aimed
higher than the center of the lamp from which it comes at a distance of 25 feet
ahead, and in no case higher than a level of 42 inches above the level upon
which the vehicle stands at a distance of 75 feet ahead.
(b)   The lowermost distribution of light specified in §
15-19.16 (b)(1) shall be deemed to avoid glare at all times, regardless of road
contour and loading.
(Sec. 15-19.17, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.17)
§ 15-19.18 Single-beam road-lighting equipment.
   Head lamps arranged to provide a single distribution of light not
supplemented by auxiliary driving lamps shall be permitted on motor vehicles
manufactured and sold before one year after December 31, 1948, in lieu of
multiple-beam road-lighting equipment hereinabove specified, if the single
distribution of light complies with the following requirements and limitations:
(a)   The head lamps shall be so aimed that, when the vehicle is not loaded,
none of the high-intensity portion of the light shall at a distance of 25 feet
ahead project higher than a level of 5 inches below the level of the center of
the lamp from which it comes, and in no case higher than 42 inches above the
level on which the vehicle stands at a distance of 75 feet ahead; and
(b)   The intensity shall be sufficient to reveal persons and vehicles at a
distance of at least 200 feet.
(Sec. 15-19.18, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.18)
§ 15-19.19 Number of driving lamps permitted.
   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with head lamps as required is also
equipped with any auxiliary lamps or a spot lamp or any other lamp on the front
thereof projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not
more than a total of four of any such lamps on the front of a vehicle shall be
lighted at any one time when upon a highway.
(Sec. 15-19.19, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.19)
§ 15-19.20 Lights not required where obscured from view.
   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the
time that lights are required, any lamp (except tail lamps) which, by reason of
its location on a vehicle of the combination, would be obscured by another
vehicle of the combination, need not be lighted; but this shall not affect the
requirement that lighted clearance lamps be displayed on the front of the
foremost vehicle required to have clearance lamps, nor that all lights required
on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be lighted.
(Sec. 15-19.20, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.20)
§ 15-19.21 Head lamps on motorized scooters.
   Every motorized scooter or motorized bicycle, at all times specified in §
15-19.2, shall be equipped with at least one and not more than two lighted head
lamps so aimed and of sufficient intensity to reveal a person or vehicle at a
distance of at least 100 feet ahead of the vehicle. The head lamps may be of
the single beam type, provided that the power supply and the complete
electrical system of the vehicle shall be adequate to provide 2,500 candlepower
illumination.
(Sec. 15-19.21, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.21)
§ 15-19.22 Special restrictions on lamps.
(a)   Any lighted lamp or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle that
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, other
than head lamps, spot lamps, auxiliary lamps or flashing front direction
signals, shall be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of
the roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from
the vehicle.
(b)   No person shall drive or move any vehicle or equipment upon any highway
with any lamp, reflector, or other device thereon or therein displaying a red
or green or blue light visible to any driver or pedestrian upon the highway
ahead of such vehicle or equipment. The foregoing provisions shall not apply to
authorized emergency vehicles.
(c)   Flashing lights are prohibited on or within any motor vehicle, except on
an authorized emergency vehicle, a mechanical street sweeper as described in §
15-4.8, an escort or other vehicle mentioned in §
15-21.13, an authorized maintenance vehicle, an authorized tow vehicle, a
vehicle using such light as a means for indicating a right or left turn,
vehicles participating in a funeral procession required by §
15-24.4(c) to display flashing amber lights, and a stopped or disabled vehicle
indicating the presence of a vehicular traffic hazard as provided in §
15-19.13(a)(3).
(d)   No person shall drive or move any vehicle or equipment upon any highway
with any lamp or other device therein or thereon emitting a flashing or
revolving light. The foregoing prohibition, however, shall not apply to:
(1)   An authorized emergency vehicle;
(2)   A mechanical street sweeper as described in §
15-4.8;
(3)   A vehicle using such light as a means for indicating a right or left
turn;
(4)   A vehicle using an amber flashing light when escorting, carrying,
transporting, or drawing equipment or loads of excessive weight, width or
height as mentioned in §
15-21.13;
(5)   Authorized maintenance vehicles, authorized tow vehicles, and those
vehicles participating in a funeral procession required by §
15-24.4(c) to display flashing amber lights shall be permitted the use of
flashing amber lights when answering emergency calls or when actually engaged
in construction or maintenance work or in towing vehicles or when participating
in a funeral procession. Such authorized vehicles shall be subject at all times
to all traffic laws, and rules; and
(6)   A taxicab using a flashing dome light sign to signal when a robbery is in
progress.
(e)   No person shall drive or move any vehicle or equipment upon any highway
with any lamp, reflector, or other device thereon displaying a blue light
visible to any driver or pedestrian upon the highway. The foregoing provisions,
however, shall not apply to officers and employees of the Honolulu police
department operating vehicles of the police department or vehicles privately
owned, but used in the performance of duties with the approval of the chief of
police.
(Sec. 15-19.22, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.22)
(Am. Ord. 96-58)
§ 15-19.23 Selling or using lamps or devices.
(a)   No person shall have for sale, sell, or offer for sale for use upon or as
a part of the equipment of a motor vehicle, trailer, or semi-trailer, or use
upon any such vehicle any head lamp, auxiliary driving lamp, rear lamp, signal
lamp, or reflector that is required, or parts of any of the foregoing that tend
to change the original design or performance, unless such lamp or reflector is
of the type that has been submitted to the chief of police and approved by the
chief.
(b)   No person shall have for sale, sell, or offer for sale for use upon or as
a part of the equipment of a motor vehicle, trailer, or semi-trailer any lamp
or device mentioned in this article that has been approved by the chief of
police unless such lamp or device bears thereon the trademark or name under
which it is approved, legible when installed.
(c)   No person shall use upon any motor vehicle, trailer, or semi-trailer, any
lamps mentioned in this article, unless such lamps are equipped with bulbs of a
rated candlepower and are so mounted and adjusted as to focus and aim in
accordance with instructions of the chief of police.
(Sec. 15-19.23, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.23)
§ 15-19.24 Brake equipment required.
(a)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a
highway, shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and
to stop and hold such vehicle, including two separate means of applying the
brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at least
two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are connected in
any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one part of the
operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without brakes on at
least two wheels.
(b)   Every motorcycle and bicycle with motor attached, when operated upon a
highway, shall be equipped with at least one brake that may be operated by hand
or foot.
(c)   Every trailer or semi-trailer of a gross weight of 3,000 pounds or more
when operated upon a highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control
the movement of and to stop and to hold such vehicle, and so designed as to be
applied by the driver of the towing motor vehicle from its cab; and such brakes
shall be so designed and connected that, in case of an accidental breakaway of
the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied. An exception is
made that such brakes are not required on any trailer of a gross weight of less
than 3,000 pounds if such gross weight does not exceed 50 percent or more of
the weight of the towing vehicle.
(d)   Every new motor vehicle except a motorcycle or motor scooter sold in the
city and operated upon the highways thereof shall be equipped with service
brakes upon all wheels of every such vehicle.
(e)   In any combination of motor-drawn vehicles, means shall be provided for
applying the rearmost trailer brakes, of any trailer equipped with brakes, in
approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle and developing
the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or
means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost
trailer wheels equipped with brakes; or both of the above means capable of
being used alternatively may be employed.
(f)   One of the means of brake operation shall consist of a mechanical
connection from the operating lever to the brake shoes or hands, and this brake
shall be capable of holding the vehicle, or combination of vehicles, stationary
under any condition of loading on any upgrade or downgrade upon which it is
operated.
(g)   The brake shoes operating within or upon the drums on the vehicle wheels
of any motor vehicle may be used for both service and hand operation.
(Sec. 15-19.24, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.24)
§ 15-19.25 Performance ability of brakes.
   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall be capable,
at all times and under all conditions of loading, of being stopped on a dry,
smooth, approximately level road free from loose material, upon application of
the service (foot) brake, within the distance specified below, or shall be
capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to the distances
specified below:
 
                            Feet to Stop from 20 Miles Deceleration in Feet per
                            per Hour                   Second
Vehicles or combinations of
vehicles having brakes on   30                         14
all wheels
Vehicles or combinations of
vehicles not having brakes  40                         10.7
on all wheels
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.25)
§ 15-19.26 Maintenance of brakes.
   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be so
adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels on
opposite sides of the vehicle.
(Sec. 15-19.26, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.26)
§ 15-19.27 Horns and warning devices.
(a)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be equipped with a
horn in good working order and capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 200 feet; but no horn or other
warning device shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or a whistle. The
driver of a motor vehicle shall, when reasonably necessary to ensure safe
operation, give audible warning with the driver’s horn; but shall not otherwise
use such horn when upon a highway.
(b)   No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a vehicle
any siren, whistle, or bell, except as otherwise permitted herein.
(c)   Any authorized emergency vehicle may be equipped with a siren, whistle,
bell, or air horn capable of emitting sound audible, under normal conditions,
from a distance of not less than 500 feet, and of a type approved by the
director of finance; provided that the use of such air horn shall be restricted
to heavy fire equipment such as fire engines, ladder trucks, and rescue trucks;
and provided further, that such siren or air horn shall not be used except when
such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate
pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which latter events
the driver of such vehicle shall sound the siren or air horn when necessary to
warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
(d)   Any truck used to haul dirt, rock concrete, or other construction
material may be equipped with a horn, bell, or whistle in the rear thereof,
capable of emitting a sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of
not less than 200 feet; such warning device, however, to be sounded only while
the truck is backing up.
(Sec. 15-19.27, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.27)
§ 15-19.28 Mufflers—Noise-controlling devices.
(a)   A person may not operate a motor vehicle or moped on a public highway or
street, unless the motor vehicle or moped is equipped, at all times, with a
muffler or mufflers in constant operation and of such length and size or of
sufficient capacity for the motor or exhaust system, or both, to prevent the
escape of excessive or annoying fumes or smoke, and excessive or unusual noise.
The term “excessive or unusual noise,” as used in this section, means noise in
excess of the usual noise that would necessarily result from the operation of a
motor when reduced to the minimum by a muffler operated in the manner and
meeting the standards described in this subsection.
(b)   A person may not operate a motor vehicle or moped on a public highway or
street unless the motor or exhaust system, or both, of the motor vehicle or
moped are properly equipped and adjusted so as to prevent the escape of
excessive or annoying fumes or smoke and the emission of excessive or unusual
noise as defined in this section.
(c)   A person may not operate a motor vehicle or moped on a public highway or
street with a motor or exhaust system, or both, that has been altered or
modified to such an extent that the noise emitted by the motor or exhaust
system, or both, thereof is excessive or unusual as defined in this section, or
equipped with a dummy muffler, cut-out, by-pass, or other similar device.
(d)   A person may not operate a motor vehicle or moped on a public highway
equipped with an exhaust system or device that will amplify or increase the
noise emitted by the motor of such motor vehicle or moped above that emitted by
the exhaust system or device with which the motor vehicle or moped came
originally equipped from the factory.
(e)   A person may not operate a motor vehicle or moped on a public highway
with a muffler with baffles or other interior parts, or both, that are not
fixed or are not stationary.
(Sec. 15-19.28, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.28)
(Am. Ord. 19-31)
§ 15-19.29 Rear vision mirror required.
   Every motor vehicle must be equipped with a mirror or mirrors so located as
to reflect to the driver a view of the highway for a distance of at least 200
feet to the rear of such vehicle.
(Sec. 15-19.29, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.29)
§ 15-19.30 Windshields to be unobstructed and equipped with wipers.
(a)   A person may not drive any motor vehicle with any sign, poster, or other
nontransparent material upon the front windshield, side wings, or side or rear
windows of such vehicle that obstructs the driver’s clear view of the highway
or any intersecting highway.
(b)   Except as otherwise provided in §
15-15.5, posters or stickers approved by the chief of police must be placed at
the lower right-hand corner of the front windshield of a left-hand-driven motor
vehicle or at the lower left-hand corner of the front windshield of a right-
hand-driven motor vehicle, or in a location as approved by the chief of police.
However, posters or stickers so placed may not cover an area greater than 4 x 6
inches, except for nonresidence permits or for military requirements, in which
case an additional area 4.5 x 6 inches may be used.
(c)   A person may not drive any motor vehicle with any nontransparent material
or object suspended within the windshield area as viewed from the driver’s
seat, nor may any person drive any motor vehicle upon the hood or radiator of
which is attached any fixture ornament of any material that vibrates, swings,
or flutters within view of the driver of such vehicle.
(d)   The windshield on every motor vehicle must be equipped with a device for
cleaning rain or other moisture from the windshield, which device must be so
constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver of the vehicle.
(e)   Every windshield wiper upon a vehicle must be maintained in good working
order.
(Sec. 15-19.30, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art.
19, § 15-19.30)
§ 15-19.31 Windshield, fenders and bumpers required on all vehicles.
   Every motor vehicle upon a highway, excepting a motorcycle and motor
scooter, must be equipped with a windshield. In addition, every motor vehicle
upon a highway, excepting a motorcycle and motor scooter, must be equipped with
fenders for all wheels, and front and rear bumpers.
(Sec. 15-19.31, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.31)
§ 15-19.32 Mudguards required.
   A person may not operate on any highway any motor vehicle, trailer, or semi-
trailer, unless equipped with fenders, covers, or devices, including flaps or
splash aprons, or unless the body of the vehicle or attachments thereto afford
adequate protection to effectively minimize the spray or splash of water or mud
to the rear of the vehicle.
(Sec. 15-19.32, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.32)
§ 15-19.33 Safety glass in motor vehicles.
(a)   A person may not sell any new motor vehicle, unless the new vehicle is
equipped with safety glass wherever glass is used in doors, windows, and
windshields.
(b)   Glass, wherever used in doors, windows, and windshields of any motor
vehicle, which is shattered or broken must be removed and replaced with safety
glass
(Sec. 15-19.33, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.33)
§ 15-19.34 Reserved.
§ 15-19.35 Display of warning devices when vehicle is disabled.
(a)   Whenever any motor truck, truck tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, or pole
trailer is disabled upon the traveled portion of any highway or the shoulder
thereof at any time when lighted lamps are required on the vehicles, the driver
of such vehicle shall display the following warning devices upon the highway
during the time the vehicle is so disabled on the highway, except as provided
otherwise in subsection (b).
(1)   A lighted fusee shall be immediately placed on the roadway at the traffic
side of the motor vehicle, unless electric lanterns are displayed.
(2)   Within the burning period of the fusee and as promptly as possible, three
lighted flares (pot torches) or three electric lanterns shall be placed on the
roadway as follows: one at a distance of approximately 100 feet in advance of
the vehicle; one at a distance of approximately 100 feet to the rear of the
vehicle; each in the center of the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled
vehicle; and one at the traffic side of the vehicle approximately 10 feet
rearward or forward thereof.
(b)   Whenever any vehicle used in the transportation of flammable liquids in
bulk or in the transportation of compressed flammable gases is disabled upon a
highway at any time or place mentioned in subsection (a), the driver of such
vehicle shall display upon the roadway the following lighted warning devices:
one red electric lantern shall be immediately placed on the roadway at the
traffic side of the vehicle, and two other red electric lanterns shall be
placed to the front and rear, respectively, of the vehicle in the manner
prescribed in subsection (a)(2).
When a vehicle of the type specified in this subsection is disabled, the use of
flares, fusees, or any signal produced by flame as warning devices is
prohibited.
(c)   Whenever any vehicle of a type referred to in this section is disabled
upon the traveled portion of a highway or the shoulder thereof, at any time
when the display of fusees, flares, or electric lanterns is not required, the
driver of such vehicle shall display two red flags upon the roadway in the lane
of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle, one at a distance of approximately
100 feet in advance of the vehicle, and one at a distance of approximately 100
feet to the rear of the vehicle.
(d)   In the alternative, it is a compliance with this section in the event
three portable reflector units on standards of a type approved by the chief of
police are displayed at the times and under the conditions specified in this
section either during the daytime or at nighttime; and such portable reflector
units shall be placed on the roadway in the locations as described with
reference to the placing of electric lanterns and lighted flares.
(e)   The flares, fusees, lanterns, and flags to be displayed as required in
this section shall conform with the requirements as hereinabove set forth.
(Sec. 15-19.35, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.35)
§ 15-19.36 Display of warning devices by passenger buses when disabled.
   Whenever any passenger bus is disabled upon the traveled portion of any
unlighted highway or the shoulder thereof at any time when lighted lamps are
required on vehicles, the driver of such vehicle shall display the same warning
devices upon the highway during the time the vehicle is so disabled on the
highway as are required to be displayed by drivers of motor trucks and truck
tractors in §
15-19.35, except that in lieu of such warning devices the driver of a passenger
bus may display the interior lights of the bus for as long a time as warning
devices must be displayed.
(Sec. 15-19.36, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.36)
§ 15-19.37 Vehicles transporting explosives and flammable liquids.
(a)   Every vehicle used for the transportation of any flammable liquid upon
any public highway, regardless of the quantity being transported, or whether
loaded or empty, must be conspicuously and legibly marked on each side and the
rear thereof in letters at least 3 inches high on a background of sharply
contrasting color, either:
(1)   With a sign or lettering on the vehicle with the word “Flammable”;
(2)   With the common name of the flammable liquid being transported; or
(3)   With the name of the carrier or the carrier’s trademark, when and only
when such name or trademark plainly indicates the flammable nature of the load;
provided that the foregoing provisions do not apply to any vehicle used
occasionally for personal delivery by the owner thereof for the owner’s private
use.
(b)   Every vehicle transporting any explosive as a cargo or part of a cargo
upon any public highway must be marked or placarded on each side and the rear
with the word “Explosives” in letters not less than 8 inches high, or there
must be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red flag not less than 24
inches square marked with the word “Danger” in white letters 6 inches high.
(c)   Every vehicle used for the transportation of any explosive or flammable
liquid upon any public highway must be equipped with not less than two fire
extinguishers of a type approved by the fire chief of the city, filled and
ready for immediate use, and placed at a convenient point on the vehicle.
(d)   A person may not transport explosives or cause explosives to be
transported, except in compliance with the rules of the State department of
labor and industrial relations and after first having secured a permit from the
State director of labor and industrial relations as prescribed in HRS Chapter
396.
(Sec. 15-19.37, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.37)
(Am. Ord. 96-58)
§ 15-19.38 Reserved.
§ 15-19.39 Television in motor vehicle.
(a)   A person may not drive a motor vehicle if an analog or digital screen, or
other means of visually receiving or visually displaying a television broadcast
or video signal that produces entertainment or business applications, is
operating while the vehicle is in motion and is located in the motor vehicle at
any point forward of the back of the driver’s seat or is visible to the driver
while operating the motor vehicle.
(b)   Subsection (a) does not apply to the following equipment when installed
in a vehicle:
(1)   A vehicle information display that includes internal vehicle climate
controls;
(2)   A global position display;
(3)   A mapping display;
(4)   A visual display used to enhance or supplement the driver’s view forward,
behind, or to the sides of a motor vehicle for the purpose of maneuvering the
vehicle; and
(5)   An analog or video screen or any similar means of visually displaying a
television broadcast, video signal, or internet video stream, if that equipment
satisfies one of the following requirements:
(A)   The equipment has an interlock device that, when the motor vehicle is
driven, disables the equipment for all uses except as a visual display as
described in subdivisions (1) to (4) above; or
(B)   The equipment is designed, operated, and configured in a manner that
prevents the driver of the motor vehicle from viewing the television broadcast,
video signal, or internet video stream, while operating the vehicle in a safe
and reasonable manner.
(c)   Subsection (a) does not apply to a mobile digital terminal installed in
an authorized emergency vehicle or to a motor vehicle providing emergency road
service or roadside assistance.
(Sec. 15-19.39, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.39)
(Am. Ord. 24-32 )
§ 15-19.40 Trucks equipped with lift tail gates.
   At all times, a lift tail gate shall be placed in a vertical position and
securely locked or be completely withdrawn under the body of the truck, except:
(1)   When the truck is stopped and the lift tail gate is being used in loading
or unloading freight; and
(2)   That the lift tail gate of a pickup truck, while in operation and
carrying passengers in the bed or load-carrying area, shall be in compliance
with HRS § 291-14.
(Sec. 15-19.40, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.40)
(Am. Ord. 89-130)
§ 15-19.41 Safety chain (stay chain or cable) required.
   Every trailer to be operated upon a public highway shall, in addition to a
tow bar, be equipped with a safety chain or chains (stay chain or cable)
adequate to hold such vehicle to the towing vehicle in the event of tow bar or
coupling failure, or both. Each chain or cable and its accompanying coupling
and mounting devices shall have an ultimate strength equal at least to the
gross weight of the trailer.
(Sec. 15-19.41, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.41)
§ 15-19.42 Movement of forklifts upon the public highway.
   No forklift shall be towed or otherwise moved upon a public highway, unless
the fork has been removed or stowed in such a manner as to not extend beyond
the body of the vehicle, or a flag at least 16 inches square on a 2-foot pole
is attached in an upright position at the extreme end of the fork. The tip of
the fork shall not be raised more than 9 inches above the road surface while
being towed.
(Sec. 15-19.42, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.42)
§ 15-19.43 Sound vehicles.
(a)   Sound vehicle means any vehicle that carries or is equipped with any
instrument or device for the production or reproduction of music, spoken words,
or other sounds, or any loudspeaker or other sound-amplifying device designed
to enlarge the volume of sound produced by any instrument or by the human
voice, which instrument or device is used, or intended to be used, for the
purpose of advertising or calling attention to any article, thing, or event, or
for the purpose of addressing the public or attracting the attention of the
public; provided that the term does not include the following:
(1)   Vehicles used in a parade or procession duly authorized;
(2)   A vehicle equipped with a horn designed and used for the purpose of
warning traffic, or any authorized emergency vehicle, as defined in the traffic
code; or
(3)   Vehicles equipped with radio, television, or other sound device,
designed, and installed for the use and enjoyment of the occupants of such
vehicles.
(b)   A person may not drive, operate, propel, or park on any public street or
highway any sound vehicle with its sound-amplifying device in operation without
first having obtained a revocable permit from the chief of police. The permit
is good for one year and may be renewed annually upon application.
(c)   All applications for permits must be made on forms furnished by the chief
of police. Each application must state the name and address of the person
applying for such permit, a description of the vehicle to be used, the type and
kind of sound-making or broadcasting device attached to the vehicle, and the
license number of the vehicle, including any other information required by the
chief of police.
(d)   A vehicle may not be operated while broadcasting at any time between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(e)   The chief of police shall adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 for
implementing and administering this section.
(f)   The chief of police is authorized to deny any application for a permit
that does not meet the conditions provided herein or in any rules adopted by
the chief. The chief is also authorized to suspend or revoke any permit issued
under this section for violations of any of this section or rules adopted by
the chief. Before the chief of police can deny any application for a permit or
suspend or revoke a permit, the chief shall first afford the applicant or
permittee a hearing, as prescribed in HRS Chapter 91, and shall adopt rules to
establish procedures for a hearing.
(Sec. 15-19.43, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.43)
ARTICLE 20: INSPECTION OF MOTOR VEHICLES*
Sections
   
15-20.1   Official inspection stations
   
15-20.2   Inspection fees
Editor’s note:
   * The inspection of motor vehicles shall be as prescribed in HRS Chapter
286, §§ 286-21 to 286-30.
§ 15-20.1 Official inspection stations.
(a)   Pursuant to the authority granted in HRS § 286-27, the department of
budget and fiscal services is designated as the department responsible for
supervising the operation of official inspection stations according to
standards prescribed by the State director of the department of transportation.
(b)   Application for such permit shall be made upon an official form and shall
be granted only when the director of budget and fiscal services is satisfied
that the station is properly equipped and has competent personnel to make such
inspections and adjustments and will be properly conducted.
(c)   No permit for an official inspection shall be issued without the
following equipment: a headlight testing machine approved by the director of
budget and fiscal services, and a wheel alignment gauge or tester also approved
by the director of budget and fiscal services.
(d)   The person operating an official inspection station shall issue a
certificate of inspection and approval upon an official form to the owner of a
vehicle upon inspecting such vehicle and determining that its equipment is in
good working condition and proper adjustment; otherwise no certificate shall be
issued. When required by the director of budget and fiscal services, a record
and report shall be made of every inspection and every certificate issued
therefor.
(e)   Pursuant to HRS § 286-28, the department of budget and fiscal services
shall supervise and cause inspections to be made of official inspection
stations. The department shall inspect each official inspection station at a
frequency of not less than once every two months. The department shall suspend,
or revoke and require the surrender of, the permit issued to a station that it
finds is not properly conducting inspections. The department shall maintain and
post at its office lists of all stations holding permits and, of those, those
whose permits have been suspended or revoked. Proceedings involving the
suspension or revocation of permits shall be governed by HRS Chapter 91.
(Sec. 15-20.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 20,
§ 15-20.1) (Am. Ord. 96-58)
§ 15-20.2 Inspection fees.
(a)   A fee of not more than $9.75 may be charged by the operator of an
official inspection station for the inspection of motor vehicles other than a
trailer or a motorcycle and the issuance of a certificate therefor as provided
in §
15-20.1(d). A fee of not more than $7.75 may be charged by the operator of an
official inspection station for the inspection of trailers and motorcycles. The
director of budget and fiscal services shall collect from the operator of an
official inspection station the sum of 50 cents from the above-charged fees.
Twenty-five cents of the 50 cents shall be for the left one-half of the
sticker, designating the month of expiration of the inspection certificate; and
25 cents of the 50 cents shall be for the right one-half of the sticker
designating the year of expiration of the inspection certificate. The director
of budget and fiscal services shall, in addition, collect from the operator of
an official inspection station the sum of 50 cents from the above-charged fees
that must be expended for enforcement purposes only. It is the intent of this
provision to set the fee for motor vehicle inspections as provided for in HRS §
286-26(e).
(b)   A fee of not more than $5 per 100 motor vehicle safety inspection
applications will be charged to all official inspection stations and to anyone
who is authorized to do official motor vehicle safety inspections. The cost of
obtaining these forms may be added to the regular safety inspection fee.
(Sec. 15-20.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 20,
§ 15-20.2)
ARTICLE 21: WEIGHT, SIZE, AND LOAD
Sections
   
15-21.1   Reserved
   
15-21.2   Limitation of weight and wear defined
   
15-21.3   Projecting loads on passenger vehicles
   
15-21.4   Reserved
   
15-21.5   Trailers and towed vehicles
   
15-21.6   Police officers may weigh vehicles and require removal of excess
loads
   
15-21.7   Liability for damage to highway or structure
   
15-21.8   Width and height of vehicles restricted
   
15-21.9   Reserved
   
15-21.10   Restricting the use of Tantalus Road by heavy vehicles
   
15-21.11   Restricting the use of Kaneohe Bay Drive
   
15-21.12   Permit to move equipment or load, or both, of excessive weight,
width, or height
   
15-21.13   Regulations as to movement of loads of excessive width
   
15-21.14   Reserved
   
15-21.15   Restricting the use of Ahuimanu Road by certain heavy vehicles
§ 15-21.1 Reserved.
§ 15-21.2 Limitation of weight and wear defined.
(a)   No vehicles equipped wholly or partly with metal tires or vehicles
resting on any metal roller, wheel, or other object or portion thereof in
contact with the highway, the weight of which with its load exceeds 500 pounds
upon any inch width of the tire, shall be operated on any highway; provided
that traction engines or tractors, the propulsive power of which is exerted not
through wheels resting upon the ground, but by means of a flexible band or
chain known as a movable tract, shall not be subject to the foregoing
limitations upon permissible weight per inch of width of tire, if the portions
of the movable track in contact with the highway present a plane surface.
Further, no vehicle or trailer that is equipped wholly or partly with metal
tires or other hard nonresilient material shall be operated upon any highway
unless a special permit for each such operation be first obtained from the
State director of transportation, or the director’s representative, in case of
State highways, or from the director of transportation services, or the
director’s representative, in case of city and county highways.
(b)   No vehicle equipped with pneumatic tires, the weight of which with its
load exceeds 800 pounds per inch of width per tire shall be operated upon any
public highway.
(c)   No vehicle equipped wholly or partly with solid tires, other than metal,
the weight of which with its load exceeds 600 pounds on any inch of the channel
base width of the tire used thereon, shall be operated upon any highway. The
total width of all the tires on any one wheel is the width of one tire.
(d)   No vehicle equipped with solid rubber tires shall be operated upon any
public highway if the thickness of any such tire is less than as shown in the
following table:
 
Width of Tire in Inches         Minimum Thickness
3 inches to 5 inches, inclusive 1
6 inches to 8 inches, inclusive 1-1/4
10 inches and over              1-1/2
 
(e)   No vehicle equipped with solid rubber tires shall be operated on any
highway when the variation in width of the entire traction surface of any solid
tire due to injury or wear exceeds 15 percent, or when the variation in
thickness on any part of the traction surface exceeds 15 percent, or when any
portion of the rubber is not securely attached to the channel base. No dual
solid rubber tires shall be permitted to be used on any highway if there is an
average difference greater than one-eighth inch between the outside diameters
of each of the single tires composing the dual tire.
(Sec. 15-21.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.2)
§ 15-21.3 Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.
   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on any highway with any load
thereon projecting beyond the extreme width of the vehicle, regardless of the
nature of the property being transported.
(Sec. 15-21.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.3)
§ 15-21.4 Reserved.
§ 15-21.5 Trailers and towed vehicles.
(a)   When one vehicle is towing another, the drawbar or other connection shall
be of sufficient strength to pull all weight towed thereby, and such drawbar or
other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one vehicle to the other, except
that the connection may be longer between any two vehicles transporting poles,
pipes, machinery, or other objects of such structural nature as cannot readily
be dismembered.
(b)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists of a
chain, rope, or cable, there shall be displayed upon such connection a white
flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.
(c)   Trailers shall not be operated, permitted to be operated, caused to be
operated, or parked on public highways without the safety chain or chains (stay
chain or cable) securely coupled to the motor vehicle to which it has been
coupled for towing. The safety chain or chains shall not be coupled to the same
coupling of the towing vehicle to which the tow bar is coupled. Each chain or
cable and its accompanying coupling and mounting devices shall have an ultimate
strength equal at least to the gross weight of the trailer. No more slack shall
be left in the safety chain or cables than shall be necessary to permit proper
turning. The safety chain or cable shall be so connected to the trailer and
towing vehicle, and also to the tow bar so as to prevent the tow bar from
dropping to the ground in the event the tow bar or coupling should fail.
(d)   No asphalt kettle containing hot liquid asphalt shall be towed or
otherwise moved upon the highway, unless the kettle is no more than one-half
full of liquid asphalt, the top has been securely fastened, and chunks of cold,
hard asphalt have been added to the liquid asphalt in sufficient quantities to
cool the asphalt to a semisolid state and minimize splashing. In no event shall
an asphalt kettle be towed or moved along the public highway while the heating
element is operating.
(Sec. 15-21.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.5)
§ 15-21.6 Police officers may weigh vehicles and require removal of excess
loads.
(a)   Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle
and load is unlawful is authorized to require the driver to stop and submit to
a weighing of the same by means of either portable or stationary scales, and
may require that such vehicle be driven to the nearest public scales in the
event such scales are within 2 miles.
(b)   Whenever an officer, upon weighing a vehicle and load as above provided,
determines that the weight is unlawful, such officer may require the driver to
stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until such portion of
the load is removed as may be necessary to reduce the gross weight of such
vehicle to such limit as permitted under this article. All material so unloaded
shall be cared for by the owner or operator of such vehicle at the risk of such
owner or operator.
(c)   Any driver of a vehicle who fails or refuses to stop and submit the
vehicle and load to a weighing when directed by an officer or who fails or
refuses to otherwise comply with this section, is deemed to have committed a
violation.
(Sec. 15-21.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.6)
(Am. Ord. 95-15)
§ 15-21.7 Liability for damage to highway or structure.
(a)   Any person driving any vehicle, object, or contrivance upon any highway
or highway structure shall be liable for all damage that such highway or
structure may sustain as a result of any illegal operation, driving or moving
of such vehicle, object, or contrivance, or as a result of operating, driving,
or moving any such vehicle, object, or contrivance weighing in excess of the
permitted maximum weight but authorized by a special permit issued as provided
in §
15-21.12.
(b)   Whenever such driver is not the owner of such vehicle, object, or
contrivance, but is so operating, driving, or moving the same with the
expressed or implied permission of its owner, then such owner and driver shall
be jointly and severally liable for any such damage.
(Sec. 15-21.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.7)
§ 15-21.8 Width and height of vehicles restricted.
   The width and height of a motor vehicle or other power vehicle operated on
any street or highway shall be in conformance with HRS § 291-34.
(Sec. 15-21.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.8)
(Am. Ord. 01-36)
§ 15-21.9 Reserved.
§ 15-21.10 Restricting the use of Tantalus Road by heavy vehicles.
(a)   A person may not drive any motor vehicle having an aggregate weight of
vehicle and load in excess of 8 tons in either direction over that part of
Tantalus Road beginning from the mauka side of Papakolea Bridge to the junction
of Round Top-Makiki Road.
(b)   The foregoing provisions do not apply to an authorized emergency vehicle,
as defined previously, while the driver of the vehicle is operating the same in
an emergency in the necessary performance of the driver’s duties, nor to a
vehicle, the owner or operator of which has obtained from the director of
transportation services a permit authorizing the operation of the vehicle over
the described road. The director of transportation services shall issue a
permit only when it appears to the director’s satisfaction that an emergency
exists necessitating the issuance of a permit.
(Sec. 15-21.10, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.10)
§ 15-21.11 Restricting the use of Kaneohe Bay Drive.
(a)   It is unlawful for any person to drive any truck in either direction over
Kaneohe Bay Drive, between the intersection of Mokapu Saddle Road and Kaneohe
Bay Drive and the junction of Kaneohe Bay Drive with Paku Place, when such
truck with load weighs in excess of 7 tons.
(b)   The provisions of this section do not apply to an authorized emergency
vehicle, as defined in this chapter, while the driver of the vehicle is
operating the same in an emergency in the necessary performance of the driver’s
duties, nor to a city transit bus, as defined in this chapter, nor to a vehicle
the owner or driver of which has obtained from the director of transportation
services a permit authorizing the operation of the vehicle over the above
described segment of Kaneohe Bay Drive. The director of transportation services
is authorized to issue such a permit at the director’s discretion.
(Sec. 15-21.11, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.11)
(Am. Ord. 01-61, 18-32)
§ 15-21.12 Permit to move equipment and/or load of excessive weight, width, or
height.
(a)   No vehicle, equipment, or other object that does not meet the standards
of weight, width, or height or other requirements mentioned in §§
15-21.2 and 15-21.8, nor any load in excess of 9 feet in width, exclusive of
eaves or overhangs of less than 3 feet and having a clearance of 10 feet or
more above the roadway, shall be moved, transported, or caused to be moved or
transported over any public highway or street by any person without a permit
therefor issued by the State director of transportation or the director’s
representative, whenever State highways are involved, and by the director of
transportation services or the director’s representative, whenever city and
county highways are involved.
(b)   All applications for permits required under this section shall be made in
writing to the State director of transportation or the director of
transportation services of the city and county, or both, as the case may be,
and shall contain the following:
(1)   Description of any one or more of the following: the vehicle, equipment,
or load to be moved;
(2)   Street location or other identifying description of the place to which
the same is to be moved;
(3)   Complete designation of the route to be followed;
(4)   Height, width, and length of the same;
(5)   Times at which the movement of the same will commence and terminate; and
(6)   Certified statement that the moving contractor has examined the route and
determined that there will be a clearance of at least 1 foot on each side of
any one or more of the following: the vehicle, equipment, or load and any
possible obstructions existing along such route.
(c)   No permit shall be issued unless:
(1)   The applicant has secured and presents to the issuing officer all
clearances required by any law, ordinance, or regulation;
(2)   There is more than 1 foot clearance on each side of any one or more of
the following: the vehicle, equipment, or load along the route to be followed;
(3)   The issuing officer is satisfied that there are available sufficient pull
out areas for use in case of delay or breakdown;
(4)   The applicant has obtained a permit from the joint pole committee where
any one or more of the following: the vehicle, equipment, or load, as loaded,
exceeds 13 feet in height; and
(5)   In the case of loads of such excessive widths, the applicant has filed
with the issuing officer a certificate of any insurance carrier certifying that
there is a comprehensive automobile liability insurance policy covering the
applicant, and the applicant’s authorized agents, executors, administrators,
heirs, and assigns for liability in the minimum amount of $100,000 for bodily
injury to or death of one person in any one accident, and in the amount of
$300,000 for bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one
accident, and in the amount of $50,000 because of damage to or destruction of
property of others in any one accident.
(d)   The State director of transportation or the director of transportation
services, or both, as the case may be, may, in their discretion, change and
designate another route to be followed or the time during which the movement
shall be made before the issuance of a permit.
(Sec. 15-21.12, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.12)
(Am. Ord. 96-58)
§ 15-21.13 Regulations as to movement of loads of excessive width.
(a)   Such loads of excessive width shall be moved or transported only during
the hours between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.; except in certain rural areas, the
issuing officer may, in such officer’s discretion, permit movements between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. where traffic may be diverted over an
alternate route and where the flow of traffic will not be unduly impeded by
such movement; provided such loads of less than 14 feet in width, exclusive of
eaves or overhangs of 3 feet or less and having a clearance of 10 feet or more
above the roadway, may be moved at any time, except during the hours between 6:
30 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and during the hours between 3:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m.
(b)   The maximum speed of movement of such loads shall be 25 miles per hour.
(c)   When movements are permitted during daylight hours, such loads shall be
marked at each corner by a red flag. An escort vehicle, displaying at least one
red flag on each side at the front, shall precede such load. The flags herein
referred to shall be not less than 16 inches square (256 square inches).
(d)   When movements are made at night, such load shall be escorted by at least
two escort vehicles, one of which shall precede the load and one of which shall
follow the load. Such escort vehicles shall be equipped with at least one
oscillating amber light on the top of the cab, or one blinking amber light at
least 6 inches in diameter in the front of the front escort vehicle and one
blinking amber light in the rear of the rear escort vehicle.
(e)   The leading escort vehicle shall precede the load by not less than the
distances shown on the following table. The speeds shown in the table represent
the established speed limit for the street or highway on which the movement is
taking place added to the speed at which the load is traveling.
Combined Speed (MPH) Minimum Distance from Load to Leading Escort Vehicle
Combined Speed (MPH) Minimum Distance from Load to Leading Escort Vehicle
30                   200
35                   240
40                   280
45                   320
50                   350
55                   420
60                   480
65                   540
70                   600
 
(f)   When movements are made at night, such loads shall be lighted by at least
one string of incandescent lamps spaced at a maximum of 5 feet on center around
the entire load. At least one lamp in the string shall be located at each
corner of the load. All such lamps shall be located not less than 5 feet from
the roadway surface. In addition thereto, at least one lamp shall be placed or
located at each corner and at the lowest point of the load. All lamps located
at the corners of the load shall be red in color and not less than 100 watts
each; all others may be red, white, or amber in color and shall be not less
than 50 watts each. Sufficient lanterns shall be provided of the colors
specified for incandescent lamps to be used in the event of power failure or
other similar emergency to ensure that the minimum lighting required by this
traffic code is maintained at all times.
(g)   The vehicle or tractor carrying, transporting, or drawing such load at
night shall be equipped with at least two flashing amber lights not less than 6
inches in diameter that shall be mounted on each side at the front of the
vehicle or tractor, near the headlight but not in the same horizontal line
therewith.
(h)   If trailers are used in carrying or transporting such load at night, the
lighting of such trailers shall be as specified in §
15-19.5(d).
(i)   On movements of loads that require the adjustment of overhead facilities,
the contractor shall provide at least two experienced workers on top of the
structure to lift wires and perform other work as required to ensure the safe
passage of the load under overhead obstructions without damage to the wires or
obstructions. Such workers shall be provided with safety gloves and all other
safety devices required by the State safety code.
(j)   All military tactical movements shall be exempted from this section.
(k)   All agricultural equipment and implements of husbandry moved on public
highways in the course of normal agricultural operations, and within the
geographic area in which they are normally used, shall be exempted from this
section.
(Sec. 15-21.13, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.13)
§ 15-21.14 Reserved.
§ 15-21.15 Restricting the use of Ahuimanu Road by certain heavy vehicles.
(a)   A person may not drive any vehicle in either direction over Ahuimanu Road
between Ahuimanu Place and Kamehameha Highway when the vehicle, with or without
load, weighs in excess of 10 tons.
(b)   The foregoing provision does not apply to an authorized emergency vehicle
while the driver is operating such vehicle in the necessary performance of such
driver’s duties, nor to a vehicle, the owner or operator of which has obtained
from the director of transportation services a permit authorizing the operation
of the vehicle over the described road. The director of transportation services
shall issue a permit only when it appears to the director’s satisfaction that
an emergency exists necessitating the issuance of a permit.
(Sec. 15-21.15, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.15)
ARTICLE 22: PARKING METER ZONES
Sections
   
15-22.1   Parking meter zone
   
15-22.2   Designation of parking meter spaces
   
15-22.3   Acquisition, installation, and operation of parking meters
   
15-22.4   Parking time limits and rates
   
15-22.5   Placement of parking meters
   
15-22.6   Method of parking
   
15-22.7   Operation of parking meters
   
15-22.8   Enclosure or obstruction of parking spaces
   
15-22.9   Collections
   
15-22.10   Use of fund
   
15-22.11   Violations
§ 15-22.1 Parking meter zone.
(a)   All streets, including those named, lying within an area, bounded and
described in Schedule XXX attached to the ordinance codified in this section
and made a part hereof shall constitute parking meter zones.*
(b)   All other streets may be included, added, and designated as parking meter
zones by an ordinance, enacted by the council.
(c)   All municipal parking areas shall constitute parking meter zones when
they have been so designated by the council.
(Sec. 15-22.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.1)
Editor’s note:
   * See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
§ 15-22.2 Designation of parking meter spaces.
   The director of transportation services is authorized and directed to
establish, mark, and designate individual parking meter spaces for the parking
of a single motor vehicle or one or more bicycles, or such other uses as are
authorized under this article and
Chapter 14, Article 18, including complete streets features such as parklets
and bicycle corrals, in the parking meter zones designated and described in §
15-22.1 and in such other zones as may be established, including the
reservation of spaces for loading and unloading of commercial vehicles for
which no parking meters may be established, which loading zone spaces must be
marked and designated to extend in width 8 feet from the curb or edge of the
street towards the center of the street and extend in length a maximum of
approximately 22 feet and a minimum length of approximately 18 feet along the
curb or edge of the street.
(Sec. 15-22.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.2)
(Am. Ord. 16-2)
§ 15-22.3 Acquisition, installation, and operation of parking meters.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall do all things necessary to
provide for the purchase, rental, acquisition, installation, maintenance, and
repair of parking meters, including the collection of coins, currency, and
other payments from parking meters. The department of facility maintenance or
the Honolulu police department, as appropriate, shall provide for the
installation, maintenance, and repair of parking meter poles and related
infrastructure as requested by the department of budget and fiscal services.
(Sec. 15-22.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.3)
(Am. Ord. 04-32)
§ 15-22.4 Parking time limits and rates.
(a)   (1)   Except as otherwise allowed by law or permit, parking or standing a
vehicle in a designated space in the downtown and civic center area (which is
bounded by River Street to Vineyard Boulevard, then along Vineyard Boulevard to
Punchbowl Street, then along Punchbowl Street to Beretania Street, then along
Beretania Street to Alapai Street, then along Alapai Street to King Street,
then along King Street to Punchbowl Street, and along Punchbowl Street to the
waterfront) and in the City Hall parking meter zones is lawful between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., on any day, except Sundays and public
holidays, upon payment by a method allowed by parking meter, including but not
limited to credit or debit cards, smart cards, and coins, of the following
amounts in a $3 per hour zone: 50 cents for 10 minutes; $1.50 for 30 minutes;
and $3 for 60 minutes or one hour. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a car-sharing
organization shall pay an annual rental rate of $2,475 for a stall in the area
that is reserved and designated for use by the organization pursuant to §
15-28.1, without the need to operate the parking meter.
(2)   Except as otherwise allowed by law or permit, parking or standing a
vehicle in a designated space in the parking meter zones that are specified in
Schedule XXX and located in Waikiki is lawful between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 10:00 p.m. on any day upon payment by a method allowed by parking meter,
including but not limited to credit or debit cards, smart cards, and coins, of
the following amounts in a $3 per hour zone: 50 cents for 10 minutes; $1.50 for
30 minutes; and $3 for 60 minutes or one hour. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
car-sharing organization shall pay an annual rental rate of $4,380 for a stall
in the specified Waikiki parking meter zones that is reserved and designated
for use by the organization pursuant to §
15-28.1, without the need to operate the parking meter.
(3)   Provided that with respect to those parking meter zones in areas other
than those designated above the deposit of the following amounts is required:
50 cents for 20 minutes; and $1.50 for 60 minutes or one hour. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, a car-sharing organization shall pay an annual rental rate of
$1,350 for a stall in the area that is reserved and designated for use by the
organization pursuant to §
15-28.1, without the need to operate the parking meter.
(4)   Each parking meter, when operated, must either display the expiration of
the period of legal parking, or issue a receipt indicating the date and time of
expiration.
(5)   For the purposes of this subsection, car-sharing organization has the
same meaning as defined in §
15-28.1.
(6)   The foregoing rates are set forth in tabular form as follows:
 
                                                                          Shared
                                                                 Meter    Mobility
Zone      Hours                                                  Rate     Annual
                                                                          Rental
                                                                          Rate
                                                                 $0.50
                                                                 for 10
                                                                 minutes.
Downtown/ 7:00 a.m.–6:00 p.m. daily, except Sundays and public $1.50
Civic     holidays.                                              for 30   $2,475
Center                                                           minutes.
                                                                 $3 for
                                                                 60
                                                                 minutes.
                                                                 $0.50
                                                                 for 10
                                                                 minutes.
                                                                 $1.50
Waikiki   6:00 a.m.–10:00 p.m. daily.                          for 30   $4,380
                                                                 minutes.
                                                                 $3 for
                                                                 60
                                                                 minutes.
                                                                 $0.50
                                                                 for 20
All other See Schedule XXX                                       minutes. $1,350
areas                                                            $1.50
                                                                 for 60
                                                                 minutes.
 
(b)   The director of transportation services shall fix and indicate the time
limitations for legal parking in such zones; and the hours during the day when
the parking meters must be used and when the time limitations for legal parking
in such zones are effective, on the parking meters or by appropriate sign or
signs posted in proximity to such meters in those zones, or both.
(c)   A special transit service vehicle may park or stand in a designated space
without charge or necessity of paying the parking meter when loading or
unloading a mobility-handicapped passenger; provided that the vehicle does not
park or stand in the designated space:
(1)   For more than 15 minutes; or
(2)   During hours when parking in the designated space is prohibited.
(Sec. 15-22.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 22,
§ 15-22.4) (Am. Ords. 89-58, 89-78, 04-21, 04-32, 17-25, 19-19)
§ 15-22.5 Placement of parking meters.
(a)   The parking meters installed in the parking meter zones as established
and provided for in §
15-22.2 shall be placed upon the curb or public parking area immediately
adjacent to the individual parking spaces heretofore mentioned or in the use of
multispace parking meters at a location in the vicinity of the parking spaces.
Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such manner as to show or display
by a signal that the parking space adjacent to such meter is or is not legally
in use or, if required by the directions on the parking meter, the vehicle
operator shall place or cause to be placed, the receipt provided in or on the
vehicle according to the directions on the meter.
(b)   The director of transportation services may, upon request of the owner,
tenant, or occupant of the abutting property, remove or relocate any parking
meter that obstructs or interferes with the construction of any authorized
driveway or the construction of improvements on the abutting property; provided
the person requesting the removal or relocation of the parking meter or meters
shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred in the removal or relocation,
including costs of labor, materials, and equipment.
(Sec. 15-22.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.5)
(Am. Ord. 04-32)
§ 15-22.6 Method of parking.
   Except as otherwise specifically stated on the parking meter or signage,
when a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the adjacent
curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space with an individual
parking meter shall be parked within the parking space lines or pavement
markings with the front of such vehicle nearest to the parking meter. In the
case of the use of a multispace parking meter, the vehicle shall be parked
within the parking space lines or pavement markings with the front of the
vehicle pointing in the direction of traffic, except as otherwise specifically
stated on the parking meter or signage. When a parking space in any parking
meter zone with individual parking meters is diagonal to the curb or sidewalk,
any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked within the parallel
parking space lines with the front of such vehicle nearest to such meter,
except as otherwise specifically stated on the parking meter or signage. For
multispace parking meters with parking spaces diagonal to the curb or sidewalk,
any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked within the parallel
parking space lines with the front of such vehicle adjacent to the curb or
sidewalk.
(Sec. 15-22.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.6)
(Am. Ord. 04-32)
§ 15-22.7 Operation of parking meters.
   Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the fire or
police department, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control sign or signal, when any vehicle is parked in any parking space
that is regulated by a parking meter, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon
entering such parking meter space, immediately make the proper payment by a
method as is required for such parking meter and as is designated by directions
on the meter, and when required by the directions on the meter, the operator of
such vehicle, after payment, shall also set in operation the timing mechanism
on such meter in accordance with directions appearing thereon or place the
receipt provided by the meter in or on the vehicle in accordance with the
directions appearing on the meter. For a vehicle other than a motorcycle, the
receipt shall be placed on the dashboard on the driver’s side of the vehicle
with the date and time of expiration clearly visible from outside. For a
motorcycle, the receipt shall be affixed to the windshield or handlebars with
the date and time of expiration clearly visible. The failure to make payment,
set the timing mechanism in operation, or place the receipt in or on the
vehicle, when so required, shall constitute a violation of this section. Upon
payment and the setting of the timing mechanism in operation or placing the
parking meter receipt in or on the vehicle, when so required, the parking space
may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of time that has
been prescribed for the part of the street or public parking area in which the
parking space is located; provided that any person placing a vehicle in a
parking meter space served by a meter that indicates that unused time has been
left in the meter by the previous occupant of the space shall not be required
to make payment so long as such person’s occupancy of the space does not exceed
the indicated unused parking time. If a vehicle remains parked in any parking
space beyond the parking time limit set for such parking space, and if the
meter indicates such illegal parking, or if the noted date and time on the
receipt has expired, then and in that event, such vehicle shall be considered
as parking overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time, and such
parking is a violation of this traffic code.
(Sec. 15-22.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.7)
(Am. Ord. 04-32)
§ 15-22.8 Enclosure or obstruction of parking spaces.
(a)   Before any person (other than any governmental agency) uses, encloses,
obstructs, or causes to be used, enclosed, or obstructed, any parking meter
space or unmetered parking stall or portion thereof, for purposes authorized
pursuant to §
15-22.2 or
Chapter 14, Article 18, including complete streets features, or incidental to
erecting, constructing, enlarging, altering, repairing, moving, improving,
removing, converting, or demolishing any building or structure, the person must
pay to the department of transportation services a processing fee of $5 for
each permit issued in addition to a sum calculated at the rate of $12 for each
parking space for each day or fraction thereof, exclusive of Sundays and State
holidays, that the space is used, enclosed, or obstructed. The director of
transportation services may waive the per day fee for parking spaces used
exclusively for complete streets features as defined in
Chapter 14, Article 18, for the use and enjoyment of the public.
(b)   A permit issued under subsection (a) must:
(1)   Be revocable at the discretion of the director of transportation
services;
(2)   Specify the kind of work, use, or both, that is specifically authorized;
(3)   Require the permittee to defend and indemnify the city for all activities
and liabilities associated with use of the parking space;
(4)   Require the permittee to maintain liability insurance at amounts approved
by the director of transportation services; and
(5)   Contain such conditions as the director of transportation services finds
appropriate considering public safety, surrounding uses, and the public
interest, including requiring signs stating that an area designated for public
use is open to the public.
(c)   A permit issued under subsection (a) for private purposes is valid for no
longer than 90 days. A permit issued under subsection (a) exclusively for
complete streets features as defined in
Chapter 14, Article 18, for the use and enjoyment of the public may be issued
for a term not to exceed 180 days.
(d)   Where the use, enclosure, or obstruction of a parking meter space also
requires a permit under Title 19, Chapter 129 of the Hawaii Administrative
Rules, entitled “Use of Traffic Control Devices at Work Sites on or Adjacent to
Public Streets and Highways,” no such permit may be issued by the director of
transportation services until the applicant has made the payment required under
subsection (a), based on the estimated number of days that the parking meter
spaces will be used, enclosed, or obstructed. The permittee must notify the
department of transportation services immediately upon termination of such use,
enclosure, or obstruction.
(e)   All moneys due and collected under this section must be deposited in the
highway fund created by HRS Chapter 249, as amended. In the event there is a
variance between the amount collected and the amount due, adjustment must then
be made by or with the department of transportation services.
(f)   The director of transportation services may adopt rules pursuant to HRS
Chapter 91 implementing this section.
(Sec. 15-22.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.8)
(Am. Ord. 04-21, 10-3, 16-2)
§ 15-22.9 Collections.
   It shall be the duty of the chief of police of the Honolulu police
department to designate some member or members in the Honolulu police
department to make regular collections of the coins and currency deposited in
the parking meters. The person or persons so designated shall make a record in
duplicate of the number shown registered on the coin and currency counter of
each parking meter whenever coins and currency are removed therefrom. The coins
and currency so removed shall be taken, together with the duplicate copy of the
record above mentioned, to the city treasury for count by the chief of treasury
and deposit into the highway fund, created by HRS Chapter 249, as amended. The
Honolulu police department shall coordinate with the department of budget and
fiscal services in ensuring that there is a proper accounting of payments by
methods other than coins and currency deposited into the parking meter.
(Sec. 15-22.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.9)
(Am. Ord. 04-32)
§ 15-22.10 Use of fund.
   In addition to other authorized purposes, the moneys in the highway fund
created by HRS Chapter 249, as amended, shall be used for supervising,
controlling, and regulating parking of vehicles in the parking zones created;
for the purchase, rental, acquisition, supervision, protection, inspection,
installation, operation, maintenance, control, regulation, collection, and use
of the parking meters described herein, of off-street parking spaces, and of
other facilities and properties for parking purposes; and for purposes and
functions of traffic control and safety upon the highways and streets in the
city.
(Sec. 15-22.10, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.10)
§ 15-22.11 Violations.
   It is a violation for any person to:
(1)   Cause, allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of, or
operated by, the person to be parked overtime, or beyond the period of legal
parking time established for any parking meter zone as herein described;
(2)   Cause, allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle to be placed or remain in any
parking space while the meter regulating the parking space is displaying a
signal indicating illegal or overtime parking, or the receipt issued by the
parking meter has expired. A special transit service vehicle is not in
violation of this subsection when loading or unloading a mobility-handicapped
passenger as long as the parking space is not occupied for more than 15
minutes;
(3)   Park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking meter space or
in such position that the vehicle is not entirely within the area designated by
such lines or markings;
(4)   Deface, injure, tamper with, open or wilfully break, destroy or impair
the usefulness of any parking meter installed under this traffic code;
(5)   Deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device,
metal or other substance, or other substitute for lawful United States coins or
currency;
(6)   Deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter a coin or coins or
currency or make payment by credit, debit, or smart card for the purpose of
increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond the legal
parking time, or fraction thereof, which has been established for the parking
space adjacent to which such parking meter is placed;
(7)   Fail to pay the fees as required under §
15-22.8;
(8)   Permit any special transit service vehicle to remain in a parking space
without charge for more than 15 minutes or during hours when parking is
prohibited, even if loading or unloading a mobility-handicapped passenger;
(9)   Permit any vehicle to be or remain parked in a tow zone during tow zone
hours, unless the parking is permitted under and in compliance with §
15-14.8;
(10)   Fail to display a receipt issued by a parking meter so that the date and
time are clearly visible or otherwise not in compliance with the instructions
on the parking meter; and
(11)   Alter, duplicate, or transfer to another vehicle operator any receipt
issued by a parking meter.
(Sec. 15-22.11, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.11)
(Am. Ords. 89-58, 90-77, 04-32, 16-2)
ARTICLE 23: OFF-STREET PARKING
Sections
   
15-23.1   Designation and allocation of parking meter spaces or parking spaces
   
15-23.2   Metered parking facilities
   
15-23.2A   Attendant parking facilities
   
15-23.2B   Unclaimed vehicles
   
15-23.2C   Special transit service vehicles
   
15-23.2D   Review and amendment of parking rates and terms
   
15-23.3   Business hours
   
15-23.4   Signs
   
15-23.5   Use of revenues
   
15-23.6   Violations
   
15-23.7   Permitted commercial use of public off-street parking facilities by
the city-sponsored People’s Open Market program
§ 15-23.1 Designation and allocation of parking meter spaces or parking spaces.
   The director of transportation services is authorized and directed to
establish, mark, and designate individual parking meter spaces or individual
parking spaces for the parking of a single vehicle therein of appropriate size
in public off-street parking facilities. In all facilities where public monthly
parking is authorized, the director shall allocate to vehicles displaying a
valid carpool parking program permit an appropriate number of designated
carpool parking spaces at preferential locations, provided that such designated
carpool spaces shall not be to the detriment of daytime, short-term parkers,
and disabled persons parking. For any off-street parking facility under the
director’s control or supervision, the director shall give priority on any
waiting list for permits for monthly parking spaces to vehicles with valid
carpool parking program permits.
(Sec. 15-23.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 23,
§ 15-23.1) (Am. Ord. 94-61)
§ 15-23.2 Metered parking facilities.
   The following time limits, parking fees, and other regulations shall be
applicable to the parking facilities listed:
Facility Parking Limit  Fee Rate Special Hours Other
         (No. of Hours)
Facility           Parking Limit  Fee Rate      Special Hours Other
                   (No. of Hours)
Bishop-Kukui (Area 3              $1.50/hour                  
2)
Kuhio-Kaiolu       5              $1.50/hour                  
                                                              Director of
                                                              transportation
                                                              services to
HPD                2              $1.50/hour                 designate areas
                                                              and post time
                                                              limits on meters
                                                              or signs.
                                                              Director of
                                                              transportation
                                                              services to
Kailua             5 and 3        $0.75/hour                 designate areas
                                                              and post time
                                                              limits on meters
                                                              or signs.
                                                              Director of
                                                              transportation
                                                              services to
Kailua Elderly     5 and 3        $0.75/hour                 designate areas
                                                              and post time
                                                              limits on meters
                                                              or signs.
                                                              Director of
                                                              transportation
Kaimuki 2                                                     services to
(Koko Head Ave./   2              $0.75/hour                 designate areas
12th Ave.)                                                    and post time
                                                              limits on meters
                                                              or signs.
Civic Center       3              $1.50/hour                  
                   2              $0.50/2 hours               Time limits, not
                                                              to exceed the
                                                              maximum, to be
                                                              fixed by director
Salt Lake          12 (max.)      $0.10/hour                  of transportation
                                                              services and
                                                              posted on meters
                                                              or signs.

                                                              Time limits, not
                                                              to exceed the
Palace Square                                                 maximum, to be
(Honolulu Post     1              $1.50/hour                 fixed by director
Office)                                                       of transportation
                                                              services and
                                                              posted on meters
                                                              or signs.
                                                              Director of
                                                              transportation
                                                              services to
Wahiawa            1              None                       designate areas
                                                              and post time
                                                              limits on meters
                                                              or signs.
 
(Sec. 15-23.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 23,
§ 15-23.2) (Am. Ords. 89-48, 89-58, 89-78, 90-98, 91-13, 91-72, 92-24; Added by
Ord. 94-61; Am. Ords. 97-06, 04-21, 04-32, 06-49, 12-13, 15-3)
§ 15-23.2A Attendant parking facilities.
(a)   The following time limits, parking fees, and other regulations shall be
applicable to the parking facilities listed:
         Primary Secondary   Public                         Shared
Facility Period  Period      Monthly Lost Ticket Business   Mobility    Other
         Hours/  Hours/Rates Rate    Charge      Validation Annual
         Rates                                              Rental Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                       Shared
                                                                                                                                                             Public  Lost   Business   Mobility
Facility    Primary Period Hours/Rates                                                   Secondary Period Hours/Rates                                        Monthly Ticket Validation Annual   Other
                                                                                                                                                             Rate    Charge            Rental
                                                                                                                                                                                       Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                Carpool
                                                                                                                                                                                                parking
Alii Place                                                                                                                                                                  At primary          program
(Alakea-    Monday—Friday 6:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m. $0.75/half-hour first 2 hours $1.50/halMonday—Friday 5:00 p.m.—12:00 midnight, Sat., Sun., holidays 6:0$155    $21    rates, as  $3,150   authorized.
Richards:   hour thereafter                                                              a.m.—12:00 midnight $0.50/half-hour, maximum $3                                  may be              Early bird
Area 4a)                                                                                                                                                                    adjusted.           all-day
                                                                                                                                                                                                parking
                                                                                                                                                                                                authorized.
                                                                                                                                                                                                Carpool
                                                                                                                                                                                                parking
Harbor                                                                                                                                                                      At primary          program
Court       Monday—Friday 6:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m. $0.75/half-hour first 2 hours, $1.50/haMonday—Friday 5:00 p.m.—12:00 midnight, Sat., Sun., holidays 6:0$140    $21    rates, as  $31.50   authorized.
(Kaahumanu: hour thereafter                                                              a.m.—12:00 midnight $0.50/half-hour, maximum $3                                  may be              Early bird
Area 6)                                                                                                                                                                     adjusted.           all-day
                                                                                                                                                                                                parking
                                                                                                                                                                                                authorized.
Marin Tower
(Maunakea-
Smith: Area
3)                                                                                                                                                                                              Carpool
(applicable                                                                                                                                                                                     parking
only to 258                                                                                                                                                                 At primary          program
parking     Monday—Friday 6:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m. $0.75/half-hour first 2 hours, $1.50/haMonday—Friday 5:00 p.m.—12:00 midnight, Sat., Sun., holidays 6:0$125    $21    rates, as  N/A      authorized.
stalls that hour thereafter                                                              a.m.—12:00 midnight $0.50/half-hour, maximum $3                                  may be              Early bird
are                                                                                                                                                                         adjusted.           all-day
reserved                                                                                                                                                                                        parking
for city                                                                                                                                                                                        authorized.
use as
public
parking)
                                                                                                                                                                                                Carpool
                                                                                                                                                                                                parking
                                                                                                                                                                                                program
                                                                                                                                                                                                authorized.
                                                                                                                                                                                                Early bird
                                                                                                                                                                            At primary          all-day
Kukui Plaza Monday—Friday, except holidays 6:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m. $0.75/half-hour first Monday—Friday 5:00 p.m.—12:00 midnight, Sat., Sun., holidays 6:0$100    $21    rates, as  $3,150   parking
            hours, $1.50/half-hour thereafter                                            a.m.—12:00 midnight $0.50/half-hour, maximum $3                                  may be              authorized.
                                                                                                                                                                            adjusted.           Low-
                                                                                                                                                                                                moderate
                                                                                                                                                                                                income
                                                                                                                                                                                                resident
                                                                                                                                                                                                rate: $40/
                                                                                                                                                                                                month.
                                                                                                                                                                                                Carpool
                                                                                                                                                                                                parking
                                                                                                                                                                                                program
                                                                                                                                                                                                authorized.
                                                                                                                                                                                                Early bird
                                                                                                                                                                                                all-day
                                                                                                                                                                                                parking
                                                                                                                                                                                                authorized.
                                                                                                                                                                                                Commercial
                                                                                                                                                                                                tenant
                                                                                                                                                                                                rate: $90/
                                                                                                                                                                                                month.
                                                                                                                                                                                                Below-
                                                                                                                                                                            At primary          market unit
            Monday—Friday except holidays 6:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m. $0.75/half-hour first 2Monday—Friday 5:00 p.m.—12:00 midnight, Sat., Sun., holidays 6:00              rates, as           resident
Hale Pauahi hours, $1.50/half-hour thereafter                                            a.m.—12:00 midnight $0.50/half-hour, maximum $3                   $90     $21    may be     N/A      rate: $40/
                                                                                                                                                                            adjusted.           month.
                                                                                                                                                                                                Market unit
                                                                                                                                                                                                resident
                                                                                                                                                                                                rate: $60/
                                                                                                                                                                                                month.
                                                                                                                                                                                                River-
                                                                                                                                                                                                Pauahi
                                                                                                                                                                                                resident
                                                                                                                                                                                                rate: $40/
                                                                                                                                                                                                month.
                                                                                                                                                                                                Pauahi
                                                                                                                                                                                                Kupuna Hale
                                                                                                                                                                                                resident
                                                                                                                                                                                                rate: $10/
                                                                                                                                                                                                month.
Harbor
Village
(River-
Nimitz)                                                                                                                                                                                         Carpool
(applicable                                                                                                                                                                                     parking
only to 76                                                                                                                                                                  At primary          program
parking     Monday—Friday 6:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m. $0.75/half-hour first 2 hours, $1.50/haMonday—Friday 5:00 p.m.—12:00 midnight, Sat., Sun., holidays 6:0$125    $21    rates, as  N/A      authorized.
stalls that hour thereafter                                                              a.m.—12:00 midnight $0.50/half-hour, maximum $3                                  may be              Early bird
are                                                                                                                                                                         adjusted.           all-day
reserved                                                                                                                                                                                        parking
for city                                                                                                                                                                                        authorized.
use as
public
parking)
Chinatown
Gateway
Plaza
(Bethel-                                                                                                                                                                                        Carpool
Hotel)                                                                                                                                                                                          parking
(applicable                                                                                                                                                                 At primary          program
only to 80  Monday—Friday 6:00 a.m.—5 p.m. $0.75/half-hour first 2 hours, $1.50/half-Monday—Friday 5:00 p.m.—12:00 midnight, Sat., Sun., holidays 6:00              rates, as           authorized.
parking     hour thereafter                                                              a.m.—12:00 midnight $0.50/half-hour, maximum $3                   $150    $21    may be     N/A      Early bird
stalls that                                                                                                                                                                 adjusted.           all-day
are                                                                                                                                                                                             parking
reserved                                                                                                                                                                                        authorized.
for city
use as
public
parking)
                                                                                                                                                                                                Carpool
                                                                                                                                                                                                parking
                                                                                                                                                                                                program
                                                                                                                                                                                                authorized.
                                                                                                                                                                                                Early bird
                                                                                                                                                                                                all-day
                                                                                                                                                                                                parking
                                                                                                                                                                                                authorized.
                                                                                                                                                                                                Commercial
                                                                                                                                                                                                tenant
                                                                                                                                                                                                rate: $125/
Kekaulike                                                                                                                                                                   At primary          month. Low-
Courtyards  Monday—Friday except holidays 6:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m. $0.75/half-hour first 2Monday—Friday 5:00 p.m.—12:00 midnight, Sat., Sun., holidays 6:0$125    $21    rates, as  $3,150   moderate
(Kekaulike  hours, $1.50/half-hour thereafter                                            a.m.—12:00 midnight $0.50/half-hour, maximum $3                                  may be              income
Area 7)                                                                                                                                                                     adjusted.           resident
                                                                                                                                                                                                rate: $40/
                                                                                                                                                                                                month. Gap
                                                                                                                                                                                                group
                                                                                                                                                                                                income
                                                                                                                                                                                                resident
                                                                                                                                                                                                rate: $60/
                                                                                                                                                                                                month.
                                                                                                                                                                                                Market unit
                                                                                                                                                                                                resident
                                                                                                                                                                                                rate: $80/
                                                                                                                                                                                                month.
                                                                                                                                                                                                Carpool
                                                                                                                                                                                                parking
                                                                                                                                                                            At primary          program
Smith-      Monday—Friday 6:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m. $0.75/half-hour first 2 hours $1.50/halMonday—Friday 5:00 p.m.—12:00 midnight, Sat., Sun., holidays 6:0$125    $21    rates as   $3,150   authorized.
Beretania   hour thereafter                                                              a.m.—12:00 midnight $0.50/half-hour maximum $3                                   may be              Early bird
                                                                                                                                                                            adjusted.           all-day
                                                                                                                                                                                                parking
                                                                                                                                                                                                authorized.
Kaimuki 1                                                                                                                                                                   At primary
(12th Ave./ Monday—Friday except holidays 5:00 a.m.—11:00 p.m. $0.75/hour first 2 houSat., Sun., holidays 6:00 a.m.—12:00 midnight $0.75/hour          $125    $21    rates, as  $2,100    
11th Ave.)  and $1.50/hour thereafter. First 20 minutes free.                                                                                                               may be
                                                                                                                                                                            adjusted.
Kapalama
Hale                                                                                                                                                                                            Carpool
adjacent    Monday—Friday except holidays 6:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m. $2/half-hour. With                                                                                        Validation          parking
parking     validation, $0.75/half -hour first 4 hours, and $2/half-hour thereafter.     None                                                                None    $21    by city    $2,100   program
facility                                                                                                                                                                    only.               authorized.
(TMK 1-5-
15-16)
 
(b)   The director of transportation services shall determine the occupancy
rate of the facilities listed in subsection (a) on a semiannual basis. If the
occupancy rate equals or exceeds 90 percent of the facility’s capacity, the
primary and secondary parking rates will be increased by 15 cents per 30
minutes for the first two hours, and 30 cents per 30 minutes thereafter;
provided that in no event may the rates exceed $3 per hour for the first two
hours and $4.50 per hour thereafter. If the occupancy rate decreases by 20
percent over the occupancy rate for the immediately preceding period of six
months, the primary and secondary parking rates will be decreased by 15 cents
per 30 minutes for the first two hours and 30 cents per 30 minutes thereafter;
provided that in no event may the rates be reduced below the rates specified in
subsection (a).
For the purposes of this subsection, “occupancy rate” means the ratio, over a
given time period, between the portion of the time vehicles were parked in a
facility’s parking spaces versus the total available space hours.
Any change in the rates will become effective 30 days after its establishment
by the director. At least seven days before the effective date, the director
shall post a notice of the change at the affected parking facility.
(c)   The director of transportation services shall designate appropriate
portions of each facility listed in subsection (a) for the parking, free of
charge, of bicycles, motorcycles, motor scooters, and mopeds, as defined in HRS
§ 291C-1.
(d)   The director of transportation services may establish a carpool parking
program where authorized in subsection (a) and set monthly carpool parking
rates that shall be no more than 70 percent of the public monthly rate
established for each facility. In any facility where monthly carpool parking is
authorized by this section, no less than 50 percent of spaces set aside for the
public monthly parking program shall be allocated for the carpool parking
program; provided that the director may reduce the percent of carpool parking
stalls upon the director’s findings that the demand for such spaces is less
than 50 percent. Carpool spaces shall be in preferential locations and a valid
carpool parking program permit shall be required for all vehicles parked in the
designated carpool parking spaces or paying carpool parking rates.
(e)   The director of transportation services may establish an all-day early
bird parking program where authorized in subsection (a) and set the all-day fee
to be charged therefor; provided that in no event shall the early bird parking
program be implemented to the detriment of daytime, short-term parkers nor
shall such programs be implemented at any facility, unless carpool spaces have
been designated and offered at reduced parking rates as required in subsection
(d). In any facility that the director of transportation services implements
all-day early bird parking, the director shall offer all-day early bird carpool
parking at a reduced rate that shall be no more than 70 percent of the daily
all-day rate.
(f)   Commercial tenants and residents of city projects applying for
authorization to use designated parking stalls therein shall be certified by
the department of facility maintenance; provided that the foregoing shall not
apply to commercial tenants and residents of the Marin Tower (Maunakea-Smith:
Area 3), Harbor Village (River-Nimitz), and Chinatown Gateway Plaza (Bethel-
Hotel) properties.
(g)   When an ordinance increasing parking fees for monthly tenants of any city
attendant parking facility is enacted, the department of facility maintenance
shall immediately post signs at the affected facility notifying all monthly
tenants of the increase. No increase on monthly parking rates shall be
collected until 90 days after the signs have been posted.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 23, § 15-23.2A) (Added by Ord. 94-61; Am. Ords. 97-06,
04-21, 04-32, 04-40, 06-49, 12-13, 16-32, 19-19)
§ 15-23.2B Unclaimed vehicles.
   When any vehicle not belonging to a commercial or residential tenant is not
called for at closing time, such vehicle shall not be delivered to the owner or
driver thereof until such time as the parking facility is again open for
business and a charge of $1, together with the charges hereinabove specified
remaining unpaid, shall have been paid by such owner or driver. Further, should
the owner or driver fail to claim or call for such vehicle within 24 hours
after the parking facility is again open for business, the chief of police
shall remove or cause to be removed such vehicle from the parking facility, and
the owner or driver thereof shall be liable for all reasonable expenses
incurred by such removal, as well as the charges herein specified. In no event
shall the city be responsible for any claim by reason of loss, theft or
conversion of, or for any damage or injury to, a vehicle parked in the parking
facility.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 23, § 15-23.2B) (Added by Ord. 94-61)
§ 15-23.2C Special transit service vehicles.
   When a special transit service vehicle parks in a public off-street parking
facility to load or unload a mobility-handicapped passenger, there shall be no
charge for the first 15 minutes; provided that the waiver of charge shall not
be applicable when a concession agreement applicable to the public off-street
parking facility prohibits the waiver.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 23, § 15-23.2C) (Added by Ord. 94-61)
§ 15-23.2D Review and amendment of parking rates and terms.
   Every three years beginning no later than July 1, 1995, the director of
transportation services shall review the rates charged and applicable parking
terms of all municipal off-street parking facilities as to their consistency
with city transportation policies, appropriateness with respect to adjacent
land uses, and comparability with private parking rates. The director shall
prepare and submit to the council for its consideration any recommended
amendments to the prevailing parking rates and applicable terms in the form of
a bill for an ordinance.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 23, § 15-23.2D) (Added by Ord. 94-61)
§ 15-23.3 Business hours.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided, all public off-street parking
facilities shall be open for business seven days per week, 24 hours per day.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, whenever any special event or
occurrence shall require extra parking spaces in the downtown area, the
director of transportation services is authorized to extend the business hours
of any “Class D” and “Class F” facility, including opening for business on any
Sunday or holiday.
(Sec. 15-23.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 23, § 15-23.3)
§ 15-23.4 Signs.
   Appropriate signs indicating the parking charges, as well as the hours that
such facility is open for business, shall be installed and maintained at each
public off-street parking facility.
(Sec. 15-23.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 23, § 15-23.4)
§ 15-23.5 Use of revenues.
(a)   All revenues derived from the operation and use of the public off-street
parking facilities, other than the Harbor Village (River-Nimitz), Chinatown
Gateway Plaza (Bethel-Hotel), Marin Tower (Maunakea-Smith: Area 3), and Hale
Pauahi parking facilities, shall be collected and deposited as prescribed in §
15-22.9, and such revenues shall be used as prescribed in §
15-22.10. All revenues derived from lessee operation and use of each of the
leased parking facilities at the Harbor Village (River-Nimitz), Chinatown
Gateway Plaza (Bethel-Hotel), and Marin Tower (Maunakea-Smith: Area 3) projects
shall inure to the benefit of the lessee of the parking facility, in accordance
with the terms of the governing lease with the city.
(b)   Upon the execution of a long-term lease by the city of the Harbor Village
(River-Nimitz) or Chinatown Gateway Plaza (Bethel-Hotel) projects, or both,
including their parking facilities, all proceeds payable at lease inception and
allocated to parking under the terms of the lease for each of the projects
shall be deposited into the housing development special fund.
(c)   All revenues derived from the operation and use of the Hale Pauahi
parking facility shall be deposited into the rental assistance fund as
prescribed in §
6-45.2.
(d)   Upon the execution of a long-term lease by the city of the Marin Tower
(Maunakea-Smith: Area 3) project, including its parking facilities, all
proceeds payable at lease inception and allocated to parking under the terms of
the lease shall be deposited as prescribed in §
15-22.9.
(e)   All revenues derived from the operation and use of the joint traffic
management center parking garage shall be deposited into the transportation
fund.
(Sec. 15-23.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 23,
§ 15-23.5) (Am. Ords. 91-13, 12-13, 12-36, 20-19)
§ 15-23.6 Violations.
   No person shall violate the following:
(1)   Refuse or fail to pay the parking charges specified in §
15-23.2;
(2)   Park any vehicle, except one that is not called for at closing time, in a
public off-street parking facility when not open for business;
(3)   Park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking space or in such
position that the vehicle is not entirely within the area designated by such
lines or markings;
(4)   Tamper with or damage any vehicle other than the person’s own parked in a
public off-street parking facility;
(5)   Park any vehicle for the purpose of washing, cleaning, greasing, or
repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency;
(6)   Except as provided in §
15-23.7, display for sale, or sell, goods, or merchandise;
(7)   Travel at a speed in excess of 10 miles per hour; and
(8)   Disregard any official direction, instruction, or restriction indicated
by or on official signs posted therein.
(Sec. 15-23.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 23, § 15-23.6)
(Am. Ords. 90-77, 92-121)
§ 15-23.7 Permitted commercial use of public off-street parking facilities by
the city-sponsored People’s Open Market program.
(a)   The department of transportation services may issue a permit, at no cost,
to the department of parks and recreation to conduct the People’s Open Market
program in those municipal off-street surface parking facilities located in
residential neighborhoods not zoned for business, commercial, or industrial
use, under the following guidelines:
(1)   No one facility may be used more frequently than once a week;
(2)   The facility may be used for no more than four hours on any one day and
may only be used between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.;
(3)   The department must first find that the facility is one that generally
has space available during the hours for which the permit is issued and that
the public off-street parking needs of the surrounding residential community
will not be adversely affected by issuance of the permit; and
(4)   The persons in charge of the People’s Open Market program shall ensure
that the facility is left in a clean and sanitary condition following its use.
(b)   The permit shall state the days and hours during which it is in effect
and may include other reasonable conditions and restrictions on the People’s
Open Market use permitted in subsection (a).
(c)   The permits may be issued on a per-use, a per-month, a biennial, or an
annual basis.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 23, § 15-23.7) (Added by Ord. 92-121)
ARTICLE 24: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sections
   
15-24.1   Tampering with vehicle
   
15-24.2   Putting glass or other injurious substances on a highway
   
15-24.3   Tracking mud onto the highway
   
15-24.4   Driving through funeral or other processions
   
15-24.5   Unlawful riding
   
15-24.6   Obstruction of intersection
   
15-24.7   Motor vehicle drifting and drift racing prohibited
   
15-24.8   Restricting animals and livestock on highways
   
15-24.9   Reserved
   
15-24.10   Reserved
   
15-24.11   Off-street parking for persons with disabilities at City Hall
   
15-24.12   Attention to driving
   
15-24.13   Restrictions on federal-aid highways
   
15-24.14   Transportation of explosives through tunnels
   
15-24.15   Restrictions on freeways
   
15-24.16   Restriction of motorized vehicles on pedestrian overpass or
underpass
   
15-24.17   Miscellaneous traffic controls
   
15-24.18   Anti-speed bumps
   
15-24.19   Slow-moving vehicles—Requirement of emblems
   
15-24.20   Parades, street festivals, and other activities
   
15-24.21   Permits for special transit service vehicles
   
15-24.22   Carrying animal in vehicle
   
15-24.23   Mobile electronic devices
   
15-24.24   Wheelies prohibited
§ 15-24.1 Tampering with vehicle.
(a)   No person shall, without the consent of the owner or person in charge of
a vehicle, climb upon or into any such vehicle with the intent to commit any
injury thereto or with the intent to commit any crime, whether such vehicle is
in motion or at rest. The following persons are not in violation of this
subsection:
(1)   A police officer, when authorizing the entering or opening of a motor
vehicle and silencing of an alarm system, as provided under § 15A-5.7; and
(2)   An owner, operator, or employee of a tow service, when entering or
opening a motor vehicle and silencing an alarm system under the authorization
of a police officer, as provided under § 15A-5.7.
(b)   No person, without the consent of the owner or person in charge of a
standing unattended vehicle, shall manipulate any of the levers, brakes, or
other devices thereon; provided that an operator of a motor vehicle may release
the brakes and move a standing unattended vehicle for the purpose of
extricating the operator’s vehicle from a parking location. Persons authorized
by §§
15-13.8, 15-13.9, and 15A-5.7 are excepted from this provision.
(Sec. 15-24.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.1)
(Am. Ords. 90-3, 96-58)
§ 15-24.2 Putting glass or other injurious substances on a highway.
(a)   No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or highway any glass
bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, or any other substance or object
likely to injure any person, animal, or vehicle on a highway.
(b)   Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any
highway, any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the
same or cause it to be removed.
(c)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall
remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from
such vehicle.
(d)   Upon finding probable cause to believe that there has been a violation of
this section, the police officer may either arrest the person believed to be in
violation or may issue to that person a summons and citation in accordance with
HRS § 803-6.
(e)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to a
fine of up to $1,000 or up to five days’ imprisonment, or both.
(Sec. 15-24.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.2)
(Am. Ord. 01-17)
§ 15-24.3 Tracking mud onto the highway.
   No vehicle using the public highway shall track mud or dirt onto the
traveled portion of such highway in such quantities as will constitute a hazard
when the roadway is wet, or obscure the painted pavement markings thereon. If
mud or dirt is unavoidably tracked onto the highway, it shall be the duty of
the operator of the offending vehicle to have such mud or dirt removed as
quickly as possible.
(Sec. 15-24.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.3)
§ 15-24.4 Driving through funeral or other processions.
(a)   No person shall drive a vehicle between the vehicles comprising a funeral
or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles
are conspicuously designated as by law required. This provision shall apply at
intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or by
police officers. When the lead car of any funeral or other procession has
entered any intersection, notwithstanding the light conditions at those
intersections controlled by signal devices, then all other traffic shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles comprising such funeral or other procession
until it has passed through the intersection. The foregoing provisions of this
section shall apply only to such funeral or other processions moving under
police escort.
(b)   No funeral procession shall be permitted during the hours of 6:30 a.m. to
8:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. to 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays.
(c)   A funeral procession composed of any number of vehicles shall be
identified as such by the conspicuous display on the top center of each vehicle
of a device not less than 8 inches long and 4 inches high, predominantly black
or violet in color with the word “Funeral” imprinted on each side thereof in
letters no less than 1.25 inches in height, and the display on the top center
of both the lead vehicle and the end vehicle of a flashing amber light having a
minimum diameter of 6 inches. Such devices and the lights shall be fastened to
the vehicles by means of magnets or suction cups. While in the procession, each
driver shall turn on the head lamps of the driver’s vehicle as further
identification.
(Sec. 15-24.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.4)
§ 15-24.5 Unlawful riding.
(a)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), no person shall ride on
any vehicle or any portion of a vehicle, nor shall the operator of any vehicle
permit any person to ride on any vehicle or any portion of a vehicle not
designed or intended for the use of passengers.
(b)   Persons may ride or be permitted by the vehicle operator to ride in a
vehicle or portion of a vehicle not designed or intended for the use of
passengers under the following circumstances:
(1)   When riding within a trailer in a space intended for merchandise;
(2)   When engaging in the necessary discharge of an employment duty; or
(3)   When riding in the bed or load-carrying area of a truck;
provided that persons riding in the bed or load-carrying area of a pickup truck
shall be subject to HRS § 291-14, whether or not engaging in the necessary
discharge of an employment duty.
(Sec. 15-24.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.5)
(Am. Ord. 89-130)
§ 15-24.6 Obstruction of intersection.
(a)   No wall, fence, sign, hedge, tree, shrubbery, or other similar structure
or plant growth, or any part thereof, that is more than 3 feet above the
nearest edge of the abutting roadway shall be erected, planted, or maintained
at the corner of any street intersection within the area of a triangle, the
apex of which is at the intersections of the property lines at such corner, and
consisting of two sides each extending 30 feet from such apex along the
respective property lines and the third side being a straight line connecting
the respective end points of the two sides; provided that the height of any
such wall, fence, sign, hedge, tree, shrubbery, or similar structure or plant
growth, subject to any height limitation imposed by any law, ordinance or
regulation, may exceed 3 feet upon determination by the director of
transportation services that the same does not obstruct vision or constitute a
traffic hazard.
(b)   The chief of police shall cause a notice to be served upon the owner or
occupant of all property where a violation of the above provision exists,
requesting the removal of the obstruction therefrom within one week from the
service of such notice.
(Sec. 15-24.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.6)
§ 15-24.7 Motor vehicle drifting and drift racing prohibited.
(a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Motor Vehicle Drifting. A driving technique whereby the driver intentionally
oversteers a motor vehicle, causing loss of traction in the rear wheels, while
maintaining control from entry to exit of a corner. A motor vehicle is drifting
when the rear slip angle is greater than the front slip angle, to such an
extent that the front wheels of the motor vehicle are pointing in the opposite
direction to the turn (e.g. the motor vehicle is turning left, but the wheels
are pointed to the right, or vice versa).
Drift Racing. The use of one or more motor vehicles in an attempt to:
(1)   Outgain or outdistance another motor vehicle, or prevent another vehicle
from passing; or
(2)   Arrive at a given destination ahead of another motor vehicle or vehicles,
or ahead of a time standard as determined by a stopwatch or other time-keeping
device;
while incorporating motor vehicle drifting, on some or all curves or turns of
the designated or assumed course.
Racing. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 291C-103(c).
(b)   No person shall engage in motor vehicle drifting or drift racing upon any
street or highway within the City and County of Honolulu.
(c)   Any person who violates this section shall, upon conviction, be fined up
to $2,000, or imprisoned up to one year, or both.
(Added by Ord. 18-15)
§ 15-24.8 Restricting animals and livestock on highways.
(a)   No person owning, controlling, or having the possession of any livestock
or animals, such as cattle, horses, mules, asses, swine, sheep, or goats, shall
wilfully or negligently permit any such livestock or animals to stray upon, or
remain unaccompanied by a person in charge or control thereof, upon any street
or highway.
(b)   No person shall drive or lead any such livestock upon, over or across any
street or highway without keeping a sufficient number of herders on continual
duty to open the road so as to permit the passage of vehicles.
(Sec. 15-24.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.8)
§ 15-24.9 Reserved.
§ 15-24.10 Reserved.
§ 15-24.11 Off-street parking for persons with disabilities at city hall.
(a)   There are established two unmetered parking spaces reserved for persons
with disabilities to be located within 50 feet of City Hall. The two parking
spaces shall be located in the off-street area immediately in front of City
Hall until two spaces have been identified and constructed in some other
location within 50 feet of City Hall.
(b)   The use of the spaces shall be subject to the requirements and
limitations of the State law and rules.
(c)   The director of planning and permitting or the director of transportation
services, as is appropriate, is authorized and directed to establish, mark, and
designate the reserved parking described in subsection (a).
(d)   The members of the police department and any other persons authorized by
the chief of police are authorized to enforce this section pursuant to
Article 26.
(e)   Any person violating this section shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $50, nor more than $250, for each violation.
(Sec. 15-24.11-A, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art.
24, § 15-24.11) (Am. Ords. 89-92, 90-77, 95-15, 96-54, 14-25)
§ 15-24.12 Attention to driving.
   Every operator of a motor vehicle shall exercise due care in the operation
of such vehicle upon any street or highway to avoid collision with any person,
vehicle, or other property on or off such street or highway.
(Sec. 15-24.12, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.12)
§ 15-24.13 Restrictions on federal-aid highways.
   No person shall, at any time, carry on or solicit business on any portion of
a federal-aid highway.
(Sec. 15-24.13, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.13)
§ 15-24.14 Transportation of explosives through tunnels.
   No person shall transport, or cause to be transported, any explosives
through any vehicular tunnel that is used by the general public as part of a
public street or highway, except that this provision shall not apply to the
transport of military munitions or military explosives by an operating division
of the United States Department of Defense or its contractors using the H-
3 tunnels. The military munitions or explosives shall be transported in
accordance with United States Department of Defense standard operating
procedures.
(Sec. 15-24.14, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.14)
(Am. Ord. 03-25)
§ 15-24.15 Restrictions on freeways.
   No unlicensed mobile equipment shall be operated under its own power on any
freeway or any portion thereof when official signs are posted prohibiting such
operation.
(Sec. 15-24.15, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.15)
§ 15-24.16 Restriction of motorized vehicles on pedestrian overpass or
underpass.
   No person shall operate a motor scooter, motorcycle, or any motorized
vehicle upon any portion of a pedestrian overpass or underpass.
(Sec. 15-24.16, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.16)
§ 15-24.17 Miscellaneous traffic controls.
   Miscellaneous traffic controls are established and described in Schedule
XXXVIII attached to the ordinance codified in this section and made a part
hereof.* All traffic controls not covered elsewhere shall be listed under this
section.
(Sec. 15-24.17, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.17)
Editor’s note:
   * See listing of schedules at the end of this chapter.
§ 15-24.18 Anti-speed bumps.
   The council finds that there may be a need for the installation of anti-
speed bumps on streets located within the city and, therefore, authorizes the
use thereof by the department of transportation services; provided that the
location and installation of any anti-speed bumps on a particular street or
streets within the city shall be left to the determination of the department of
transportation services as prescribed in Charter § 6-1703(b). The determination
of the location and installation of any anti-speed bumps shall be made after
all of the following conditions have been considered:
(1)   The population count, especially the population of children, indicating
the need for anti-speed bumps to safeguard the lives of the people residing
within the immediate vicinity of the street upon which anti-speed bumps are to
be located and installed;
(2)   Whether there is sufficient motor vehicular traffic based on the traffic
count as against the population density to warrant the location of anti-speed
bumps on a particular street;
(3)   Where the width, configuration, and layout of the street would make the
location and installation of anti-speed bumps effective;
(4)   That the speed limit and the location and installation of anti-speed
bumps will be compatible;
(5)   That the location and installation of anti-speed bumps will not create a
dangerous or hazardous situation to the residents of the streets on which anti-
speed bumps are located; and
(6)   No anti-speed bumps shall be located on streets where there are other or
better protective devices that can be used to safeguard the lives of the
residents living on or in the vicinity of the streets on which the location and
installation of anti-speed bumps are proposed.
(Sec. 15-24.18, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.18)
(Am. Ord. 96-58)
§ 15-24.19 Slow-moving vehicles—requirement of emblems.
(a)   All farm machinery and other machinery, including all road construction
machinery except when guarded by flaggers or flares, designed to operate at 25
miles per hour or less, hereinafter referred to as “slow-moving vehicles,”
traveling on a public highway where permitted by law during day or night, shall
display a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem on the rear of the vehicle.
Registered or legal owners of such vehicles shall use emblems, as developed by
the American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers and printed in
ASABE Standard ASABE S 276.8, for the purpose of identifying slow-moving
vehicles. The emblem shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, base down,
and at a height of not less than 3 nor more than 5 feet from ground to base.
(b)   The display or use of such emblem as required by this section shall be in
addition to any lighting devices required by law.
(c)   The display or use of this emblem shall be restricted to the display or
use specified by this section and its display or use by any other type of
vehicle, or as a clearance marker on wide machinery or any stationary objects
on the highway is prohibited.
(d)   The slow-moving vehicles are not permitted to use public highways, unless
otherwise permitted by law, from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m. on weekdays from Monday through Friday, except on holidays,
notwithstanding §
15-2.17.
(e)   Slow-moving vehicles operated on any roadway open to public travel shall
be driven in the right-hand lane, or as close as practicable to the right-hand
curb or edge of the roadway, except for a distance not to exceed 1,000 feet
when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway.
(Sec. 15-24.19, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.19)
§ 15-24.20 Parades, street festivals, and other activities.
(a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Agency. Any federal, State, or city agency that reviews a street activity
permit application upon the request of the director, to assist the director in
determining whether to issue the permit.
Applicant. The applicant for a street activity permit.
Chief of Police. The chief of police of the city, or the chief’s authorized
subordinate.
Department. The department of transportation services.
Director. The director of transportation services, or the director’s authorized
subordinate.
First Amendment Street Activity. Street activity that involves speech or
conduct, the principal object of which is the expression, dissemination, or
communication by verbal, visual, literary, or auditory means of political,
religious, philosophical, or ideological opinions, views, or ideas that are
protected under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution, for
which no fee is charged or required to participate in or attend the street
activity. First Amendment street activity generally would not include sports
events such as marathons, fundraising events, beauty contests, commercial
events, cultural celebrations, or other events the principal purpose of which
is entertainment.
Force Majeure Event. A natural or man-made event that is not able to be
reasonably foreseen and is completely beyond the control of the parties
involved, including natural disasters (fire, storms, floods), governmental or
societal actions (war, invasion, civil unrest, labor strikes), and
infrastructure failures (transportation, energy).
Parade. Has the same meaning as defined in § 15-2.15.
Public Safety. The safety or protection of any motorists, pedestrians,
occupants or riders of vehicles, participants, spectators, and police officers
assigned to a street activity, or the protection of any real or personal
property.
Street. Has the same meaning as defined in § 15-2.23, and also includes malls,
as defined in § 13-1.1, for which the department has authority regarding
permitted usage.
Street Activity. The occupation, use, or participation in any parade, street
festival, or other activity that requires the exclusive use of a street or any
portion thereof.
Street Block. Has the same meaning as defined in § 15-2.23.
Street Festival. The occupation, use, or participation in a gathering featuring
one or more of the following: festive activities, cultural events,
entertainment, and food or merchandise vendors, which generally remains at a
stationary location for the duration of the gathering, requires the exclusive
use of a street or any portion thereof, and is open to the public without
charge for entry or participation.
Waikiki Legacy Street Activity. Any street activity that has been held in the
Waikiki special district annually for at least 15 consecutive calendar years.
To maintain legacy status, the street activity must be held every calendar year
after attaining legacy status; provided that this requirement may be waived by
the director, at the director’s discretion, when a force majeure event does not
allow for the holding of a safe and appropriate street activity. Failure to
hold the street activity in every calendar year after attaining legacy status
will result in the loss of legacy status.
Waikiki Special District. The district described in § 21-9.80-2, including any
precinct thereof established pursuant to § 21-3.20.
(b)   Special activity permit required. Except for funeral processions,
parades, marches, or other processions by members of the United States Armed
Forces, State of Hawaii Armed Forces, and city police and fire departments, a
person may not conduct a street activity on streets or highways without first
obtaining a permit from the director pursuant to this section.
(c)   Application. An applicant desiring a street activity permit shall file
with the department a permit application on a form prescribed by the director.
Information to be submitted on the application form must at a minimum include:
(1)   The type of street activity, and the date the street activity will be
held;
(2)   The starting time and estimated duration of the street activity;
(3)   The route or location of the street activity;
(4)   Whether the street activity is a First Amendment street activity; and
(5)   For a street activity that is not a First Amendment street activity, the
public purpose to be served by the street activity.
(d)   Requirements prior to the issuance of a street activity permit.
(1)   Public purpose. All street activities must serve a public purpose. The
director shall determine whether the street activity serves a public purpose.
(A)   For purposes of this section, a First Amendment street activity is deemed
to serve a public purpose.
(B)   The director may determine that a non-First Amendment street activity
serves a public purpose so long as any private benefit arising out of the
street activity is incidental to the public benefit to the community as a whole
arising out of the street activity.
(2)   First Amendment street activities.
(A)   Upon receipt of an application for a First Amendment street activity, no
later than five working days prior to the date of the event, the director shall
transmit a copy of the application to the corporation counsel for a
determination on whether the proposed street activity constitutes a First
Amendment street activity.
(B)   The director shall make the determination to grant or deny the First
Amendment street activity application and shall notify the applicant of the
director’s decision.
(C)   The application may be denied if the applicant does not provide adequate
information to determine whether the street activity is a First Amendment
street activity.
(D)   If the application for a First Amendment street activity is not denied
within three working days after the date the application is submitted, the
application will be deemed granted and a permit will be issued.
(E)   An application for a First Amendment street activity:
(i)   Filed less than five working days prior to the date of the street
activity; or
(ii)   That conflicts with a permit application that has already been received
or a permit that has already been issued by the department;
or both, will be deemed denied.
(3)   Non-First Amendment street activities. Applications for street activities
that are not First Amendment street activities are subject to the following
requirements.
(A)   Street activities outside of the Waikiki special district. An application
for a street activity outside of the Waikiki special district must be filed
with the department in accordance with deadlines and other requirements set by
the director.
(B)   Street activities in the Waikiki special district.
(i)   Street activity permit applications. An application for a street activity
in the Waikiki special district must be filed with the department in accordance
with deadlines and other requirements set by the director.
(ii)   Maximum number of street activity permits issued. Except for Waikiki
legacy street activities, the director may approve a maximum of nine permits
per calendar year for a street activity that:
(aa)   Has a route or location through any portion of the Waikiki special
district;
(bb)   Would result in the closure of any portion of a street within the
Waikiki special district; and
(cc)   Has an estimated duration of two or more hours;
(iii)   Waikiki street festivals. For street festivals in the Waikiki special
district, including Waikiki legacy street festivals, the director may approve a
maximum of two permits per triannual period (four-month period) of the calendar
year, based on the date the street festival will be held.
(iv)   Waikiki legacy street activities. Waikiki legacy street activities will
receive a permit if all permit requirements are satisfied. It is the
responsibility of the applicant for a Waikiki legacy street activity permit to
demonstrate that the street activity qualifies as a Waikiki legacy street
activity.
(v)   Restrictions on dates street activities may be held.
(aa)   No street activity permits for non-First Amendment street activities in
the Waikiki special district may be issued for days on which a general election
is held; and
(bb)   The director may, by rule adopted pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, designate
up to a maximum of 10 dates during the calendar year (other than general
election day) as unavailable for non-First Amendment street activities in the
Waikiki special district, if the director finds that those dates historically
have experienced high traffic volumes in Waikiki.
(C)   Review of a street activity permit application by the chief of police.
Upon the filing of an application for a non-First Amendment street activity,
the director shall transmit a copy of the application for review to the chief
of police, and at the director’s discretion, to any other agency if that
agency’s review is desirable or necessary. The chief of police and any agency
to which an application has been transmitted shall transmit a response to the
director with any comments and recommendations within five working days after
receipt of the copy of the application.
(4)   The director may impose conditions on the issuance of a street activity
permit that are reasonable and necessary to address public safety, minimize
traffic congestion or hazards, and allow for the passage of authorized
emergency vehicles. Any street activity permit conditions imposed by the
director must be included in the street activity permit and must not unduly
restrict the ability of a street activity participant to engage in First
Amendment street activity. The applicant shall comply with all conditions
imposed by the director.
(5)   The applicant shall secure appropriate medical services for the street
activity.
(6)   For street activities serving alcoholic beverages, the applicant shall
obtain an appropriate liquor license from the Honolulu liquor commission.
(e)   Requirements after the issuance of a street activity permit.
(1)   Compliance with applicable rules. Any street activity for which a permit
has been issued must comply with all rules adopted pursuant to HRS Chapter 91
that apply to street activities.
(2)   Requirements after the conclusion of a street activity.
(A)   Within 30 days after the conclusion of a street activity, other than a
First Amendment street activity or a Waikiki legacy street activity:
(i)   The applicant shall file documentation with the director evidencing
compliance with the public purpose requirement set forth in subsection (d)(1);
and
(ii)   If the director, upon review of the post street activity documentation,
determines that the street activity failed to comply with the public purpose
requirement set forth in subsection (d)(1), during the immediately following
calendar year, the applicant that obtained the permit will be ineligible to
receive a permit for a street activity, other than a permit for a First
Amendment street activity.
(B)   Within 60 days after the conclusion of a street activity, other than a
First Amendment street activity or a Waikiki legacy street activity, the
director shall post on the department’s website the report received pursuant to
this subdivision with the director's determination that:
(i)   The activity complied with the public purpose requirement set forth in
subsection (d)(1), stating the public purpose fulfilled by the activity; or
(ii)   The activity failed to comply with the public purpose requirement,
stating the reasons why the activity did not fulfill the public purpose
requirement.
(f)   Denial, revocation, or termination of a street activity permit.
(1)   Denial of a street activity permit.
(A)   The director may deny any street activity permit application if the
street activity does not conform to this chapter, the Statewide Traffic Code
and other State laws, the rules adopted by the State director of transportation
or the director pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, any requirements of this section,
or any street activity permit conditions imposed by the director under
subsection (d)(4).
(B)   Prior to the denial of an application for a street activity permit, the
director may, at the director’s discretion, hold a hearing pursuant to rules
adopted by the director for conducting the hearing. An applicant for a street
activity permit whose application has been denied may pursue any remedy
provided by law.
(C)   An applicant for a street activity in the Waikiki special district that
is denied a street activity permit solely due to the limitation on the number
of street activity permits for the Waikiki special district pursuant to
subsection (d)(3)(B) may apply for a waiver as follows:
(i)   A minimum of 60 calendar days prior to the date of the street activity,
the applicant shall file with the mayor’s office a waiver application, on a
form prescribed by the director, and attach a copy of the street activity
permit application.
(ii)   Except for the limitation on the maximum number of permits per calendar
year for Waikiki street activities, the street activity must satisfy all street
activity permit requirements.
(iii)   The mayor may grant a waiver if the mayor, at the mayor’s discretion,
determines that the proposed street activity meets any one or more of the
following criteria:
(aa)   The street activity would be of economic benefit to the city,
considering:
(AA)   The revenue expected to be generated for businesses in the city;
(BB)   The public facilities to be used by organizers and participants in the
street activity;
(CC)   The number of visitors the street activity is expected to bring to the
city;
(DD)   Whether the event would generate media exposure for the city that could
result in further economic benefits; and
(EE)   Any other factors or information that the mayor may reasonably determine
to be relevant;
(bb)   The street activity would be culturally or historically significant;
(cc)   The street activity would recognize an outstanding achievement or
significant accomplishment; or
(dd)   The street activity would:
(AA)   Foster community spirit, pride, identity, or well-being;
(BB)   Benefit community organizations or causes; or
(CC)   Result in an identifiable community benefit.
The applicant shall identify the criteria that apply to its street activity,
and explain how the street activity meets the identified criteria.
(iv)   Maximum number of waivers granted. The mayor may grant a maximum of four
waivers for street activities in the Waikiki special district per calendar
year; provided that the mayor may grant only one waiver per quarterly period
(three-month period) of the calendar year, based on the date the street
activity will be held provided that the actual number of waivers for street
activities in the Waikiki special district may vary as follows:
(aa)   For every Waikiki legacy street activity that obtains legacy status
after the effective date of this ordinance, the number of available waivers
during the calendar year will decrease by one;
(bb)   For every Waikiki legacy street activity that loses legacy status after
March 11, 2025, the number of available waivers during the calendar year will
increase by one; provided that the total number of waivers per calendar year
may not exceed four; and
(cc)   At such time that the number of waivers available during the calendar
year is exhausted by the addition of Waikiki legacy street activities that
obtain legacy status after March 11, 2025, no waivers may be granted by the
mayor, unless and until waivers become available due to the subsequent loss of
legacy status by a Waikiki legacy street activity.
(2)   Revocation of a street activity permit.
(A)   The director or the chief of police may revoke any street activity permit
if the director or the chief of police finds that prior to the actual
commencement of the street activity, any prerequisite condition imposed by the
director in the street activity permit has not been satisfied.
(B)   A permittee whose street activity permit has been revoked may pursue any
remedy provided by law.
(3)   Termination of a street activity permit.
(A)   The director or the chief of police may terminate any street activity
that is in progress if the director or the chief of police finds that public
safety is endangered, or any condition imposed by the director in the street
activity permit and required to be observed during the street activity has been
breached or disobeyed.
(B)   A permittee whose street activity permit has been terminated may pursue
any remedy provided by law.
(g)   The director shall:
(1)   Adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 to administer and implement this
section;
(2)   Conduct hearings as authorized in subsection (f)(1)(B); and
(3)   Include a list of Waikiki legacy street activities on the department’s
website.
(h)   Penalties.
(1)   Definition of “violation.” Violation, as used in this subsection, means
an instance in which any person:
(A)   Fails to obtain a required permit for a street activity on a public
street or any portion thereof;
(B)   Authorizes, urges, or solicits any person to participate in a street
activity without a required permit;
(C)   Participates in a street activity on a public street or any portion
thereof, for which a street activity permit has not been issued or the
applicable street activity permit has been denied or revoked; or
(D)   Fails to obey any lawful directive, order, or command of a police officer
when the police officer believes that public safety is in peril.
(2)   Criminal sanctions. Any person who is convicted of committing a
violation, as defined in this subsection, shall be subject to a fine of up to
$200 for each violation, imprisonment for up to 30 calendar days, or both.
(Sec. 15-24.20, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.20)
(Am. Ords. 06-39, 15-44, 19-9, 25-10)
Editor’s note:
   “March 11, 2025” is substituted for “the effective date of this ordinance.”
Amendments made to §§ 15-2.15 and 15-24.20 in Ord. 25-10 apply to permits
issued for 2026 and thereafter.
§ 15-24.21 Permits for special transit service vehicles.
(a)   The department of budget and fiscal services shall establish a permit
program to identify special transit service vehicles, other than those operated
by a special transit service under
Chapter 15B, Article 4, which may benefit from the stopping, standing, or
parking privileges under this chapter. Under the program, the department shall
issue a permit for a vehicle eligible under subsection (d) upon:
(1)   Application by the registered owner of the vehicle or, if the registered
owner is a partnership or corporation, by a partner or officer or employee
authorized by the partnership or corporation; and
(2)   If imposed by the department, payment of a fee.
A permit, which is granted upon approval of the application and, if required,
payment of a fee, shall expire on December 31 of the year in which issued.
(b)   A permit may be renewed upon:
(1)   Application before December 1 of the year in which the permit is to
expire; provided that the department may renew a permit after December 1, but
before December 31. The application shall be made by any person allowed to make
the application for an original permit; and
(2)   If imposed by the department, payment of a fee.
If renewed, the permit is renewed on the January 1 immediately following the
date of the application for renewal and shall expire on December 31 immediately
following that January 1. There shall be no limit on the number of times a
permit may be renewed; provided that the department shall have the right to
deny renewal if the renewal would be contrary to this section.
If a permit is not renewed before expiration, the permit expires on that
expiration date. Nothing in this section shall prevent a person from applying
for another permit for a vehicle in accordance with subsection (a) after the
expiration of a permit for that vehicle.
(c)   A decal shall be issued with each permit, and if the department chooses
to do so, a decal shall be issued with each renewal of a permit. To be
identified as a special transit service vehicle under §
15-2.11, a vehicle shall have a valid decal on its front right bumper or, if
determined more appropriate by the department, elsewhere on its exterior. The
decal shall be placed on the vehicle for which the permit is issued, and no
other.
The department may:
(1)   Change the form, substance, or color of the decal from year to year to
make easier the identification of the decal that is valid in a given year; and
(2)   Require a permit holder to return a decal, the validity of which has
expired, to the department.
(d)   To be eligible for a permit under this section, a vehicle shall be:
(1)   Under the registered ownership of a:
(A)   Proprietorship, partnership, or for-profit corporation, the primary
business activity of which is the transportation of mobility-handicapped
passengers upon demand or arrangement; or
(B)   Nonprofit corporation that provides the service of transporting mobility-
handicapped passengers upon demand or arrangement.
The department may require the proprietorship, partnership, or for-profit
corporation to submit satisfactory evidence of compliance with this paragraph;
and
(2)   If the registered owner is a:
(A)   Proprietorship, partnership, or for-profit corporation, clearly marked
with a business identification sign lawful under
Chapter 41, Article 29; or
(B)   Nonprofit corporation, clearly marked by a sign, graphics, or lettering
relating to the corporation’s name or service performed.
(e)   When a decal is mutilated, defaced, or lost, the department may issue a
replacement decal, upon request of the permit holder.
(f)   If deemed desirable or necessary, the department may establish and impose
a fee for the:
(1)   Issuance of an original permit;
(2)   Renewal of a permit;
(3)   Issuance of a decal, when issued with an original or renewed permit; or
(4)   Replacement of a mutilated, defaced, or lost decal.
If any fee is established, the amount shall be established by rule.
(g)   The department may revoke a permit:
(1)   When a permit or accompanying decal has been used in violation of this
chapter; or
(2)   When a vehicle for which a permit is issued has violated the stopping,
standing, or parking privileges provided under this chapter for special transit
service vehicles.
(h)   The following persons shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $250:
(1)   Any person who falsifies an application for an original permit or renewal
of a permit;
(2)   Any person who places a decal on a vehicle, other than the vehicle for
which the permit and decal are issued;
(3)   Any person who retains on a vehicle a decal after the permit with which
the decal was issued expires or is revoked;
(4)   Any person who uses a facsimile of a decal; and
(5)   Any person who uses a permit or decal issued under this section in a
manner contrary to this section.
The penalties provided under this subsection shall be in addition to any
penalty provided elsewhere in this chapter.
(i)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as:
(1)   Requiring a special transit service vehicle operating under authority of
Chapter 15B, Article 4 to acquire permits or decals under this section for its
vehicles;
(2)   Requiring a vehicle of a special transit service operating under
authority of
Chapter 15B, Article 4 to have a decal to benefit from the stopping, standing,
or parking privileges provided under this chapter for special transit service
vehicles; or
(3)   Prohibiting a vehicle with a decal issued under §§
15-29.2 and
15-24.11 when transporting a disabled person with a disabled parking
identification card and a disabled parking placard issued under §
15-24.10. When utilizing the parking or standing privileges under §§
15-29.2 and
15-24.11, the vehicle shall be subject to those sections.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.21) (Added by Ord. 89-58; Am. Ord. 96-58)
§ 15-24.22 Carrying animal in vehicle.
(a)   For the purposes of this section, the term “vehicle” includes a “trailer”
and “semitrailer” as those terms are defined in §
15-2.28; “cattle” includes any of the bovine animals, including those bred for
beef, and cows, bulls, steers, and oxen; and “horse” includes any of the equine
animals, including any pony, mule, or donkey.
(b)   Except as provided in subsection (c), no dog or any other animal shall be
transported on any public street or highway in any vehicle unless such animal
is totally enclosed within such vehicle, within a secured container carried
upon such vehicle, or securely cross-tethered to such vehicle in such a way as
to prevent the animal from falling out of or off such vehicle, and to prevent
injury to the animal.
(c)   Horses or cattle that are transported on any public street or highway
shall be carried within enclosed vehicles. A vehicle is enclosed, even if it
provides openings for ventilation, so long as the horses or cattle cannot fall
or jump off of or out of the vehicle through any of its openings.
(d)   If a conflict arises between this section and rules adopted by the State
department of agriculture or the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service of
the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the rules of the State department of
agriculture or the U.S. Department of Agriculture shall control.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.22) (Added by Ord. 89-130; Am. Ord. 03-41)
§ 15-24.23 Mobile electronic devices.
(a)   No pedestrian shall cross a street or highway while viewing a mobile
electronic device.
(b)   It is an affirmative defense to any citation for a violation of
subsection (a) that the cited person was engaged in making a “911” emergency
communication with a mobile electronic device.
(c)   Emergency responders viewing a mobile electronic device while in the
performance and scope of their official duties are exempt from subsection (a).
(d)   Any person violating this section will be subject to the following fines:
(1)   For a first violation: a fine of not less than $15, but not more than
$35;
(2)   For a second violation committed within one year after the date of the
first violation: a fine of not less than $35, but not more than $75; and
(3)   For a third or subsequent violation that is within one year after the
date of the first violation: A fine of not less than $75, but not more than
$99.
(e)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Emergency Responders. Includes firefighters, emergency medical technicians,
mobile intensive care technicians, emergency management workers, police
officers, and federal and State law enforcement officers.
Mobile Electronic Device. Any handheld or other portable electronic equipment
capable of providing wireless or data communication, or both, between two or
more persons or of providing amusement, including but not limited to a cellular
phone, text messaging device, paging device, personal digital assistant, laptop
computer, video game, or digital photographic device, but does not include any
audio equipment.
Viewing. Looking in the direction of the screen of a mobile electronic device.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.23) (Added by Ord. 09-6; Am. Ord. 17-39)
§ 15-24.24 Wheelies prohibited.
(a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Electric Bicycle. A bicycle equipped with a motor.
Moped. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 291C-1.
Motorcycle. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 291C-1.
Wheelie. A stunt performed by a person while riding on an electric bicycle,
moped, or motorcycle in which the front wheel is raised so that the vehicle is
balanced for a moment or longer on its rear wheel or wheels.
(b)   Prohibition. A person may not perform a wheelie on any public street or
roadway; provided that this subsection does not apply to a person performing a
wheelie as part of a parade, tournament, or other activity permitted by the
city.
(Added by Ord. 25-13)
ARTICLE 25: PEDESTRIAN MALLS
Sections
   
15-25.1   Establishment of pedestrian malls
   
15-25.2   Violation of pedestrian mall provisions
§ 15-25.1 Establishment of pedestrian malls.
(a)   That portion of Union Street extending from Bishop to Hotel Streets in
downtown Honolulu is closed to vehicular traffic and is established as a
pedestrian mall.
(1)   Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful for any person to park, or
cause to be parked, or to operate or propel, or cause to be operated or
propelled, any vehicle (as defined in this traffic code) upon the mall
hereinabove established:
(A)   Any person legally entitled as owner, lessee, invitee, or licensee to
operate or propel a vehicle in the alley situated on the mauka end of the mall
within the easement between the lots bearing the tax map designation 2-1-10-15
and 2-1-10-42 shall be permitted to operate or propel such vehicle, for
purposes of ingress and egress, over the portion of the mauka end of the mall
between the alley and Bishop Street, the width of which shall be parallel lines
connecting the alley to Bishop Street; provided that entry and exit to and from
the alley shall be from and to Bishop Street only;
(B)   It is lawful to operate or propel a vehicle, for purposes of ingress and
egress, over the portion of the mauka end of the mall between the lot bearing
the tax map designation 2-1-10-15 and Bishop Street. The director of
transportation services shall designate the width of the passageway. In
determining the width of the passageway, the director of transportation
services shall take into consideration pedestrian safety and adequate ingress
and egress for the highrise office/retail complex using lot 2-1-10-15. Entry
and exit to and from the lot bearing the tax map designation 2-1-10-15 shall be
from and to Bishop Street only; and
(C)   The speed limit upon the mall shall not exceed 5 miles per hour.
(b)   That portion of Fort Street extending from the makai side of Beretania
Street to the mauka side of Queen Street is closed to vehicular traffic and is
established as a pedestrian mall.
(1)   Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful for any person to park, or
cause to be parked, or to operate or propel, or cause to be operated or
propelled, any vehicle (as defined in the traffic code) upon the mall
hereinabove established; provided that vehicular traffic on Hotel, King, and
Merchant Streets crossing the intersections at Hotel and Fort, King and Fort,
and Merchant and Fort, respectively, shall be exempted from this section.
(2)   Notwithstanding the prohibitions contained in subdivision (1), vehicles
may be allowed on the mall as specified herein.
(A)   Passenger vehicles may be operated on the mall between Beretania and
Pauahi Streets at all times for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers
for Blaisdell Hotel and the Catholic church; and in addition thereto, vehicles
may, under police control, park in the area designated for parking during
weddings or funeral services, and other special events held at the Catholic
church.
(B)   Passenger vehicles may be operated on the mall between Merchant Street
and the C. Brewer driveway for the purpose of exiting from the C. Brewer
parking lot.
(C)   Passenger vehicles loading or unloading passengers at Blaisdell Hotel and
the Catholic church shall load or unload passengers only within the area
designated for such purposes for the respective establishments.
(D)   Any vehicle used by, or serving business firms between any one or more of
the following: Bethel Street and Fort Street via Chaplain Lane or the two
service alleys situated between Bethel Street and Fort Street may at any time,
enter the mall from Chaplain Lane, and shall exit on Pauahi Street; and
further, any vehicle used by or serving C. Brewer & Co. may at any time, enter
the mall through the existing C. Brewer driveway.
(E)   It is lawful during the period from 2:00 p.m. to 10:00 a.m. of the
following day, and all day on Sundays, to operate or propel a vehicle upon the
mall for the purpose of delivering property to or receiving the same from a
store, shop, office, or other establishment in or upon any premises abutting
the mall or for the purpose of cleaning or maintaining the mall, except for
that portion of the mall between Merchant Street and Queen Street, where it is
lawful to operate or propel a vehicle at any time only for purposes of cleaning
or maintaining the mall, providing emergency services or exiting and entering
the C. Brewer driveway. A vehicle for cleaning or maintaining the mall may be
lawfully operated on the mall pursuant to this paragraph only if it is an
“authorized maintenance vehicle.”
(F)   Vehicular traffic allowed under this subsection shall travel only upon
the area delineated for travel and shall move only in the makai direction,
except upon portions between King Street and Merchant Street, where traffic may
move in either direction and between Merchant Street and the C. Brewer
driveway, where traffic shall move only in the mauka direction; and except
further that the direction of bicycle travel shall be subject to paragraph (H).
No vehicle shall park at any time for any purpose upon the area clearly
delineated for travel.
(G)   Passenger vehicles loading or unloading passengers at Blaisdell Hotel and
the Catholic church may park for such purpose for a period not exceeding three
minutes; and vehicles loading or unloading freight under subsection (b)(2)(E)
may park for a period not exceeding 30 minutes.
(H)   Bicycles shall be permitted on the mall, provided that unless otherwise
provided under this paragraph:
(i)   The operators of such bicycles shall be dismounted, but may travel in any
direction of the mall; and
(ii)   The bicycles shall be parked only in bicycle racks that the city shall
provide on the mall for that purpose.
   Information and safety officers of the Fort Street Mall business improvement
district association or its contractor may ride bicycles upon the mall while in
the performance of their duties.
   This paragraph shall control over any conflicting provision that may arise
should the Fort Street Mall be designated as any type of bikeway.
(I)   Pedestrians shall at all times have the right-of-way upon the mall.
(J)   The speed limit upon the mall shall not exceed 5 miles per hour.
(K)   Mopeds shall be permitted on the mall, provided that:
(i)   The moped is not operated on the mall but escorted by the dismounted
moped operator, and may be escorted in any direction on the mall; and
(ii)   The moped shall only be parked in bicycle racks designated for moped
parking by signage of the city.
(c)   That portion of College Walk extending from the mauka side of Beretania
Street to the makai side of Vineyard Boulevard, and that portion of River
Street extending from the mauka side of Beretania Street to the makai side of
Kukui Street are closed to vehicular traffic and are established as pedestrian
malls.
(1)   Right-of-way. Pedestrians shall at all times have the right-of-way upon
the malls.
(2)   Parking restrictions. Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful for
any person to park, or cause to be parked, or to operate or propel, or cause to
be operated or propelled, any vehicle (as defined in the traffic code) upon the
malls hereinabove established; provided that vehicular traffic on Kukui Street
crossing the intersection of Kukui Street and College Walk shall be exempted
from this section.
(3)   Maintenance thereof. Notwithstanding the prohibitions contained in
subsection (c)(2), vehicles may be allowed on the malls as specified herein.
(A)   It is lawful to park, operate, or propel a vehicle upon the malls for the
purpose of cleaning or otherwise maintaining the malls.
(B)   Vehicular traffic allowed under this section shall travel only upon the
area delineated for travel. No vehicle shall park at any time for any purpose
upon the area clearly delineated for travel, except for the purpose of cleaning
or otherwise maintaining the malls.
(4)   Vehicular speed limit. No person shall operate or propel, or cause to be
operated or propelled, any vehicle at any time upon the malls at a speed in
excess of 5 miles per hour.
(5)   Exempt vehicles. The prohibition against parking or operating a vehicle
upon the malls shall not apply to the driver of any authorized emergency
vehicle (as defined in the traffic code) responding to an emergency occurring
on the mall area; provided that such exemption shall not relieve the driver of
operating the vehicle with due regard for the safety of others.
(Sec. 15-25.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 25, § 15-25.1)
(Am. Ords. 88-95, 89-8, 89-65, 89-106, 96-58, 02-50, 12-27, 13-30)
§ 15-25.2 Violation of pedestrian mall provisions.
   The police department is authorized to remove or cause to be removed at the
owner’s expense any vehicle in violation of this article.
(Sec. 15-25.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 25, § 15-25.2)
ARTICLE 26: PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE ON ARREST
Sections
   
15-26.1   Procedure upon arrest
   
15-26.2   Summons or citation
   
15-26.3   Failure to obey summons or respond to administrative
citation—Contesting an administrative citation
   
15-26.4   Summons or citation for illegally parked, standing or stopped vehicle
   
15-26.5   When penal summons or complaint to be issued
   
15-26.6   Offenses under former ordinances saved
   
15-26.7   Interpretation
   
15-26.8   Severability
   
15-26.9   Unspecified penalty and administrative fines
   
15-26.10   Illegal parking, standing or stopping—Minimum fine
   
15-26.11   Revocation or suspension of license
   
15-26.12   Disposition of fines and forfeitures
§ 15-26.1 Procedure upon arrest.
(a)   Except as provided in §
15-24.2 or when authorized or directed under State law to immediately take a
person arrested for a violation of any of the traffic laws before a magistrate,
any authorized police officer, upon making an arrest for violation of the State
traffic laws or traffic code and ordinances of the city, shall take the name,
address, and driver’s license number of the alleged violator and license plate
number or vehicle identification number of the vehicle involved, and shall
issue to such person in writing a summons or citation, hereinafter described,
notifying the person to answer to the complaint to be entered against the
person at a place and at a time provided in the summons or citation.
(b)   In lieu of issuing the summons or citation referred to in subsection (a),
an authorized police officer, in accordance with rules adopted by the Honolulu
police department, shall offer to issue an administrative citation under this
subsection. If issuing an administrative citation, the officer shall take the
name, address, and driver’s license number of the alleged violator and license
plate number or vehicle identification number of the vehicle involved, and
shall issue the administrative citation. At any time before payment of an
administrative fine as set forth in §
15-26.9(c), an alleged violator may request a citation be issued under
subsection (a) instead.
(Sec. 15-26.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.1)
(Am. Ords. 90-77, 01-17, 04-13)
§ 15-26.2 Summons or citation.
(a)   There shall be provided for use by authorized police officers a form of
summons or citation for use in citing violators of those traffic laws that do
not mandate the physical arrest of such violators. The form and content of such
summons or citation shall be as adopted or prescribed by the administrative
judge of the district courts and shall be printed on a form commensurate with
the form of other summonses or citations used in modern methods of arrest, so
designed as to include all necessary information to make the same valid within
the laws and regulations of the State of Hawaii and the City and County of
Honolulu.
(b)   In every case when a citation is issued, the original of the same shall
be given to the violator or, in the case of an unattended vehicle, the original
of the same shall be affixed to such vehicle as provided for in §
15-26.4; provided that the administrative judge of the district courts may
prescribe the giving to the violator, or affixing to such vehicle, a carbon
copy of the citation, and provide for the disposition of the original and any
other copies.
(c)   Every citation shall be consecutively numbered and each carbon copy shall
bear the number of its respective original.
(d)   There shall be provided for use by authorized police officers a form for
administrative citations. The form and content of such citation shall be as
prescribed by the corporation counsel and shall be printed on a form
commensurate with the form of other citations used in modern methods of arrest,
so designed as to include all necessary information to make the same valid
within the laws and regulations of the State of Hawaii and the City and County
of Honolulu.
(Sec. 15-26.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.2)
(Am. Ord. 04-13)
§ 15-26.3 Failure to obey summons or respond to administrative
citation—Contesting an administrative citation.
(a)   Any person who fails to appear at the place and within the time specified
in the summons or citation addressed to the person by an officer upon the
person’s arrest for any violation of this traffic code for which a criminal
penalty is provided is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of
the charge on which the person was originally arrested.
(b)   Any person who seeks to contest an administrative citation, or fails to
remit payment of an administrative fine within 10 days of receiving an
administrative citation, has opted not to receive an administrative citation,
and shall be issued a summons or citation pursuant to §
15-26.1(a).
(Sec. 15-26.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.3)
(Am. Ords. 90-77, 95-15, 04-13)
§ 15-26.4 Summons or citation for illegally parked, standing or stopped
vehicle.
(a)   Whenever any vehicle is parked, standing, or stopped in violation of any
of the restrictions contained in this traffic code, the officer finding the
vehicle shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle an administrative citation.
The citation shall be addressed to the registered owner of the vehicle, but
need not identify the registered owner by name. The registered owner may be
unnamed, so long as the citation identifies the vehicle by its license plate
number or vehicle identification number. The citation shall notify the
registered owner that if they wish to contest the administrative citation, or
do not remit payment of the administrative fine within 10 days of issuance of
the administrative citation, they shall be issued a nonadministrative summons
or citation. The nonadministrative summons or citation shall notify the
registered owner to answer the complaint to be entered against the registered
owner at the location and time specified in the summons or citation.
(b)   The registered owner of a vehicle shall be responsible and accountable
for the illegal parking, standing, or stopping of the vehicle when:
(1)   The registered owner committed the illegal parking, standing, or stopping
of the vehicle; or
(2)   Another person committed the illegal parking, standing, or stopping of
the vehicle, but the registered owner gave the person explicit or implicit
permission to use the vehicle at the time of the violation.
(c)   In any proceeding for violation of a parking, standing, or stopping
provision of the traffic code, the license plate number or vehicle
identification number of the parked, standing, or stopped vehicle shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the registered owner was responsible and
accountable for the illegal parking, standing, or stopping of the vehicle.
(Sec. 15-26.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.4)
(Am. Ords. 90-77, 04-13)
§ 15-26.5 When penal summons or complaint to be issued.
   If any person fails to comply with a summons or citation addressed to such
person or fails or refuses to deposit bail as required and within the time
permitted by the district court, the traffic violations bureau shall issue a
penal summons ordering the person’s appearance in the district court or have a
complaint entered against such person and secure the issuance of a warrant for
the person’s arrest.
(Sec. 15-26.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.5)
(Am. Ord. 90-77)
§ 15-26.6 Offenses under former ordinances saved.
   Nothing contained in any provision of this traffic code shall apply to an
act done or omitted, or to an offense committed, at any time before the day
that this traffic code became effective. Such act or omission shall be governed
by, and any such offense shall be punished according to the provisions of, the
ordinances existing when such act, omission or offense occurred, in the same
manner as if this traffic code had not been enacted.
(Sec. 15-26.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.6)
§ 15-26.7 Interpretation.
   Wherever consistent with the context of this traffic code, words in the
present, past, or future shall be construed to be interchangeable with and to
include such respective other genders; and words in the singular number shall
be construed to include the plural; and in the plural to include the singular,
and each shall be construed to be interchangeable with the other.
(Sec. 15-26.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.7)
§ 15-26.8 Severability.
   If any provision of this traffic code is held for any reason invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the remaining provisions of this traffic code.
(Sec. 15-26.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.8)
§ 15-26.9 Unspecified penalty and administrative fines.
(a)   Except as otherwise provided in this traffic code, it is a violation for
any person to violate this traffic code, unless the violation is by other law
of this State declared to be a felony.
(b)   Every person who violates this traffic code where another penalty is not
provided shall, for a first offense thereof, be fined not less than $15, but
not more than $100; for a second offense committed within one year after the
date of the first offense, the person shall be fined not less than $15, but not
more than $200; and for a third or subsequent offense committed within one year
after the date of the first offense, the person shall be fined not less than
$15, but not more than $500.
(c)   The amount of the administrative fine shall be $10 less than the fine
that would be indicated on a citation for a violation of the same provision. If
the administrative fine is paid, the alleged violator has not committed a
violation of that provision.
(Sec. 15-26.10, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.9)
(Am. Ords. 90-77, 95-15, 04-13)
§ 15-26.10 Illegal parking, standing or stopping—Minimum fine.
(a)   The registered owner of a vehicle that violates any of the following
provisions of the traffic code shall be fined not less than $15:
(1)   Sections 15-13.1, 15-13.3, 15-13.5, 15-13.11, and 15-13.12;
(2)   Sections 15-14.1, 15-14.2, 15-14.3, 15-14.5, 15-14.6, and 15-14.7;
(3)   Sections 15-15.3 and 15-15.4;
(4)   Sections 15-16.1, 15-16.5, 15-16.6, 15-16.7, and 15-16.8;
(5)   Sections 15-18.6, 15-18.10(a)(9), and 15-18.10(a)(17);
(6)   Section 15-22.11, other than §
15-22.11(i); and
(7)   Section 15-23.6.
(b)   The registered owner of a vehicle that violates any of the following
provisions of the traffic code shall be fined not less than $25:
(1)   Section 15-6.7, when the violation is for the parking, standing, or
stopping of a vehicle in a transit bus lane, bicycle lane, express bus lane or
express bus and car pool lane;
(2)   Section 15-13.4;
(3)   Section 15-14.8;
(4)   Section 15-15.1;
(5)   Sections 15-16.3 and 15-16.4;
(6)   Section 15-22.11(i); and
(7)   Section 15-25.1, when the violation is for the parking, standing or
stopping of a vehicle on a pedestrian mall.
(c)   Except as otherwise provided in §
15-16.8, after the first violation of a provision to which the penalty under
subsection (a) or (b) applies, every hour a vehicle remains parked, stopped, or
standing in violation of that provision shall constitute a separate violation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.10) (Added by Ord. 90-77; Am. Ord. 96-58,
18-29)
§ 15-26.11 Revocation or suspension of license.
   In addition to the penalty heretofore provided, the court may revoke or may
suspend, for a period not to exceed one year, the license of any operator or
chauffeur convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this traffic
code involving a vehicle in motion.
(Sec. 15-26.11, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.11)
§ 15-26.12 Disposition of fines and forfeitures.
   All fines and forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture
of bail of any person charged with a violation of any section or provision of
this traffic code shall be paid to the State director of budget and finance.
All administrative fines shall be paid to the director of budget and fiscal
services of the city.
(Sec. 15-26.12, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.12)
(Am. Ord. 04-13)
ARTICLE 27: DESIGNATION OF CERTAIN COUNTY HIGHWAYS AS CLOSED TO
LARGE PASSENGER CARRIER VEHICLES
Sections
   
15-27.1   Definitions
   
15-27.2   Closure of certain streets and highways to large passenger carrier
vehicles
   
15-27.3   Adoption of rules
   
15-27.4   Inapplicability to interstate and foreign commerce
   
15-27.5   Posting of signs
   
15-27.6   Conflict with certificate of public convenience and necessity or
permit issued by public utilities commission
   
15-27.7   Information program
   
15-27.8   Permits
   
15-27.9   Exceptions
   
15-27.10   Violation—Penalties
§ 15-27.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Director. The director of transportation services.
Large Passenger Carrier Vehicle. Any motor vehicle with a vehicle weight, as
indicated on the vehicle’s certificate of registration, in excess of 15,000
pounds that is designed, constructed and used for the transportation of
passengers.
School. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 149A-25, and any community
college, any college, or any university.
School Vehicle. Any publicly or privately owned vehicle that is being used at
the time in question to transport pupils or students to or from a school, a
school function, or a school-related event.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 27, § 15-27.1) (Added by Ord. 90-79)
§ 15-27.2 Closure of certain streets and highways to large passenger carrier
vehicles.
(a)   The director may declare heavily traveled city streets or highways to be
closed to large passenger carrier vehicles upon finding that the use of those
streets or highways by such vehicles is incompatible with the safe and normal
movement of traffic on or along those streets or highways. In making its
finding of incompatibility, the director shall consider the following:
(1)   Physical suitability of the county street or highway for the vehicles,
including condition of the roadway surface, street width, curves, and dangerous
intersections;
(2)   Density of neighborhoods adjacent to the street or highway;
(3)   Proximity of the street or highway to schools and playgrounds;
(4)   Pedestrian traffic conditions along the street or highway, including the
availability of paved sidewalk areas adequate for pedestrian traffic;
(5)   Existing traffic control devices or aids which control traffic on,
entering, exiting, or crossing the street or highway, such as traffic lights,
signs, and curb markings;
(6)   Congestion of the county street or highway, generally;
(7)   Use of the street or highway as an official county transit bus route;
(8)   Use of the street or highway by emergency vehicles such as police, fire,
and ambulance vehicles; and
(9)   The availability of alternative routes for the affected large passenger
vehicles.
(b)   It is unlawful to operate a large passenger carrier vehicle or to stop,
park, or cause to stand a large passenger carrier vehicle on any city street or
highway, or portion thereof, designated by the director under subsection (a).
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 27, § 15-27.2) (Added by Ord. 90-79)
§ 15-27.3 Adoption of rules.
   The director shall adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, to implement and
administer this article, which shall include the procedures to be followed by
the director to designate streets for closure to a large passenger vehicles.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 27, § 15-27.3) (Added by Ord. 90-79)
§ 15-27.4 Inapplicability to interstate and foreign commerce.
   Neither this article nor any provision thereof shall apply to commerce with
foreign nations or to interstate commerce, except insofar as the application is
permitted under the Constitution and laws of the United States.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 27, § 15-27.4) (Added by Ord. 90-79)
§ 15-27.5 Posting of signs.
   The director may post signs indicating that a particular city street or
highway is closed to large passenger carrier vehicles. The contents of such
signs shall be determined by the director. It shall not be a defense to any
prosecution for a violation of this article that no such sign was posted.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 27, § 15-27.5) (Added by Ord. 90-79)
§ 15-27.6 Conflict with certificate of public convenience and necessity or
permit issued by public utilities commission.
   To the extent that any designation made by the director is in direct
conflict with the terms of a certificate of public convenience and necessity or
permit issued by the State public utilities commission that specifies
particular public streets or highways as permitted routes of a passenger
carrier, the terms of the certificate or permit shall govern.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 27, § 15-27.6) (Added by Ord. 90-79)
§ 15-27.7 Information program.
   The director and the director of budget and fiscal services shall undertake
a program to notify public passenger carriers and operators of large passenger
carrier vehicles of this article and, in particular, of the streets and
highways closed to large passenger carrier vehicles under this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 27, § 15-27.7) (Added by Ord. 90-79)
§ 15-27.8 Permits.
   The director or the director of budget and fiscal services shall adopt rules
for the issuance of short-term permits for large passenger carrier vehicles to
travel on city streets and highways closed under this article for special
events.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 27, § 15-27.8) (Added by Ord. 90-79)
§ 15-27.9 Exceptions.
   This article shall not apply to city transit buses or to school vehicles
that are being used at the time in question to transport pupils or students to
or from a school, a school function or a school-related event. Any passenger
carrier vehicle traveling at the direction of a police officer is not in
violation of this article. Any passenger carrier vehicle being operated within
the terms of a permit issued pursuant to the rules adopted under §
15-27.8, is not in violation of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 27, § 15-27.9) (Added by Ord. 90-79)
§ 15-27.10 Violation—Penalties.
   Any person violating this article, or rules adopted by the director pursuant
to HRS Chapter 91, to implement this article, or any person owning or having
control of a passenger carrier vehicle who knowingly directs the operator of
the vehicle to violate this article or such rules, shall for a first offense
thereof, be fined not more than $100; for a second offense committed within one
year after the date of the first offense, be fined not more than $250; and for
a third or subsequent offense committed within one year after the date of the
first offense, be fined not more than $1,000.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 27, § 15-27.10) (Added by Ord. 90-79; Am. Ord. 95-15)
ARTICLE 28: PUBLIC TRANSIT SUPPORTIVE SERVICES
Sections
   
15-28.1   Definitions–Reserved car-sharing parking stalls, on-street parking
stalls, and stickers
   
15-28.2   Reserved
   
15-28.3   Eligibility for stickers
   
15-28.4   Car-sharing reporting requirements
   
15-28.5   Administrative enforcement
   
15-28.6   Deposit and use of revenues
   
15-28.7   Adoption of rules
§ 15-28.1 Definitions–Reserved car-sharing parking stalls, on-street parking
stalls, and stickers.
(a)   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Car-sharing Organization. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 251-1.
   Department. The department of transportation services.
   Director. The director of transportation services or the director’s
designee.
   On-Street Parking Stall. A metered or unmetered parking stall located on a
street or roadway.
   Sticker. A reserved car-sharing parking stall sticker or any other
identifying means as determined by the department.
(b)   The director is authorized and directed to establish, mark, and
designate:
(1)   Reserved car-sharing parking stalls in city-controlled public off-street
parking facilities and assign them for exclusive use by a car-sharing
organization. The director shall limit the total number of reserved car-sharing
parking stalls to no more than 80 stalls in any calendar year within city-
controlled public off-street parking facilities; and
(2)   Reserved car-sharing on-street parking stalls and assign them for
exclusive use by a car-sharing organization. The director shall limit the total
number of reserved car-sharing on-street parking stalls, to no more than 80
stalls in any calendar year, provided that the director may not authorize:
(A)   More than two reserved car-sharing on-street parking stalls per street
block; or
(B)   Reserved car-sharing on-street parking stalls on streets subject to tow
or tow-away zones.
(c)   Reserved car-sharing parking stalls in city-controlled public off-street
parking facilities and reserved car- sharing on-street parking stalls must be
established, categorized, and assigned to car-sharing organizations according
to administrative rules adopted by the department in accordance with HRS
Chapter 91. In addition, no less than 30 days before the assignment of the
first stall in a city- controlled public off-street parking facility or the
assignment of the first on-street parking stall, whichever occurs first, the
director shall provide a written report to the council on the department’s
efforts demonstrating interaction and solicitation of community input in the
affected areas, including a summary of community concerns, efforts made to
address community concerns expressed during the rule-making process, and the
location of each reserved space being made available to car-sharing
organizations under this section.
(d)   The director shall charge, and collect annual fees for each reserved car-
sharing parking stall in a city-controlled public off-street parking facility
and for each reserved car-sharing on-street parking stall. The annual fee for a
reserved car-sharing parking stall in a city-controlled public off- street
parking facility is the shared mobility annual rental rate listed in the table
in §
15-23.2A. The annual fee for a reserved car-sharing on-street parking stall is
the shared mobility annual rental rate listed in the table in §
15-22.4.
(e)   (1)   Any car-sharing organization that is assigned one or more reserved
car-sharing parking stalls in city-controlled public off-street parking
facilities shall pay to the director an annual fee as provided for in
subsection(d), plus a fee of $20 for a reserved car-sharing parking stall
sticker for each vehicle in its fleet that will be allowed to park in the
reserved car-sharing stalls. When a reserved car-sharing parking stall sticker
is mutilated, damaged, defaced, or lost, a replacement sticker will be issued
upon payment of $20.
(2)   Any car-sharing organization that is assigned one or more reserved car-
sharing on-street parking stalls shall pay to the director an annual fee as
provided for in subsection (d), plus a fee of $20 for a reserved car-sharing
on-street parking stall sticker for each vehicle in its fleet that will be
allowed to park in the reserved car-sharing on-street parking stalls. When a
reserved car-sharing on-street parking stall sticker is mutilated, damaged,
defaced, or lost, a replacement sticker will be issued upon payment of $20.
(f)   Reserved car-sharing parking stall stickers and reserved car-sharing on-
street parking stall stickers must be effective for a calendar year, state the
date of expiration, be uniquely numbered, and be displayed on a vehicle inside
the lower portion of the windshield on the driver’s side of the vehicle. The
annual fee for the reserved car-sharing parking stall or sticker, or reserved
car-sharing on-street parking stall or sticker must be prorated on a monthly
basis if the stall is assigned or the sticker is purchased after January 31.
(g)   A person may not park a vehicle in a reserved car-sharing parking stall
or reserved car-sharing on-street parking stall, unless there is affixed to the
vehicle a valid and current reserved car-sharing parking stall sticker, or a
valid and current reserved car-sharing on-street parking sticker, whichever
applies, acquired pursuant to subsection (e). Any vehicle parked in a reserved
car-sharing parking stall or in a reserved car-sharing on-street parking stall
without a valid and current reserved car-sharing parking stall sticker or
reserved car-sharing on-street parking stall sticker, whichever applies, is
subject to being towed, and the owner of the vehicle is subject to a fine of
$100 for each offense.
(h)   Reserved car-sharing on-street parking stall stickers issued pursuant to
this article will not be effective during a parade or special event or when
parking is otherwise prohibited pursuant to §§
15-13.12,
15-14.8, and
15-22.8, or other applicable laws.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 28, § 15-28.1) (Added by Ord. 15-35; Am. Ord. 19-19)
§ 15-28.2 Reserved.
§ 15-28.3 Eligibility for stickers.
   Any car-sharing organization shall provide proof to the department that it
is properly registered with the State department of taxation pursuant to HRS §
251-3(a) before it may apply for stickers under this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 28, § 15-28.3) (Added by Ord. 15-35; Am. Ord. 19-19)
§ 15-28.4 Car-sharing reporting requirements.
(a)   Any car-sharing organization that is assigned one or more reserved car-
sharing parking stalls in a city-controlled public off-street parking facility
or one or more on-street parking stalls owned or controlled by the city,
pursuant to§
15-28.1, shall collect and submit to the director, in the manner and frequency
prescribed by the director, the following data:
(1)   The number of unique registered members who rented a car-sharing vehicle
during the reporting period, which period shall be determined by the director;
(2)   The number of car-sharing vehicles using reserved car-sharing parking
stalls in city-controlled public off-street parking facilities or reserved car-
sharing on-street parking stalls owned by the city that are available to
members for renting;
(3)   The number and location of all car-sharing parking stalls;
(4)   The number of rentals originating per stall; and
(5)   The average length of time a car-sharing vehicle is not rented.
(b)   Each car-sharing organization assigned one or more reserved car-sharing
parking stalls in a city-controlled public off-street parking facility or
assigned one or more car-sharing on-street parking stalls owned or controlled
by the city under this article shall be required to provide an annual report to
the director no later than 90 days after the end of each calendar year.
(c)   The annual report in subsection (b) must include the following
information for the immediately-preceding calendar year:
(1)   The total number of trips and the total miles driven for the entire fleet
of car-sharing vehicles;
(2)   The average monthly rental use hours and miles traveled per parking
stall;
(3)   The average monthly unique users per parking stall; and
(4)   Any other information deemed pertinent or requested by the director or
required by law.
(d)   The director shall annually submit to the council, no later than 120 days
after the end of the calendar year, a written report on car-sharing operations
by car-sharing organizations participating in the program under this article
during the preceding calendar year. The report must include:
(1)   A compilation of all information provided in each car-sharing
organization’s annual report submitted pursuant to subsections (b) and (c);
(2)   A discussion of the department’s efforts to verify that the data provided
is complete, consistent, accurate, and reliable; and
(3)   The department’s assessment, based on available data, of the effect the
car-sharing operations have had on traffic congestion and motor vehicle usage
on Oahu.
(e)   Each car-sharing organization participating in the program under this
article shall disclose to each of its individual users the type of data it
collects from the organization's car-sharing vehicles, as well as the type of
data the organization reports to the department or other party.
(f)   The department is authorized to use, analyze, and publish the data it
receives from each car-sharing organization; provided that such use, analysis,
and publication does not identify individual users or their private
information. Data submitted to the department, except data identifying
individual users or their private information, may be subject to public
disclosure.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 28, § 15-28.4) (Added by Ord. 15-35; Am. Ord. 19-19)
§ 15-28.5 Administrative enforcement.
   
Articles 4 and
26 apply to the enforcement of this article. If any car-sharing organization is
found to be in violation of this chapter or other applicable laws, the
department may immediately revoke the car-sharing organization’s parking
stickers and may refuse to issue additional parking stickers to the car-sharing
organization.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 28, § 15-28.5) (Added by Ord. 15-35; Am. Ord. 19-19)
§ 15-28.6 Deposit and use of revenues.
   The funds collected under this article shall be deposited in the highway
fund created by HRS Chapter 249, as amended, and shall be used pursuant to §
15-22.10, unless otherwise required by law.
(1990 Code, Ch. 15, Art. 28, § 15-28.6) (Added by Ord. 15-35)
§ 15-28.7 Adoption of rules.
   The director shall adopt rules, in accordance with HRS Chapter 91, having
the force and effect of law for the implementation, administration, and
enforcement of this article.
(Added by Ord. 19-19)
ARTICLE 29: PARKING SPACE RESERVED FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES*
Sections
   
15-29.1   Definitions
   
15-29.2   Parking or standing in reserved space
   
15-29.3   Identification of reserved space
   
15-29.4   Responsible manager—Powers and duties
   
15-29.5   Responsible manager—Authority to regulate conditions of parking
   
15-29.6   Violation—Penalty—Enforcement
Editor’s note:
   * The title of Article 29 was amended from “Parking Space Reserved for
Disabled Persons” to “Parking Space Reserved for Persons with Disabilities” by
Ord. 14-25.
§ 15-29.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Parking Placard for a Person with a Disability. A “removable windshield
placard” or a “temporary removable windshield placard” as those terms are
defined in HRS § 291-51 and Hawaii Administrative Rules § 11-219-4 and includes
a similar placard issued by an authority of another county of the State of
Hawaii or of another state or country or political subdivision thereof.
Parking Space Reserved for Persons with Disabilities. A parking space that is:
(1)   Part of real property:
(A)   Owned by a private person; and
(B)   Metered or unmetered.
(2)   Reserved by the responsible manager for the parking of a motor vehicle
driven by or for a person with a disability; and
(3)   Clearly identified, by signs and markings in accordance with §
15-29.3, by the responsible manager for the parking of a motor vehicle driven
by or for a person with a disability.
Person with a Disability. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 291-51 and
Hawaii Administrative Rules § 11-219-4.
Responsible Manager. A person who is authorized to regulate the use of a
parking space reserved for persons with disabilities because of ownership of
the parking space or under a lease, rental, or management agreement.
Special License Plates. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 291-51 and
Hawaii Administrative Rules § 11-219-4 and includes similar special license
plates issued by an authority of another county of the State of Hawaii or of
another state or country or political subdivision thereof.
Volunteer. A person who is willing to provide services on behalf of the city
without compensation, except for the benefits provided in §
2-27.5.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 28, § 41-28.1) (Added by Ord. 89-93; Am. Ords. 96-54,
99-01, 14-25)
§ 15-29.2 Parking or standing in reserved space.
   No person shall park a motor vehicle or cause it to stand or be parked in a
parking space reserved for persons with disabilities except in accordance with
HRS Chapter 291, Part III and Hawaii Administrative Rules, Title 11, Chapter
219, entitled “Parking for Persons with Disabilities.”
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 28, § 41-28.2) (Added by Ord. 89-93; Am. Ords. 96-54,
14-25)
§ 15-29.3 Identification of reserved space.
(a)   The department of transportation services, in accordance with HRS Chapter
91, shall adopt rules to establish standards for the designation and
identification of a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities, in
accordance with applicable State and federal requirements, and may adopt rules
for the implementation, administration, and enforcement of this article. The
standards shall include a notice, in conformance with HRS § 290-11, that the
parking or standing in the parking space reserved for persons with disabilities
of a motor vehicle without special license plates or a parking placard for a
person with a disability displayed in accordance with law shall be unauthorized
and prohibited. The notice shall also:
(1)   Warn violators that the motor vehicle may be towed away at the owner’s
expense; and
(2)   State the location to which the motor vehicle will be towed and held.
(b)   Each responsible manager providing parking spaces reserved for persons
with disabilities shall clearly identify those parking spaces in conformance
with the standards established under subsection (a).
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 28, § 41-28.3) (Added by Ord. 89-93; Am. Ords. 96-54,
14-25)
§ 15-29.4 Responsible manager—Powers and duties.
(a)   A motor vehicle parked or standing in a parking space reserved for
persons with disabilities in a manner contrary to §
15-29.2 is an unauthorized vehicle under HRS § 290-11.
(b)   A responsible manager shall have the power and duty to penalize the
unauthorized parking of a motor vehicle in a parking space reserved for persons
with disabilities. The penalty imposed shall include one or both of the
following:
(1)   Towing away of the motor vehicle in accordance with HRS § 290-11; or
(2)   Placement of a sticker on the windshield of the motor vehicle that shall
notify the driver of the violation and that shall be removable. Placement of
the sticker is an exercise of the lawful power and duty of a responsible
manager. The responsible manager shall have no duty to remove the sticker. The
fact that the sticker is difficult to remove shall not impose a duty on the
responsible manager to remove the sticker.
(c)   This section shall be deemed restrictions on the unauthorized parking of
a motor vehicle on private property that are additional to HRS § 290-11.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 28, § 41-28.4) (Added by Ord. 89-93; Am. Ord. 14-25)
§ 15-29.5 Responsible manager—Authority to regulate conditions of parking.
   Nothing in this article shall be deemed as preventing a responsible manager
from regulating the duration, charges, or other conditions imposed on the
privilege of parking in a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities,
so long as the regulation is not inconsistent with this article or any other
law.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 28, § 41-28.5) (Added by Ord. 89-93; Am. Ord. 14-25)
§ 15-29.6 Violation—Penalty—Enforcement.
(a)   Each violation of §
15-29.2 is a violation and punishable by a fine of not less than $50 nor more
than $250.
(b)   (1)   There shall be established a form of summons or citation for use in
citing violations of §
15-29.2 which does not provide for the physical arrest of the violators. The
form and content of the summons or citation shall be as adopted or prescribed
by the administrative judge of the district court, shall be printed on a form
commensurate with the form of other summonses or citations used in modern
methods of arrest, and so designed to include all necessary information to make
the summons or citation valid within the laws and rules of the State of Hawaii
and the City and County of Honolulu. Every summons or citation shall be
numbered and each carbon copy shall bear the same number as its original.
(2)   In every case, when a summons or citation is issued, the original of the
summons or citation shall be given to the violator; provided that the
administrative judge of the district court may prescribe that the violator be
given a carbon copy of the summons or citation and provide for the disposition
of the original and any other copies.
(c)   The chief of police may commission, in accordance with rules adopted by
the chief, special officers to issue citations for violations of §
15-29.2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 28, § 41-28.6) (Added by Ord. 89-93; Am. Ord. 96-54)
ARTICLE 30: RESTRICTED PARKING ZONES PROGRAM
Sections
   
15-30.1   Definitions
   
15-30.2   Administration
   
15-30.3   Establishment, expansion, reduction, modification, or dissolution of
restricted parking zones
   
15-30.4   Permits
   
15-30.5   Fees
   
15-30.6   Penalties
   
15-30.7   Rules
§ 15-30.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Annual Residential Permit. A card, decal, or other identification issued to an
eligible resident to be placed on a vehicle that enables it to be parked in a
restricted parking zone throughout a one-year period, subject to standards to
be determined by the director.
Annual Visitor Permit. A card, decal, or other identification issued to an
eligible resident for use by visitors in a restricted parking zone throughout a
one-year period, subject to standards to be determined by the director.
Department. The department of transportation services.
Director. The director of transportation services or the director’s designee.
Dwelling Unit. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1. Each unit of a multi-unit dwelling is considered a separate dwelling
unit.
Family. Persons related by blood, adoption, or marriage.
Nonresident Single-Day Permit. A card, decal, or other identification issued to
a person, not residing in a dwelling unit that is located in a restricted
parking zone, for use in the restricted parking zone for a single day, subject
to standards to be determined by the director.
Parking Placard for a Person with a Disability. Has the same meaning as defined
in §
15-29.1.
Resident. Any of the following persons residing in a dwelling unit that is
located in a restricted parking zone:
(1)   The owner of the dwelling unit and family members of the owner; or
(2)   The renter of the dwelling unit under a lease of 30 days or more, and
family members of the renter.
Restricted Parking Zone or RPZ. An area of at least four contiguous blocks in a
residential- or apartment-zoned district that has one or more of the following
components:
(1)   Parking in the street is reserved for the exclusive use of those vehicles
displaying a valid RPZ permit or other identification issued by the director as
part of the RPZ program;
(2)   Parking in the street is reserved during certain posted hours for
exclusive use of those vehicles displaying a valid RPZ permit or other
identification issued by the director as part of the RPZ program; or
(3)   Time limits are established for parking in the street that apply to all
vehicles, except for vehicles with a valid RPZ permit or other identification
issued by the director as part of the RPZ program.
Restricted Parking Zone Permit or RPZ Permit. A card, decal, or other
identification issued to an eligible person to be placed on a vehicle that
enables it to be parked in a restricted parking zone.
Single-Day Visitor Permit. A card, decal, or other identification issued to an
eligible resident for use by a visitor in a restricted parking zone for a
single day, subject to standards to be determined by the director.
Visitor. A person temporarily visiting a resident or temporarily having
business with a resident who is eligible for a restricted parking zone permit.
(Added by Ord. 19-1) (Am. Ords. 23-27, 25-2)
§ 15-30.2 Administration.
(a)   Authorization. The director is authorized to maintain lists of vehicles
owned or used by holders of a valid RPZ permit or other identification issued
by the director as part of the RPZ program, issue permits or other means of
identifying vehicles owned or used by holders of a valid RPZ permit, and adopt
any other reasonable means of distinguishing vehicles that are validly parked
in an RPZ from other vehicles. The RPZ permit or other means of identification
must include the license plate number of the permitted motor vehicle.
(b)   Signage. An RPZ must be appropriately signed or marked.
(Added by Ord. 19-1) (Am. Ord. 23-27)
§ 15-30.3 Establishment, expansion, reduction, modification, or dissolution of
restricted parking zones.
(a)   The director may establish, expand, reduce, modify, or dissolve an RPZ in
accordance with the limitations and criteria established in subsection (c);
provided that:
(1)   The director may not establish more than one new RPZ each calendar year;
and
(2)   The council may amend, expand, reduce, modify, or dissolve an RPZ that
was established under this subsection only by ordinance.
(b)   The council may establish, expand, reduce, modify, or dissolve an RPZ by
resolution, in accordance with the limitations and criteria established in
subsection (c); provided that the director may initiate the expansion,
reduction, modification, or dissolution of an RPZ established under this
subsection through submission to the council of a recommendation and rationale,
which will be effective upon the council’s adoption of a resolution.
(c)   Limitations and criteria.
(1)   No RPZ may be established within a 0.5-mile distance landward of:
(A)   The certified shoreline, as determined by the State board of land and
natural resources or the State surveyor in accordance with HRS § 205A-42, or
its successor, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto; or
(B)   If no valid certified shoreline survey exists, the shoreline as
determined as the upper reaches of the waves, other than storm and seismic
waves, at high tide during the season of the year in which the highest wash of
the waves occurs, usually evidenced by the edge of vegetation growth, or the
upper limit of debris left by the wash of the waves.
(2)   In determining whether to establish a new RPZ, or to expand, reduce, or
modify an existing RPZ, the following factors must be considered:
(A)   The extent to which on-street parking is occupied;
(B)   The extent to which off-street parking is available;
(C)   The extent to which vehicles parking in the area are not registered to
residents of the affected area;
(D)   Whether there is an identifiable traffic generator;
(E)   Whether a majority of the residents in the affected area support the
initiative, which may include a petition signed by a majority of the residents;
(F)   Whether an RPZ would promote certain benefits or would result in adverse
impacts:
(i)   Benefits include but are not limited to: increased access for area
residents, reduced traffic congestion, increased traffic or pedestrian safety,
reduced air or noise pollution, reduced commuter parking in neighborhoods,
prevention of blighted areas, and promotion of the use of alternative modes of
transportation; and
(ii)   Adverse impacts include but are not limited to: transferring a parking
problem to a different area, inability to effectively enforce program
restrictions, lack of alternative transportation modes, reduction in public
access to publicly-accessible areas or health care services, and availability
of simpler, cheaper, or more effective solutions;
(G)   Whether the public interest would be served;
(H)   The extent to which elimination or limitation of ongoing street parking
to the general public would impact access to publicly-accessible areas,
including, in particular, the shoreline, legal hiking, and legal hunting areas;
and
(I)   Whether other regulations or measures would improve parking availability.
Modification of the hours of an existing RPZ, or the expansion or reduction of
the boundaries of an existing RPZ by two contiguous blocks or less may be made
without the necessity of considering all of the criteria set forth in this
subsection; provided that any expansion of the boundaries of an existing RPZ
must be in compliance with the limitation in subdivision (1).
(3)   In determining whether to dissolve an existing RPZ, the following factors
must be considered:
(A)   Low permit sales in an RPZ;
(B)   The absence of the original traffic generator; and
(C)   Whether the public interest would be served.
(d)   The boundaries of an RPZ must be described on Schedule XXXIX, in
substantially the form set forth in Ordinance 23-27 as Exhibit A.
Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b), the Kalihi Valley RPZ is hereby
established, to include the streets and street segments identified in Exhibit
A, and will be the first RPZ to be included on Schedule XXXIX.
(1)   If the council, by resolution, establishes a new RPZ, or expands,
reduces, modifies, or dissolves an existing RPZ, the director shall amend
Schedule XXXIX to reflect the action of the council, and submit an updated
Schedule XXXIX to the city clerk.
(2)   If the director establishes a new RPZ, or expands, reduces, modifies, or
dissolves an existing RPZ, the director shall submit:
(A)   To the council, a report that includes a summary and rationale for the
action of the director, and the associated updated Schedule XXXIX; and
(B)   To the city clerk, an updated Schedule XXXIX that reflects the action of
the director.
(e)   Notwithstanding the establishment of the Kalihi Valley RPZ by ordinance
pursuant to this section and subsection (b), the director may expand, reduce,
modify, or dissolve the Kalihi Valley RPZ by submission to the council and the
city clerk of a revised Schedule XXXIX indicating the changes thereto.
(Added by Ord. 19-1) (Am. Ord. 23-27)
Editor’s note:
   *Sections
15-30.3(a) and
15-30.3(d)(2), as amended, relating to the authority of the Director of
Transportation Services to establish, expand, reduce, modify, or dissolve a
restricted parking zone, will be repealed on October 20, 2028, in accordance
with Ordinance 23-27.
   *In accordance with Ordinance 23-27: No later than one year prior to the
repeal date of §§
15-30.3(a) and
15-30.3(d)(2), the Director of Transportation Services shall submit to the
Council a report on the restricted parking zones established, expanded,
reduced, modified, or dissolved by the Director pursuant to §
15-30.3(a), including but not limited to the location and boundaries of, and
the type and number of parking permits issued for, each restricted parking
zone, and a recommendation regarding the repeal, modification, or extension of
the Director’s authority under §
15-30.3(a).
§ 15-30.4 Permits.
(a)   Type.
(1)   Residents may apply for one or more of the following types of RPZ
permits, subject to the limitations in subsection (b):
(A)   Annual residential permit;
(B)   Annual visitor permit; and
(C)   Single-day visitor permit; and
(2)   Nonresidents may apply for a nonresident single-day permit for use in a
specific RPZ when permitted by the director for the specific RPZ.
(b)   Limitations.
(1)   Each eligible dwelling unit is limited to two annual permits (including
both residential and visitor permits); provided that each eligible dwelling
unit may not obtain more than one annual visitor permit. A resident may request
a waiver of this limitation from the director; provided that the director may
not approve more than two additional annual permits per dwelling unit pursuant
to a request for waivers under this subsection. In determining whether to grant
a waiver request, the director may consider the availability of on-street
parking in the requester’s residential area and the number of licensed drivers
residing in the requester’s dwelling unit.
(2)   Each eligible dwelling unit is limited to 10 single-day visitor permits
per month.
(3)   An RPZ permit does not reserve or guarantee the availability of an on-
street parking space within the designated RPZ.
(c)   Exceptions. The following vehicles may park in an RPZ without obtaining
or displaying an RPZ permit:
(1)   Commercial vehicles during active delivery or service to a property
within the RPZ;
(2)   A motor vehicle displaying a valid parking placard for a person with a
disability or a special license plate, as defined in §
15-29.1; and
(3)   Mopeds, motorcycles, and motor scooters, as defined in HRS § 291C-1.
(d)   Application.
(1)   Each application for a permit or renewal of a permit by a resident must
contain information sufficient to:
(A)   Identify the applicant;
(B)   Identify the applicant’s residence or real property address within an
RPZ;
(C)   Establish that the applicant is a resident of the affected area; and
(D)   Identify the license plate number and provide proof of current Hawai‘i
registration of the motor vehicle for which the permit will be issued.
(2)   Each application for a nonresident single-day permit must contain
information sufficient to:
(A)   Identify the applicant;
(B)   Identify the applicant’s residence or real property address; and
(C)   Identify the license plate number and provide proof of current Hawai‘i
registration of the motor vehicle for which the permit will be issued.
(3)   All delinquent parking citations of the applicant must be paid for an
application to be approved.
(Added by Ord. 23-27)
§ 15-30.5 Fees.
(a)   RPZ permit fees are as follows:
 
Type of Permit                Vehicle (per dwelling unit) Fee
                              1st vehicle                 $125 (base rate)
Annual residential permit or  2nd vehicle                 2 times the base rate
annual visitor permit         3rd vehicle                 3 times the base rate
                              4th vehicle                 4 times the base rate
Single-day visitor permit     Not applicable              $10
Nonresident single-day permit Not applicable              $10
 
The director may administratively adjust the amount of the fees for an annual
residential or visitor permit, a single-day visitor permit, and a nonresident
single-day permit annually; provided that each adjustment may not increase any
fee amount by more than 10 percent, and that the director must hold a public
hearing before any adjustment of the fee for an annual residential or visitor
permit for the first vehicle.
(b)   The director may waive or reduce the RPZ fee, including if:
(1)   The waiver or reduction is in the overall public interest due to
extraordinary facts or circumstances; and
(2)   The waiver or reduction is consistent with the goals of the RPZ program..
(Added by Ord. 19-1) (Am. Ord. 23-27)
§ 15-30.6 Penalties.
(a)   Fines.
(1)   Except as provided in §
15-30.4(c), the registered owner of a vehicle not properly displaying an RPZ
permit or other authorization pursuant to this article and parked on a street
within an RPZ is subject to a fine to be determined by the director by rule
adopted under §
15-30.7. Every hour a vehicle remains parked in violation of this subdivision
constitutes a separate violation.
(2)   A person misusing a permit, including but not limited to selling,
counterfeiting, improperly using, or stealing a permit, or as otherwise
determined by the director by rule adopted under §
15-30.7, is subject to a fine to be determined by the director. Every day a
permit is misused constitutes a separate violation.
(b)   Revocation. The director is authorized to revoke a permit if a person
misuses a permit, including but not limited to selling, counterfeiting,
improperly using, or stealing a permit, or as otherwise determined by the
director by rule adopted under §
15-30.7.
(Added by Ord. 23-27)
§ 15-30.7 Rules.
   The director shall adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 for the
implementation, administration, and enforcement of this article.
(Added by Ord. 23-27)
ARTICLE 31: SHARED MOBILITY - MICROMOBILITY VEHICLE PARKING
Sections
   
15-31.1   Definitions
   
15-31.2   Authorization
   
15-31.3   SMV parking permit application and renewal terms and conditions
   
15-31.4   SMV parking permit requirements and conditions
   
15-31.5   Shared micromobility vehicle deployment and parking
   
15-31.6   Operator data sharing requirements
   
15-31.7   Fees
   
15-31.8   Removal of unpermitted SMVs
   
15-31.9   Administrative enforcement
   
15-31.10   Fine–Costs
   
15-31.11   Deposit of revenues
   
15-31.12   Severability
§ 15-31.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Department. The department of transportation services.
Deploy. The action by an operator of removing a shared micromobility vehicle
from its physical custody and making it available to and accessible by the
public for rent.
Director. The director of transportation services or the director’s authorized
representative.
Fleet. The collective shared micromobility vehicles deployed by an operator.
Operator. A shared micromobility vehicle business that holds a valid shared
micromobility vehicle parking permit issued under this article.
SMV Parking Permit. The permit approved by the director to a qualified shared
micromobility vehicle business and valid for a period of one year from date of
issue to park one or more SMVs in a stall or space on city property.
Shared Micromobility Vehicle or SMV. Commercial transportation equipment
weighing less than 100 pounds by which a person can be propelled or moved, that
is:
(1)   Either power-assisted or propelled solely by human power;
(2)   A shared resource among multiple users; and
(3)   Available to the public for short-term renting on a self-service basis,
usually through a website or mobile application, and intended for point-to-
point travel.
Shared Micromobility Vehicle Business or SMV Business. A for-profit or non-
profit entity that rents shared micromobility vehicles to the public. The term
does not include a government agency or department of the city, the State of
Hawaii, or the United States.
Shared Micromobility Vehicle User or SMV User. An individual who rides an SMV
rented from an operator.
(Added by Ord. 19-29)
§ 15-31.2 Authorization.
   Notwithstanding any ordinance to the contrary, the director is authorized to
issue SMV parking permits to qualified SMV businesses.
(Added by Ord. 19-29)
§ 15-31.3 SMV parking permit application and renewal terms and conditions.
(a)   The director may issue an SMV parking permit to an SMV business, upon
satisfaction of the requirements of this article, for portions of property
controlled by the city, including but not limited to spaces in parking meter
zones, off-street parking, and attendant parking facilities for use of these
areas for SMV parking and deployment, subject to the following conditions:
(1)   The director may not authorize more than three SMV parking permits per
street block; and
(2)   When an SMV business desires an SMV parking permit for a portion of city
property not controlled by the department, the director or the director’s
designee shall obtain prior written consent of the appropriate city department,
agency, or office that controls the subject property.
The department may implement a lottery system for the issuance or renewal of
permits under this section if the number of applications exceeds the number of
permits allowed.
(b)   An SMV parking permit may be issued for a term not to exceed one year and
shall be revocable by the director upon 30 days’ written notice. No operator
holding an SMV parking permit may be required to have a peddler’s license
pursuant to
Chapter 13, Article 6.
(c)   To receive an SMV parking permit, an SMV business must submit an
application to the director, in the manner prescribed by the director. The
application, to be accompanied by the non-refundable application fee set forth
in §
15-31.7, shall contain the following:
(1)   The name of the person designated by the applying SMV business to receive
on its behalf any future notices sent by the city to the SMV business, and that
person’s contact information, including a mailing address, telephone number,
and email address;
(2)   A certificate of good standing issued by the State of Hawaii department
of commerce and consumer affairs for the SMV business and dated no earlier than
six months prior to the date of the application;
(3)   Documentary evidence from an insurance company indicating that such
insurance company has bound itself to provide the applying SMV business with
the liability insurance required by this article;
(4)   A comprehensive operations plan that includes:
(A)   A timeline for the launch of operations or a history of operations for
established operations;
(B)   A detailed description of the SMV specifications and the size of the SMV
fleet;
(C)   A map of the proposed or actual service area and deployment and parking
locations, including parking locations not on city property;
(D)   Planned schedules for fleet management, maintenance, and repair;
(E)   An overview of the website, mobile application, or other program to be
used by the public to access and rent an SMV;
(F)   An overview of the technology to be used to track and locate each SMV;
(G)   For dockless systems, an overview of the technology to be used, including
but not limited to a picture-after-riding requirement, to demonstrate
traceability of parking of a specific SMV to a specific SMV user;
(H)   An overview of the technology, geofencing, or other means to be used to
control operational and parking areas for the SMV fleet;
(I)   A policy on how SMV users’ personal data will be safeguarded;
(J)   Minimum requirements and rules for SMV users;
(K)   Strategies for SMV-user education;
(L)   Strategies to serve low-income riders and communities with limited
transit options;
(M)   Strategies for community outreach and completed outreach efforts,
including to neighborhood boards in targeted areas for deployment; and
(N)   Any other details describing how the SMV business will comply with all
SMV parking permit requirements set forth in this article.
(d)   Any document submitted as part of the application shall become part of
the SMV parking permit and may be used to evaluate operator compliance with SMV
parking permit conditions. Any change to the information provided in the
application must be reported to the director, in the manner prescribed by the
director, no later than 10 business days following the change. Any such change
is subject to approval by the director, and a change found to be in violation
of, or inconsistent with, the SMV parking permit or this article may result in
the termination of the SMV parking permit.
(e)   The director shall review complete applications and evaluate the extent
to which an applying SMV business has the capacity to provide a reliable and
safe shared micromobility service and to meet the SMV parking permit terms and
conditions. When the director finds an applying SMV business has satisfied the
requirements of this article, the director may determine the number of SMV
permits to issue to the applying SMV business based upon the following:
(1)   The application content and the comprehensive operations plan;
(2)   The number and location of permits requested;
(3)   The availability and location of spaces designated for SMV parking; and
(4)   The total number of complete applications received by the department.
(f)   An operator shall renew its SMV parking permit annually. The process for
renewing an SMV parking permit shall be the same as the application process set
forth in this section for receiving an initial SMV parking permit. In reviewing
the application for renewal of an SMV parking permit, the director shall also
evaluate the operator’s performance over the preceding permit term. No SMV
parking permit may be renewed unless all outstanding fees, fines, or other
penalties assessed against the SMV business have been paid to the department.
(g)   The director may adopt administrative rules to establish a deadline for
applications for and renewals of parking permits, or to establish a limit on
the number of operators that may hold valid SMV parking permits at a given
time.
(h)   Subject to the approval of the director, an operator may mark or indicate
the area covered by the SMV parking permit using paint, signage, or decals to
guide the operator’s SMV users to authorized parking areas.
(Added by Ord. 19-29)
§ 15-31.4 SMV parking permit requirements and conditions.
(a)   An operator shall comply with all applicable city, State, and federal
laws, including but not limited to the State and city traffic codes and laws
governing uses of streets or highways, bikeways, sidewalks, and specific
classes of SMVs. An operator shall educate SMV users regarding the laws
applicable to riding, operating, and parking an SMV, and compliance with these
laws.
(b)   An operator shall obtain, maintain, and keep in force through the term of
the operator permit insurance policies issued by insurance or surety companies
authorized by law to issue such insurance in the State of Hawaii in the
following amounts:
(1)   General liability insurance of not less than $2,000,000 for bodily injury
and property damage liability arising out of each occurrence and $4,000,000 in
the aggregate;
(2)   Business automobile liability insurance of not less than $1,000,000
combined single limit per accident; and
(3)   Worker’s compensation insurance as required by law.
All insurance policies shall name the city and its officers and employees as
additional insureds, and shall provide for written notification to the director
at least 30 days prior to any termination, cancellation, or material change in
coverage.
(c)   An operator shall pay all applicable fees as set forth in §
15-31.7.
(d)   An operator shall indemnify the city and its officers, elected or
appointed officials, employees, and agents, and shall defend them and shall
hold them harmless, individually and in their official capacities, from and
against any and all claims, liabilities, causes of action, suits, loss, costs,
expenses, judgments, fines, reasonable attorney fees and necessary litigation
expenses, demands, and damages of every kind and description brought by third
parties arising out of or in connection with, including but not limited to:
(1)   The operator’s business conduct or operations, including any act or
omission of the operator, its subcontractors, anyone directly or indirectly
employed by the operator, and anyone for whose acts or omissions the operator
may be liable;
(2)   The city’s issuance of or decision to issue or not issue an SMV parking
permit;
(3)   The operator using or occupying the public right-of-way or any SMV user
operating the operator’s SMV in the public right-of-way;
(4)   Actual or alleged bodily injury including death, or actual and alleged
damage to property; and
(5)   Actual or alleged violations of law, including but not limited to the
Americans with Disabilities Act.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the operator shall not be required to indemnify,
defend, or hold harmless the city and its officers, elected or appointed
officials, employees, or agents to the extent such claims, liabilities, causes
of action, suits, losses, costs, expenses, judgments, fines, expenses, demands,
or damages arise from their own gross negligence or intentional misconduct;
provided, however, this exception to an operator’s indemnification and defense
obligations shall not apply to claims resulting from, or in connection with,
the condition of a public right-of-way. The obligations imposed by this
subsection shall survive the expiration of the permit.
(e)   An operator shall adhere to the operations plan submitted as part of its
SMV parking permit application, and any amendments to the plan approved by the
director.
(f)   Prior to deployment, an operator shall register with the department each
SMV to be deployed and pay to the department the SMV registration fee set forth
in §
15-31.7 for each SMV. Once an SMV is deployed, its registration shall, so long
as it remains deployed, be renewed annually and the registration fee shall be
paid annually. This registration is in addition to any vehicle registration
required by State or city law.
(g)   An operator may not deploy any SMV that is inoperable or unsafe to
operate. If an SMV is inoperable or unsafe, the operator shall ensure the SMV
is not available to or accessible by the public for use until it is repaired
and safe to operate.
(h)   All SMVs in the operator’s fleet must be marked with the operator’s name,
livery, logo, or trade dress.
(i)   All SMVs in the operator’s fleet must be equipped with active global
positioning system technology that collects the required data that must be
reported to the director pursuant to this article.
(j)   An operator shall maintain staff located in Honolulu and a customer
service center staffed 24-hour per day to receive questions, complaints,
reports of collisions, or notices of noncompliance. The contact information for
the center shall be posted on each SMV.
(k)   An operator may not transfer its SMV parking permit to any other SMV
business or other entity, including a subsidiary, or any individual.
(l)   Prior to the close of business on the expiration date of an SMV parking
permit, unless the SMV parking permit has been renewed, the operator is
responsible to remove its SMVs, all equipment, and improvements from the
permitted space and to restore the permitted space to the condition it was in
at the commencement of the SMV parking permit term.
(Added by Ord. 19-29)
§ 15-31.5 Shared micromobility vehicle deployment and parking.
(a)   An operator is responsible for ensuring that its SMVs and SMV users
comply with the following requirements:
(1)   An SMV must be standing upright when deployed and parked on city
property;
(2)   An SMV may not be deployed or parked on a sidewalk, street, or highway
controlled by the city except in accordance with a valid SMV parking permit;
(3)   An SMV may not be parked in a manner that impedes vehicular traffic on a
street or highway, or impedes pedestrian traffic on a sidewalk; and
(4)   An SMV may not be parked in a manner that obstructs all or a portion of a
bus stop, a commercial loading zone, a disabled parking stall or zone, curb
ramp, or driveway.
(b)   Any SMV deployed or parked in a manner that fails to comply with the
requirements in this section must be re-parked or removed by the operator. If
the director, an authorized city employee or agent, or a police officer
notifies an operator of non-compliance with the requirements in this section,
the operator must remedy the non-compliance within four hours of receiving the
notice. If the non-compliance is not remedied within such time, the city may
remove and store the offending SMV.
(Added by Ord. 19-29)
§ 15-31.6 Operator data sharing requirements.
(a)   An operator shall collect and submit to the director, in the manner and
frequency prescribed by the director, the following data on the SMVs in the
operator’s fleet:
(1)   Number of SMVs deployed;
(2)   Number of SMVs removed from service and returned to the operator’s
physical custody;
(3)   Average length of time an SMV is deployed but not rented;
(4)   Total number of trips for the entire fleet;
(5)   Total number of trips per SMV;
(6)   Trip origin, destination, and duration;
(7)   Total miles ridden; and
(8)   Number of collisions, accidents, injuries, or incidents of property
damage involving an SMV.
(b)   An operator shall collect and submit to the director, in the manner and
frequency prescribed by the director, the following aggregate data on SMV users
and trips taken on deployed SMVs:
(1)   Number of unique SMV users registered with the operator; and
(2)   Number of unique SMV users who used the operator’s service on a monthly
and weekly basis during the reporting period, which shall be determined by the
director.
(c)   An operator shall disclose to each SMV user the types of data it collects
from SMVs and SMV users and the types of data the operator reports to the
department or any other party.
(d)   Data submitted by an operator to the department pursuant to this section
may be subject to public disclosure, and the department may publish such data,
except data identifying individual users or their private information. The
department may use and analyze the data it receives from each operator.
(e)   An operator need not submit the data required by this section to the
department if the director determines the data is proprietary, in which event,
the operator must make the data available for the director’s inspection in lieu
of submitting the data to the city.
(Added by Ord. 19-29)
§ 15-31.7 Fees.
(a)   Application and renewal fees. An SMV business applying for an SMV parking
permit shall submit a non-refundable fee of $500 to the department with the
completed application. This fee shall also be paid when an operator renews its
SMV parking permit annually.
(b)   SMV registration fee. An operator shall pay an annual registration fee of
$30 per SMV that is deployed.
(c)   SMV parking permit fee. The annual fee per SMV parking permit per
designated stall shall be as follows:
(1)   For a stall designated in a parking meter zone, a fee equal to the
corresponding shared mobility annual rental rate, as set forth in §
15-22.4;
(2)   For a stall designated in an unmetered area, a fee equal to the
annualized daily charge for each parking space or unmetered parking stall,
exclusive of Sundays and State holidays, as set forth in §
15-22.8;
(3)   For a stall designated in an off-street parking facility or in an
attendant parking facility, a fee equal to the corresponding shared mobility
annual rental rate, as set forth in §
15-23.2A; and
(4)   For a portion of property controlled by the city that is not covered by
subdivisions (1) to (3), a fee in an amount to be determined by the director.
(d)   To support and facilitate service to low-income SMV users and to
communities determined to be underserved by transit options, the director is
authorized to reduce or waive the SMV parking permit fee. The criteria and
process to waive fees for this purpose shall be set forth in administrative
rules.
(Added by Ord. 19-29)
§ 15-31.8 Removal of unpermitted SMVs.
   It is unlawful for an SMV business to park or deploy SMVs on any city
property, including streets and sidewalks, without a valid SMV parking permit.
When an SMV owned by an unpermitted SMV business is parked on city property and
is found to be available for rent to the public, the city is authorized to
remove and store the SMV.
(Added by Ord. 19-29)
§ 15-31.9 Administrative enforcement.
   Enforcement of this article shall be done pursuant to the traffic code as
set forth in
Articles 4 and
26. If any operator is found to be in violation of its SMV parking permit, this
chapter, or other applicable laws, the department may immediately suspend or
revoke the operator permit, and refuse to issue subsequent SMV parking permits
to that SMV business.
(Added by Ord. 19-29)
§ 15-31.10 Fine–Costs.
   When an SMV is removed by the director or designee, a department employee or
agent, or police officer pursuant to this article, the department will assess a
fine of $150 per SMV to be paid by the operator to the city prior to the city’s
release of the SMV. In addition, the director may require an SMV business to
reimburse any costs the city, department, or any other city agency or office
incurs to address or abate the noncompliance with this article.
(Added by Ord. 19-29)
§ 15-31.11 Deposit of revenues.
   The funds collected under this article shall be deposited in the general
fund.
(Added by Ord. 19-29)
§ 15-31.12 Severability.
   This article is hereby declared to be severable. In accordance therewith, if
any portion of this article is held invalid for any reason, the validity of any
other portion of this article shall not be affected and if the application of
any portion of this article to any person, property, or circumstance is held
invalid, the application hereof to any other person, property or circumstances
shall not be affected.
(Added by Ord. 19-29)
TABLE 15.0: SCHEDULES*
Schedule   Title   Section
   I   Traffic Signal Lights   
15-6.2
   II   Traffic Signal Lights on Federal-Aid Highways   
15-6.2
   III   Right or Left Turns Against a Red Signal   
15-6.3
   IV   Speed Limit Zones 15 Miles Per Hour   
15-7.2
   V   Speed Limit Zones 25 Miles Per Hour   
15-7.2
   VI   Speed Limit Zones 30 Miles Per Hour   
15-7.2
   VII   Speed Limit Zones 35 Miles Per Hour   
15-7.2
   VIII   Speed Limit Zones 45 Miles Per Hour   
15-7.2
   IX   Speed Limit Zones 50 Miles Per Hour   
15-7.2
   X   Speed Limit Zones 65 Miles Per Hour   
15-7.2
   XI   No-Turns   
15-8.3
   XII   One-Way Streets   
15-10.1
   XIII   “Yield Right-of-Way” Intersections   
15-11.2
   XIV   Stop Intersections   
15-11.3
   XV   Through Streets   
15-12.1
   XVI   Reserved Parking Stalls   
15-13.4
   XVII   Tow Zones Morning Peak Period   
15-13.9
   XVIII   Tow Zones Afternoon Peak Period   
15-13.9
   XIX   Tow Zones Morning and Afternoon Peak Period   
15-13.9
   XX   Tow Zones 24-Hour   
15-13.9
   XXI   Tow Zones Restricted Parking Other Than Peak Traffic Hours   
15-13.9
   XXII   Prohibited Parking Certain Areas   
15-14.5
   XXIII   Prohibited Loading and Unloading Certain Areas   
15-14.5
   XXIV   Curb Loading Zones   
15-15.1
   XXV   Official Bus Stops   
15-15.3
   XXVI   Time Limit Parking   
15-16.1
   XXVII   Marked Crosswalks   
15-17.1
   XXVIII   Restricting Pedestrians Crossing Roadways   
15-17.2
   XXIX   Fishing and Crabbing Restricted from Certain Bridges   
15-17.7
   XXX   Parking Meter Zones   
15-22.1
   XXXI   Transit Bus Lanes   
15-6.7
   XXXII   Two-Way Left Turn Lanes   
15-6.7
   XXXIII   Speed Limit Zones 55 Miles Per Hour   
15-7.2
   XXXIV   Bicycle Lanes   
15-18.3
   XXXV   Express Bus Lanes   
15-6.7
   XXXVI   Express Bus and Car Pool Lanes   
15-6.7
   XXXVII   Speed Limit Zones 10 Miles Per Hour   
15-7.2
   XXXVIII   Miscellaneous Traffic Controls   
15-7.2;
15-24.17
   XXXIX      Establishment of Restricted Parking Zones   
15-30.3
   XL   Speed Limit Zones 20 Miles Per Hour   
15-7.2
Editor’s note:
   The schedules referred to in this table are on file in the office of the
city and county clerk and the department of transportation services, City and
County of Honolulu, and are available for examination by the general public
during reasonable hours.
CHAPTER 15A: REGULATIONS OF VEHICLES
Articles
   
1.   Bicycles
   
2.   Permits and License Fees for Driving Motor Vehicles
   
3.   Motor Vehicle Weight Tax
   
4.   Motor Vehicle Registration
   
5.   Motor Vehicle Alarms
   
6.   Inspection Fees for Reconstructed Vehicles
ARTICLE 1: BICYCLES
Sections
   
15A-1.1   Definitions
   
15A-1.2   Retail bicycle dealers—Records required
   
15A-1.3   Proof of ownership
   
15A-1.4   Certificates of registration
   
15A-1.5   Transfer of registration
   
15A-1.6   Evidence of ownership
   
15A-1.7   Serial numbers—Defacing prohibited
   
15A-1.8   Applicability
   
15A-1.9   Violation—Penalty
§ 15A-1.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Child. A minor under the age of 18 years.
Director. The director of customer services and includes the director of
customer services’s authorized deputies and subordinates.
New Bicycle. A new bicycle or a bicycle previously unregistered under this
article that is sold by a retail dealer.
Parent. Either one of the parents of the child, or any legal guardian.
Retail Dealer. Any person who sells bicycles in the regular course of business
primarily for the use and enjoyment of the purchaser and not for resale.
Transferee. The person to whom and in whose name a bicycle will be transferred
including retail dealers or in the case of a child, the child’s parent.
(Sec. 13-31.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 12, § 41-12.1)
§ 15A-1.2 Retail bicycle dealers—Records required.
   All retail dealers shall keep a record for four years after the sale of a
new bicycle of the name of the purchaser, and the serial number, description,
and make of the bicycle sold to the purchaser. This record may be inspected by
the chief of police or the chief of police’s representative during reasonable
business hours.
(Sec. 13-31.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 12, § 41-12.2)
§ 15A-1.3 Proof of ownership.
   Upon initial registration of a new bicycle with the city by an owner within
five days of the purchase thereof and as required by HRS § 249-14, the director
shall require the owner to furnish proof of ownership in the form or nature of
a bill of sale executed by a retail dealer, in the name of the purchaser. The
bill of sale shall include the name and address of the retail dealer, a written
statement executed by the purchaser that the purchaser has examined the bicycle
to verify the correct serial number and description as written in the bill of
sale. If the purchaser is a child, the bill of sale shall be issued in the name
of the parent. The director may verify the bill of sale presented at the
registration of the bicycle from the records of the retail dealer.
(Sec. 13-31.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 12, § 41-12.3)
§ 15A-1.4 Certificates of registration.
(a)   Upon the presentation of satisfactory evidence of proof of ownership as
required by § 15A-1.3, the director shall assign to such bicycle a number plate
and issue to the owner whose name appears on the bill of sale, a certificate of
registration. In the event of loss, mutilation, or destruction of any
certificates of registration, the owner of the registered bicycle shall file
such statement of facts and provide such other information as the director
shall require and unless the director shall otherwise direct, a duplicate
certificate of registration shall be issued.
(b)   The certificate of registration shall contain upon the face thereof, the
date of issue, the number plate assigned to the bicycle, the name and address
of the owner, the serial number, description, make of the bicycle, and such
other information as may be deemed necessary by the director. The reverse side
of the certificate of registration shall contain a form for notice to the
director of a transfer of registration by the owner.
(Sec. 13-31.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 12, § 41-12.4)
§ 15A-1.5 Transfer of registration.
(a)   Upon a transfer of the registration of a bicycle registered under this
article, the person named on the face of the registration and the transferee
shall endorse the certificate of registration to the intended transferee, or
the transferee’s parent if such transferee is a child.
(b)   Within 20 days thereafter, the transferee shall forward the certificate
of registration so endorsed to the director. Upon receipt of the certificate
properly endorsed, the director shall examine and determine the genuineness and
regularity of the transfer of registration of the bicycle, and the director
shall prevent the transfer of registration of a bicycle by any person not
entitled thereto. Upon being satisfied as to the regularity of the application
for transfer of registration, the director shall reregister the bicycle in the
name of the transferee and shall issue to the transferee a new certificate of
registration. No bicycle registration under this article shall be transferred
except as provided in this section.
(Sec. 13-31.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 12, § 41-12.5)
§ 15A-1.6 Evidence of ownership.
   Under no circumstances shall any certificate of registration issued under
this part be a guaranty as to the validity of the title to the bicycle by the
director, nor shall the certificate of registration be used as collateral for a
loan or the recordation of liens.
(Sec. 13-31.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 12, § 41-12.6)
§ 15A-1.7 Serial numbers—Defacing prohibited.
(a)   No person shall wilfully deface, destroy, or alter the serial number, a
component part number, or any other identification mark of any bicycle so
placed or stamped on a bicycle by the manufacturer for the purpose of
identifying the bicycle or its component parts.
(b)   This section does not prohibit the restoration by an owner of an original
mark or number, when the restoration is authorized in writing by the director.
(Sec. 13-31.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 12, § 41-12.7)
§ 15A-1.8 Applicability.
   This article shall not apply to any new bicycle sold before the effective
date of this article.
(Sec. 13-31.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 12, § 41-12.8)
§ 15A-1.9 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating §§ 15A-1.2 and 15A-1.7 shall be fined not more than
$500.
(Sec. 13-31.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 12, § 41-12.9)
(Am. Ord. 95-20)
ARTICLE 2: PERMITS AND LICENSE FEES FOR DRIVING MOTOR VEHICLES
Sections
   
15A-2.1   Definitions
   
15A-2.2   License and permit fees
   
15A-2.3   Disposition of proceeds
§ 15A-2.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Driver’s License. A license authorizing a person to operate the category of
motor vehicles specified in HRS § 286-102.
Duplicate. An instruction permit or driver’s license issued to replace one that
is lost, destroyed, or illegible.
Instruction Permit. The permit referred to in HRS § 286-110.
Renewal. Any driver’s license issued to the same person after an original
license or to the same person after the reissuance of a driver’s license.
(Sec. 13-28.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 16, § 41-16.1)
(Am. Ords. 97-53, 06-12; 08-29)
§ 15A-2.2 License and permit fees.
(a)   The issuance or renewal of a driver’s license shall be $5 per year or
fraction thereof.
(b)   The issuance of an instruction permit or any renewal thereof shall be
subject to the payment of a fee of $5.
(c)   The issuance of a duplicate permit or license shall be subject to the
payment of a fee of $6.
(d)   The reinstatement fee for a suspended or revoked current or expired
license shall be $20.
(e)   The fee for the category type one, two, or three road test given to
applicants shall be $8 for each test and is in addition to all other fees
enumerated in this section. The fee shall be paid before the road test is
administered and may be refunded only if the applicant does not begin the road
test. Failure to pass the road test shall not be grounds for a refund.
(f)   There shall be established a road test reservation fee for each road test
reservation made by an applicant. The road test reservation fee shall be the
same as the fee established in subsection (e) and shall be paid by the
applicant before the reservation is made. This fee shall be applied to the
payment of the road test fee. If an applicant fails the road test, fails to
appear, appears late, or cancels a reservation, the road test reservation fee
shall be forfeited.
(g)   There shall be established a test fee of $2 for each written or machine
examination and $10 for each oral examination taken by applicants. Failure to
pass the examination shall not be grounds for a refund.
(Sec. 13-28.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 16, § 41-16.2)
(Am. Ords. 88-52, 95-32, 97-53, 06-12, 08-29, 11-8)
§ 15A-2.3 Disposition of proceeds.
   All fees collected pursuant to § 15A-2.2 shall become a realization of the
city.
(Sec. 13-28.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 16, § 41-16.3)
ARTICLE 3: MOTOR VEHICLE WEIGHT TAX
Sections
   
15A-3.1   Vehicle weight tax
   
15A-3.2   Delinquent penalties
   
15A-3.3   Shelter buses
§ 15A-3.1 Vehicle weight tax.
(a)   The rate and the minimum tax at which all vehicles and motor vehicles
shall be taxed as provided by HRS § 249-2, as amended, shall be as provided in
subsections (b), (c), (d), and (e).
(b)   Motor vehicles designed primarily for the purpose of carrying passengers.
The rate for motor vehicles designed primarily for carrying passengers shall
be:
 
Cents per Pound of Vehicle Net Weight Effective Date
6.0                                   January 1, 2018
7.0                                   January 1, 2019
 
This category shall include but is not limited to motor vehicles primarily
designed to carry passengers, buses, ambulances, and hearses.
(c)   (1)   Trucks or noncommercial motor vehicles having a net weight of 6,500
pounds or less. The rate for trucks and noncommercial motor vehicles having a
net weight of 6,500 pounds or less and that are not being operated for
compensation or commercial purposes shall be:
 
Cents per Pound of Vehicle Net Weight Effective Date
6.0                                   January 1, 2018
7.0                                   January 1, 2019
 
The owner of such truck or noncommercial motor vehicle who desires to have such
vehicle taxed at the rate provided in this subdivision shall comply with the
requirements in subdivision (2).
(2)   For original registration under this category, the owner shall:
(A)   File an application with the director of budget and fiscal services for
registration of a noncommercial motor vehicle;
(B)   Register the vehicle under an individual’s name, or if the vehicle is
leased, provide proof that the vehicle is leased to an individual and not to a
company; and
(C)   Pay the applicable weight tax and registration fees.
When the vehicle is currently registered as a commercial vehicle and the owner
wishes to reclassify the vehicle under this category, the owner shall, in
addition to the above, also surrender the vehicle’s current certificate of
registration and license plates.
When the owner has complied with the foregoing requirements, and has paid the
applicable fees, the director of budget and fiscal services shall issue a set
of passenger vehicle license plates, emblem, and a new certificate of
registration.
(d)   Trucks or commercial vehicles. The rate for trucks, commercial vehicles
and other vehicles designed for carrying property or for purposes other than
the carrying of passengers shall be:
 
Cents per Pound of Vehicle Net Weight Effective Date
6.5                                   January 1, 2018
7.5                                   January 1, 2019
 
This category shall include, but is not limited to, trucks, truck tractors and
road tractors, trailers and semitrailers; provided that trucks and
noncommercial vehicles that qualify under subsection (c) are exempted from this
category.
(e)   Minimum tax. The minimum tax assessed and collected by reason of this
section shall in no case be less than $12.
(Sec. 14-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 17, § 41-17.1)
(Am. Ords. 89-79, 92-65, 93-110, 95-62, 03-42, 05-016, 09-15, 17-24)
§ 15A-3.2 Delinquent penalties.
   Any vehicle weight tax imposed by this article for any year and not paid
when due is delinquent. An annual penalty of $8 for vehicles taxed at the
passenger rate and $20 for vehicles taxed at the commercial rate shall be added
to, and become part of, the tax to be collected.
(Sec. 14-1.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 17, § 41-17.2)
(Am. Ords. 89-79, 95-62)
§ 15A-3.3 Shelter buses.
(a)   Notwithstanding this chapter, shelter buses shall be taxed at zero cents
per pound of the net weight of such vehicle.
(b)   For the purposes of this section, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Shelter Bus. A commercial passenger vehicle that is at least 40 feet in length
that:
(1)   Has been refitted to be used and is used as a temporary shelter for the
homeless;
(2)   Is suitable for such use, and complies with all laws, regulations, and
standards governing its use as a temporary shelter, including health and safety
regulations; and
(3)   Complies with, and is used, operated, and maintained in accordance with
all applicable laws and rules governing such vehicles.
   The owner’s certification as to the foregoing may be deemed acceptable.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 17, § 41-17.3) (Added by Ord. 06-17; Am. Ord. 07-11)
ARTICLE 4: MOTOR VEHICLE REGISTRATION
Sections
   
15A-4.1   Fee for registration, number plates and tags or emblems
   
15A-4.2   Fee for tag or emblem in subsequent years
   
15A-4.3   Fees for the issuance of a new series of number plates, or
replacement of lost or mutilated number plates, tags, or emblems
   
15A-4.4   Fee for dealer correction
   
15A-4.5   Fee for transfer of title
   
15A-4.6   Fee for duplicate certificates of title
   
15A-4.7   Registration of new and used motor vehicles
§ 15A-4.1 Fee for registration, number plates and tags or emblems.
(a)   The annual fee for the registration of a motor vehicle shall be $20.
(b)   Fees for any one or more of the following: the number plates or tags or
emblems shall be:
(1)   Number plate: $5; and
(2)   Tag or emblem: 50 cents.
(c)   For a registration involving a reassignment of number plates, pursuant to
a request from an owner of a motor vehicle registered in the city, to another
motor vehicle subsequently acquired by the owner, the fee shall be $5.
(d)   All fees collected under this section shall be deposited in the general
fund.
(Sec. 14-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 18, § 41-18.1)
(Am. Ords. 92-65, 97-42, 99-24)
§ 15A-4.2 Fee for tag or emblem in subsequent years.
   The fee for the issuance of a tag or emblem for a motor vehicle, upon
payment of the applicable tax, in any year in which the number plates do not
evidence the payment of the current year’s tax, shall be 50 cents.
(Sec. 14-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 18, § 41-18.2)
§ 15A-4.3 Fees for the issuance of a new series of number plates, or
replacement of lost or mutilated number plates, tags, or emblems.
   The fees for the issuance of a new series of number plates, tags, or emblems
shall be the same as the fees charged in § 15A-4.1.
(Sec. 14-2.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 18, § 41-18.3)
§ 15A-4.4 Fee for dealer correction.
   The fee for each instance of correction of the registration records shall be
$10.
(Sec. 14-2.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 18, § 41-18.4)
(Am. Ord. 95-31)
§ 15A-4.5 Fee for transfer of title.
   The fee charged to issue a new certificate of title shall be $10.
(Sec. 14-2.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 18, § 41-18.5)
(Am. Ord. 95-31)
§ 15A-4.6 Fee for duplicate certificates of title.
   The fee for duplicate certificates of title shall be $10.
(Sec. 14-2.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 18, § 41-18.6)
(Am. Ord. 95-31)
§ 15A-4.7 Registration of new and used motor vehicles.
   The director of budget and fiscal services, in coordination with the
director of customer services, shall enter into contracts with car dealerships
and motor vehicle rental companies for the registration of new and used motor
vehicles consistent with any statute, ordinance, or provision of any applicable
collective bargaining agreement. The director may adopt rules pursuant to HRS
Chapter 91 as may be necessary for the application, bonding, and procedural
requirements of the contractor.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 18, § 41-18.7) (Added by Ord. 17-7)
ARTICLE 5: MOTOR VEHICLE ALARMS
Sections
   
15A-5.1   Sanctions for emission of audible sound for certain durations
   
15A-5.2   Activation for at least 10 minutes—Defined
   
15A-5.3   Exception
   
15A-5.4   Other definitions
   
15A-5.5   Authority to enter property to identify motor vehicle and owner
   
15A-5.6   Removal of motor vehicle from property
   
15A-5.7   Authority to deactivate alarm system
§ 15A-5.1 Sanctions for emission of audible sound for certain durations.
(a)   As provided in HRS § 291-24.6, it is unlawful for any motor vehicle alarm
system installed in a motor vehicle to emit any audible sound for more than
five continuous minutes.
(b)   If a motor vehicle alarm system is activated for at least 10 minutes:
(1)   The motor vehicle may be removed from public or private property in
accordance with §
15A-5.6; and
(2)   The motor vehicle alarm system may be silenced in accordance with §
15A-5.7, before removal of the motor vehicle from public or private property.
(c)   If a motor vehicle alarm system is activated for at least 10 minutes and,
within that minimum 10-minute period, emits audible sound for more than five
continuous minutes, both subsections (a) and (b) shall be applicable.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 29, § 41-29.1) (Added by Ord. 90-3)
§ 15A-5.2 Activation for at least 10 minutes—Defined.
(a)   A motor vehicle alarm system is activated for at least 10 minutes if:
(1)   The alarm system emits an audible sound for 10 continuous minutes; or
(2)   The alarm system emits an audible sound intermittently within a 10-minute
period and the episodes of audible sound after the first episode:
(A)   Are not caused by the disturbance of or tampering with the motor vehicle;
but rather
(B)   Are caused by an automatic activation and deactivation mechanism of the
alarm system.
For the purpose of measuring the minimum 10-minute period, the period commences
upon the first audible sound from the motor vehicle alarm system.
(b)   Audible sound shall be emitted “intermittently within a 10-minute period”
if the audible sound is emitted interruptedly in a sequence of at least 10
minutes and, within the sequence:
(1)   Not more than one minute of silence interrupts consecutive episodes of
audible sound; and
(2)   There shall be no minimum duration for any episode of audible sound.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 29, § 41-29.2) (Added by Ord. 90-3)
§ 15A-5.3 Exception.
   This article shall not apply to a person who is doing that which is
reasonably necessary for the purpose of setting by remote control or otherwise
of the motor vehicle alarm and testing of the setting.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 29, § 41-29.3) (Added by Ord. 90-3)
§ 15A-5.4 Other definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Motor Vehicle Alarm System or Alarm System. Has the same meaning as motor
vehicle alarm system as defined in HRS §
291-24.6.
Police Officer. An officer of the police department who is authorized to
enforce the law.
Tow Service. A business engaged in the towing of motor vehicles.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 29, § 41-29.4) (Added by Ord. 90-3)
§ 15A-5.5 Authority to enter property to identify motor vehicle and owner.
   A police officer may enter onto any public or private property to identify
or obtain information to identify:
(1)   A motor vehicle, the alarm system of which has been activated for at
least 10 minutes; and
(2)   The motor vehicle’s registered owner.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 29, § 41-29.5) (Added by Ord. 90-3)
§ 15A-5.6 Removal of motor vehicle from property.
(a)   When the alarm system of a motor vehicle has been activated for at least
10 minutes and the motor vehicle is on public property or private property, a
police officer may remove or cause to be removed the vehicle from the property
to a storage area or other place of safety. The registered owner of the motor
vehicle shall be responsible for all reasonable expenses, costs, and charges
incurred by the deactivation of such alarm, and the removal and storage of such
vehicle in accordance with this article.
(b)   Upon discovery by a police officer of a motor vehicle that is or may
become subject to removal pursuant to this section, the officer shall make
reasonable efforts to locate the registered owner of the motor vehicle and
request the silencing of the alarm system. If the registered owner refuses or
is unable to immediately silence the alarm system or if, after reasonable
efforts, the registered owner cannot be located, the motor vehicle may be
removed.
(c)   Before removing the motor vehicle, the police officer may authorize the
tow service to deactivate the alarm system in accordance with § 15A-5.7.
(d)   Whenever a police officer removes or causes to be removed a motor vehicle
from property as authorized in this section, and the officer knows or is able
to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address
of the registered owner of the vehicle, the officer shall immediately notify
the police department dispatch office. The notification shall specify that the
motor vehicle has been removed, the reason for the removal, and the place to
which the vehicle has been removed.
(e)   If the registered owner is unknown or cannot be ascertained, the police
officer shall immediately notify the police department dispatch office that the
registered owner is unknown. In the event the vehicle is not returned to the
owner within a period of three days, then and in that event, the police
department dispatch office shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written
report of such removal by mail to the director of budget and fiscal services.
Such report shall include a complete description of the motor vehicle, the
license plate number of the vehicle, the date, time, and place from which
removed, the reasons for such removal, and the place to which the vehicle has
been removed.
(f)   This article is an ordinance authorizing the police to remove and store
vehicles. As such:
(1)   HRS § 290-10 shall apply to a motor vehicle that has been removed from
property and stored pursuant to this section; and
(2)   The director of finance may dispose of the motor vehicle in accordance
with HRS § 290-10.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 29, § 41-29.6) (Added by Ord. 90-3)
§ 15A-5.7 Authority to deactivate alarm system.
(a)   A police officer may authorize the tow service to enter or open a motor
vehicle, in which the alarm system has been activated for at least 10 minutes,
and silence the alarm system. The tow service shall do that which is reasonably
necessary when entering or opening the motor vehicle and silencing the alarm
system.
(b)   Before authorizing the entering or opening of the motor vehicle, the
police officer shall have made the reasonable efforts to locate the registered
owner and request the silencing of the alarm system, as required under § 15A-
5.6 (b). If, pursuant to § 15A-5.6 (b), the police officer becomes authorized
to remove the motor vehicle, the officer also may authorize the entering or
opening of the motor vehicle and silencing of the alarm system.
(c)   After silencing the alarm system, the motor vehicle shall be towed to a
storage area or other place of safety. The vehicle shall be locked or otherwise
secured from unauthorized entry and written notice of the action shall be left
on the windshield of the motor vehicle. If the alarm system is also in
violation of HRS §
291-24.6, the written notice required under this subsection shall be in
addition to the summons or citation issued for the violation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 29, § 41-29.7) (Added by Ord. 90-3)
ARTICLE 6: INSPECTION FEES FOR RECONSTRUCTED VEHICLES
Sections
   
15A-6.1   Definitions
   
15A-6.2   Inspection fee for reconstructed vehicle
   
15A-6.3   Repeal
§ 15A-6.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Department. The department of customer services.
Motorcycle. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 291C-1.
Reconstructed Vehicle. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 286-2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 38, § 41-38.1) (Added by Ord. 95-69)
§ 15A-6.2 Inspection fee for reconstructed vehicle.
(a)   The department shall charge the following fees for the inspection of a
vehicle for reconstruction:
(1)   Motorcycle: $8; and
(2)   Vehicle (other than motorcycle): $15.
(b)   The reconstructed vehicle owner, or the applicant designated by the
owner, shall pay the inspection fee established in subsection (a) before the
inspection of the reconstructed vehicle. If, however, upon preliminary review,
the department determines that an inspection is not required, the inspection
fee collected pursuant to this subdivision shall be refunded to the owner or
the applicant designated by the owner.
(c)   No additional inspection fee shall be required for the reinspection of
any items found to be deficient on the initial inspection of a reconstructed
vehicle, if the vehicle is presented for reinspection within 90 days after the
date of initial inspection.
(d)   If, after 90 days of the date of initial inspection, a reconstructed
vehicle has failed to receive certification, the entire application and
inspection process shall be initiated again and the fees established in
subsection (a) shall be charged for inspection.
(e)   All fees collected under this section shall be deposited into the general
fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 38, § 41-38.2) (Added by Ord. 95-69; Am. Ord. 97-42)
§ 15A-6.3 Repeal.
   Upon the repeal of HRS § 286-85, this article is repealed and shall have no
further force or effect.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 38, § 41-38.3) (Added by Ord. 95-69)
CHAPTER 15B: PUBLIC TRANSIT
Articles
   
1.   Definitions
   
2.   Islandwide Fare Structure
   
3.   Activities Prohibited on the Multimodal Municipal Transportation System
   
4.   Special Transit Service
   
5.   Taxicab Subsidies
   
6.   City Bus System
   
7.   Reserved
   
8.   Transit Management Services Contractor
   
9.   Reserved
   
10.   Reserved
   
11.   Reserved
   
12.   Lying Down at Bus Stops
   
13.   Automated External Defibrillators
   
14.   City Transit System
   
15.   Advertising on the Multimodal Municipal Transportation System
ARTICLE 1: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
15B-1.1   Definitions
§ 15B-1.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ADA. The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-336, 104 Stat.
327, 42 U.S.C. 12101-12213 and 47 U.S.C. 225 and 611), as it may be amended
from time to time.
Authorized Transit Personnel. Personnel employed by the city, or contracted
with on behalf of the city, and authorized to operate, maintain, or support the
multimodal municipal transportation system including but not limited to the
drivers or operators of any city transit system vehicle, repair or maintenance
workers, contracted security officers, any other agent of the city transit
system, or any police officer acting in the officer’s official capacity in
support of the multimodal municipal transportation system.
Bus. A self-propelled rubber-tired vehicle intended for use on city streets,
highways, and busways, including but not limited to minibuses, 40- and 30-foot
buses, articulated buses, double-deck buses, and electrically powered trolley
buses. Self-propelled, rubber-tired vehicles designed to look like antique or
vintage trolleys are considered buses.
Bus Management Services Contractor. The private, nonprofit corporation which,
on March 31, 1997, held the contract to manage the city bus system.
Bus Personnel. Personnel employed by the transit management services contractor
exclusively or predominantly for the operation and maintenance of the city bus
system.
Bus Shelter. A structure with a roof or covering at a city designated bus stop
where passengers are protected or shielded while they are waiting for a city
bus.
Bus Stop. Has the same meaning as defined in §
41-14.1.
Bus Stop Area. The area at a bus stop occupying the entire width of the
sidewalk that extends 20 feet before a bus stop sign or bus stop route sign or,
for bus stops furnished with a shelter or shelters, the footprint of the
shelters, and the entire width of the sidewalk that extends 10 feet before and
10 feet after the footprint of the shelter. The footprint of a shelter is
defined by vertical planes, perpendicular to the ground, extending down from
the outermost edges of the shelter overhang or roof.
City Bus System. The public mass transit service provided by the city through
the use of buses. The term includes:
(1)   Regularly scheduled public mass transit service provided through the use
of buses operating over fixed routes; or
(2)   Periodic or specially scheduled public mass transit service provided
through the use of buses for special events.
City Paratransit System or Special Transit Service. The public transit service
which supplements the city bus system to serve persons who are paratransit
eligible according to the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA); CFR
49, Part 37, Subpart F, § 37.123 and persons certified as eligible by the
department.
City Payment Card or CPC or Approved Card. The city payment card that may be
issued by the department pursuant to §
2-12.2.
City Rail System. The public transit service provided by the city through the
use of train cars on a fixed guideway system.
City Rail Vehicle. A train car owned by the city and used in the city rail
system to transport passengers.
City Transit Bus. A bus used in the city bus system and owned by:
(1)   The city; or
(2)   A contractor with the city.
City Transit System Vehicle. Any vehicle designed for carrying passengers and
used for providing public transit services as part of the multimodal municipal
transportation system.
Department. The department of transportation services.
Designated Bus Stop Area. A bus stop area at which a sign has been posted as
provided in §
15B-12.4.
Director. The director of transportation services or designated representative.
As appropriate to the circumstances, approval by the director shall include
approval by designated representatives.
Expressive Activity. Has the same meaning as defined in §
13-15A.2(d).
Hawaii Resident. Has the same meaning as “resident” as defined in HRS § 235-1.
Health Care Professional. Includes a clinical social worker, occupational
therapist, physiatrist, physical therapist, rehabilitation specialist, medical
physician, registered nurse, psychologist, or similar professional duly
licensed to practice in the State of Hawaii.
Identification Card. Includes the following:
(1)   Paratransit eligibility identification cards distributed as approved by
the department for the duration as indicated on the card;
(2)   Employee identification cards distributed and approved by the transit
management services contractor for the duration indicated on the card;
(3)   Student, Honolulu police department officers, and generally accepted
photo identification cards issued by respective agencies and schools as
indicated on the card;
(4)   Identification cards for persons with a permanent or temporary disability
under §
15B-2.2; or
(5)   Identification cards for senior citizens.
Monthly Pass. A transit pass that is valid for a one-month period.
Multimodal Municipal Transportation System or City Transit System. All public
transportation systems of the city, including but not limited to, the city bus
system, special transit services, and the city rail system and associated
parking and other services.
Personal Care Attendant. A person designated or employed specifically to help a
person with a disability meet the person with a disability’s personal needs and
without whom the person with a disability would not be able to ride.
Senior Citizen. A person 65 years of age or older.
Sidewalk. Has the same meaning as defined in §
29-1.1.
Special Transit Service Personnel. Personnel employed by the transit management
services contractor exclusively or predominantly for the operation and
maintenance of the special transit service.
Special Transit Service Vehicle. A vehicle owned by the city and used in the
special transit service.
Supplemental Bus Service. The public mass transit service provided by the city
to supplement the city bus system.
Supplemental Special Transit Service. The public transit service provided by
the city to supplement the special transit service.
Transit Management Services Contractor. The private, nonprofit corporation
contracted in accordance with this chapter to manage, operate, and maintain the
city bus system and special transit service, except where the city otherwise
provides supplemental bus service or supplemental special transit service.
(1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 1, § 13-1.1) (Added by Ord. 91-27; Am. Ords. 93-90,
96-30, 97-02, 07-13, 08-20, 18-5, 21-7, 22-35 , 23-21)
ARTICLE 2: ISLANDWIDE FARE STRUCTURE
Sections
   
15B-2.1   Fare structure
   
15B-2.2   Reduced fare—Persons with a disability
   
15B-2.3   Reduced fare—Senior citizens
   
15B-2.4   Baggage
   
15B-2.5   Payment by passengers for use of the city transit system
   
15B-2.6   Suspension of fares for promotional and demonstration purposes
   
15B-2.7   Conditions for transit passes, identification cards, or programmed
city payment cards for reduced fare—Penalty
   
15B-2.8   Reserved
   
15B-2.9   Police officers
   
15B-2.10   Transit fares for individuals with extremely low incomes
   
15B-2.11   Reserved
   
15B-2.12   City payment card—Maximum capped fares
   
15B-2.13   Student transit pass program
§ 15B-2.1 Fare structure.
(a)   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Adult. Any person over the age of 17 years who does not qualify as a “youth.”
Child. Any person five years of age or younger who is accompanied by a fare-
paying passenger, a city employee, or an employee of the transit management
services contractor. If not so accompanied, any person five years of age or
younger is a “youth” for the purposes of this section.
Medicare Cardholder. Any person to whom a Medicare card has been issued,
pursuant to Title II or Title XVIII of the Social Security Act, 42 USC § 401,
et seq. and 42 USC § 1395, et seq.
Paratransit Eligibility ID Holder. A person with a card issued under §
15B-4.3.
Person with a Disability under § 15B-2.2. A person with a temporary or
permanent disability qualified for a fare plan under §
15B-2.2.
Senior Citizen. A person 65 years of age or older with a programmed city
payment card issued in accordance with §
15B-2.3.
Service Day. The hours of operation of the city bus system and city rail system
from 12:01 a.m. to 2:59 a.m. the following day.
Single Ride Fare. The required payment for a ride on the city bus system or the
city rail system.
Single Ride Fare Special Event. The required payment for a ride on the city bus
system or the city rail system for a special event as designated by the
director.
Student Transit Pass. A card, including a smart card, ticket, voucher, or
similar document, distributed as approved by the department, that entitles a
student holding the pass to ride on the city bus and rail system for the
duration specified on the pass.
Youth. A person six through 17 years of age, subject to the presentation of a
valid identification card establishing the age of the person. “Youth” includes
high school students 18 and 19 years of age with a valid high school
identification card establishing the age of the student and the student’s
current enrollment, but excludes college, university, and vocational training
students if over the age of 17.
(b)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, the following fares apply
to every passenger using the city bus system and the city rail system, and
every passenger riding the city bus system and the city rail system shall pay
the applicable fare set forth in this table:
FARE STRUCTURE TABLE
          Cash   Fares Paid Using City Payment Card Special Event
                 (CPC) Only
                 Single Ride
                 with 2.5-
                 Hour Capped
                 Fare with   Daily   Monthly
Passenger Single Free        Pass or Pass or Annual Single Ride Fare – Special
Category  Ride   Transfers   Maximum Maximum Pass   Event
          Fare   Between     Capped  Capped
                 Bus, Rail,  Fare    Fare
                 and
                 Paratransit
                 Systems
FARE STRUCTURE TABLE
                                   Cash        Fares Paid Using City Payment Card (CPC)     Special Event
                                               Only
                                               Single Ride
                                               with 2.5-
                                               Hour Capped
                                               Fare with   Daily Pass Monthly
                                   Single Ride Free        or Maximum Pass or    Annual     Single Ride Fare – Special
Passenger Category                 Fare        Transfers   Capped     Maximum    Pass       Event
                                               Between     Fare       Capped
                                               Bus, Rail,             Fare
                                               and
                                               Paratransit
                                               Systems
Adult                              $3          $3          $7.50      $80        $880       $6.25
                                               $1.50 with  $3.75 with $40 with   $440 with
Youth                              $1.50       programmed  programmed programmed programmed $6.25
                                               CPC         CPC        CPC        CPC
Child                              $0          $0          $0         $0         $0         $0
Senior Citizen(Non-Hawaii          $1.25 with  $1.25 with  $3 with    Not        Not
Resident)                          valid CPC   programmed  programmed applicable applicable $6.25
                                   ID          CPC         CPC
                                   $1.25 with  $1.25 with  $3 with    $20 with   $45 with
Senior Citizen (Hawaii Resident)   valid CPC   programmed  programmed programmed programmed $6.25
                                   ID          CPC         CPC        CPC        CPC
Person with a Disability Under §  $1.25 with  $1.25 with  $3 with    Not        Not
15B-2.2 (Non- Hawaii Resident)     valid CPC   programmed  programmed applicable applicable $6.25
                                   ID          CPC         CPC
Person with a Disability Under §  $1.25 with  $1.25 with  $3 with    $20 with   $45 with
15B-2.2 (Hawaii Resident)          valid CPC   programmed  programmed programmed programmed $6.25
                                   ID          CPC         CPC        CPC        CPC
                                   $1.25 with  $1.25 with  $3 with
Medicare Cardholders (Non-Hawaii   valid       programmed  programmed Not        Not        $6.25
Resident)                          Medicare    CPC         CPC        applicable applicable
                                   Card ID
                                   $1.25 with  $1.25 with  $3 with    $20 with   $45 with
Medicare Cardholders (Hawaii       valid       programmed  programme  programmed programmed $6.25
Resident)                          Medicare    CPC         d CPC      CPC        CPC
                                   Card ID
                                   $1.25 with  $1.25 with  $2 with    $6 with    $35 with
Paratransit Eligibility ID Holders valid       programmed  programmed programmed programmed $6.25
                                   paratransit CPC         CPC        CPC        CPC
                                   ID
                                   $0 when     Not         Not        Not        Not
Personal Care Attendant (PCA)      performing  applicable  applicable applicable applicable $6.25
                                   PCA service
 
(c)   The department may establish a program for the use of transit passes
issued to individuals upon payment of the designated fare, which may be used
for the duration specified on the pass. The passes will be issued at various
locations to be selected and advertised by the department. The department,
through the department of budget and fiscal services, may enter into
contractual arrangements with any parties, private or public, when such
arrangements are deemed to be in the public interest for the sale and issuance
of transit passes. The council must be informed within 30 days of the city’s
entering into any such arrangement.
(d)   The department may allow a person to board a city transit system vehicle
or enter a designated paid fare area without being charged a fare as part of a
promotional offer or package made available by the city.
(e)   In the event of a strike or work stoppage that shuts down any portion of
the multimodal municipal transportation system, the department may make fare
adjustments as in the judgment of the department are warranted by the
particular circumstances.
(f)   The department may establish a program for the issuance of college and
university student, faculty, and staff transit passes. Such passes may be
issued to students, faculty, and staff by a college or university and will be
subject to terms to be agreed upon between the college or university and the
department. Students, faculty, and staff to whom the passes are issued shall
pay the fare negotiated rather than a fare established under subsection (b).
(g)   The department may establish a program for the issuance of student
transit passes in accordance with §
15B-2.13. The passes may be issued to students by a participating State
department of education school and will be subject to terms to be agreed upon
between the department and the State department of education. The fare for
students to whom the transit passes are issued must be paid by the State
department of education at the fare negotiated rather than a fare established
under subsection (b).
(h)   The department may establish a program for the issuance of free transit
passes for city employees.
(i)   A child riding a city transit system vehicle for free may not occupy a
seat to the exclusion of another passenger.
(j)   The department may establish a trainer pass program for persons who train
persons with disabilities to use the city transit system.
(k)   A personal care attendant accompanying a paratransit eligibility ID
holder may not pay a fare when performing the service.
(l)   The department may establish special reduced term passes for periods of
seven days or less at fares provided in this subsection rather than a fare
established under subsection (b). Reduced term passes will be valid for riders
of all ages. The three-day pass shall be sold at $20, and the seven-day pass
will be sold at $35. The three-day pass will be valid for 72 hours after the
initial tap on a fare validator. The seven-day pass will be valid for 168 hours
after the initial tap on a fare validator.
(Sec. 28-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 2, §
13-2.1) (Am. Ords. 89-56, 91-27, 91-70, 93-56, 93-89, 95-22, 96-55, 97-02, 01-
20, 02-18, 02-67, 03-19, 03-27, 07-13, 08-20, 09-17, 09-28, 13-31, 17-1, 17-27,
21-7, 22-35 , 24-6)
Editor’s note:
   In accordance with Ord. 24-6, any program for student fares established
pursuant to subsection (g) may be retroactively applied to encompass the entire
2023 - 2024 academic program year.
§ 15B-2.2 Reduced fare—Persons with a disability.
(a)   Single fare; use of a programmed city payment card. When the department
determines a passenger is a person with a disability as defined in subsection
(b) with supporting evidence of the disability provided pursuant to subsection
(c), and is qualified to pay the reduced fare for a person with a disability as
specified in §
15B-2.1, the department shall issue the passenger a city payment card
programmed for the reduced fare for a person with a disability as set forth in
the fare structure table as specified in §
15B-2.1. The person with a disability must use the programmed city payment card
to pay the reduced fare for rides on the city bus system and city rail system;
the reduced fare is not applicable when fares for special event services are
charged or for rides on the city paratransit system.
(b)   Definition. For the purposes of this section, a "person with a
disability" who qualifies for the reduced fare for a person with a disability
as specified in §
15B-2.1 includes any individual who, by reason of illness, injury, advanced
age, congenital malfunction or other permanent or temporary incapacity or
physical or mental disability, is unable, without special facilities or special
planning or design, to utilize the city bus system or city rail system as
effectively as a person who is not so affected. A "person with a disability"
also includes a person with any incapacity or physical or mental disability
that results in the inability of a person to perform one or more of the
following functions necessary for the effective use of the city bus system and
city rail system facilities or vehicles without significant difficulty:
(1)   Negotiating a flight of stairs, escalator, or ramp;
(2)   Boarding or alighting from a city transit system vehicle;
(3)   Reading informational signs; or
(4)   Walking more than 200 feet.
(c)   Supporting evidence of disability. Applicants for the reduced fare for
persons with a disability as specified in §
15B-2.1 must submit current proof of the disability provided in writing by a
health care professional or any governmental agency involved in a physical or
mental disability program and recognized by the department.
(d)   Programmed city payment card; duration and validity.
(1)   Permanent disability. A programmed city payment card for the reduced fare
for persons with a disability as specified in §
15B-2.1 issued to a person with a disability whose disability is determined to
be permanent will be valid for four years commencing on the date of issuance.
The programmed city payment card may be renewed upon the expiration of the
prior term.
(2)   Temporary disability. A programmed city payment card for the reduced fare
for persons with a disability as specified in §
15B-2.1 issued to a person with a disability whose disability is determined to
be temporary will be valid and programmed for either two years or for the
expected duration of the disability as specified in writing by a health care
professional, whichever is shorter. The duration shall commence on the date of
issuance. The programmed city payment card may be renewed upon the expiration
of the prior term; provided that the supporting evidence of disability is
presented at each renewal.
(3)   An application for renewal of the programmed city payment card for a
person with a disability may be made no earlier than 30 days prior to the date
of expiration.
(4)   In the event of loss or theft, the person to whom the programmed city
payment card was issued shall notify the department immediately. Thereafter,
the programmed city payment card issued to that person will be invalidated, and
a replacement programmed city payment card may be issued to that person upon
payment of the fee for a replacement card as specified in §
2-12.2.
(e)   Restriction and forfeiture. A person with a disability who holds a valid
programmed city payment card issued in accordance with this section shall
relinquish the city payment card to the department upon the department's
certification of eligibility of the person with a disability for use of the
city paratransit system pursuant to §
15B-4.2.
(f)   Appeal. A passenger who applies for the reduced fare for a person with a
disability specified in §
15B-2.1 and is denied shall receive a notice in writing stating the reasons for
denial. Within 30 calendar days of receipt of the notice, the passenger may
appeal the decision to the director by submitting a completed notice of appeal
in a form prescribed by the department. Within 20 business days from the
receipt of such notice of appeal, the director or the appointed hearings
officer shall schedule a hearing at which the appellant shall be entitled to be
heard in person or through counsel and shall be given a full and fair
opportunity to present any facts showing the reason why the denial was in
error. The director or the appointed hearings officer may affirm, reverse, or
modify the decision under appeal based upon findings of facts that justify the
decision. The decision will be the final decision of the city. All findings of
fact, conclusions of law, and decisions and orders of the director or the
appointed hearings officer must be in written form, kept on file, and open to
public inspection.
(Sec. 28-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 2, §
13-2.2) (Added by Ord. 21-7)
§ 15B-2.3 Reduced fare—Senior citizens.
(a)   Single fare; use of a programmed city payment card. When a passenger is
65 years of age or older, the passenger may apply for a city payment card
programmed for the reduced fare for senior citizens as specified in §
15B-2.1. The department shall issue a programmed city payment card to any
passenger who applies and provides acceptable supporting evidence of age. The
senior citizen must use the programmed city payment card to pay the reduced
fare for rides on the city bus system and city rail system; the reduced fare is
not applicable when fares for special event services are charged or for rides
on the city paratransit system.
(b)   Programmed city payment card; duration and validity. A programmed city
payment card for the reduced fare for a senior citizen specified in §
15B-2.1 shall be valid for four years commencing on the date of issuance. The
programmed city payment card may be renewed upon the expiration of the prior
term. An application for renewal of this programmed city payment card for a
senior citizen may be made no earlier than 30 days prior to the date of
expiration. In the event of loss or theft, the person to whom the programmed
city payment card was issued shall notify the department immediately.
Thereafter, the programmed city payment card will be invalidated, and a
replacement programmed city payment card may be issued to that person upon
payment of the fee for a replacement card as specified in §
2-12.2.
(c)   Restriction and forfeiture. A senior citizen who holds a valid programmed
city payment card issued in accordance with this section shall relinquish the
city payment card to the department upon the department's certification of
eligibility of the senior citizen for use of the city paratransit system
pursuant to §
15B-4.2.
(Sec. 28-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 2, § 13-2.3)
(Added by Ord. 21-7)
§ 15B-2.4 Baggage.
   Baggage that can be stored under a passenger’s seat or on a passenger’s lap,
that will not protrude to another seat or otherwise interfere with other
passengers, will be admitted at no charge. Baggage that will not be admitted on
board shall include any large, bulky, dangerous, or offensive article that may
cause harm or discomfort to any passenger. No baggage may be stored in the
aisle or on the seats.
(Sec. 28 2.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 2, § 13-2.4)
§ 15B-2.5 Payment by passengers for use of the city transit system.
   To use the city transit system, prior to boarding a city transit system
vehicle or entering a designated paid fare area, a passenger must pay the full
applicable fare or present a city payment card or other valid fare instrument
for transportation on or within the city transit system; provided that when
paying a cash fare, a passenger may overpay the fare, but shall not receive any
change if doing so.
(Sec. 28-2.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 2, § 13-2.5)
(Added by Ord. 21-7)
§ 15B-2.6 Suspension of fares for promotional and demonstration purposes.
(a)   The council shall have the authority to suspend, by resolution passed on
one reading, any one or more of the following: the fare structure or any part
thereof in §
15B-2.1, §
15B-4.5, the supplemental bus service, or the supplemental special transit
service for:
(1)   Promotional purposes for a period not exceeding one week; provided that
any such suspension of the fare structure or fare, or both, shall not decrease
the total average monthly fare collection of the city bus system, the city
ferry system, or the special transit service, as appropriate, when full fares
are collected, by more than 5 percent; and provided further, that such
suspension shall be for the purposes of promoting any one or more of the
following: the public ridership of the city bus system or the city ferry system
or ridership of the city’s special transit service by eligible persons;
If a private organization requests, pursuant to this subdivision, that the
department suspend any one or more of the following: bus fares or ferry fares
or the special transit fare to promote any one or more of the following: the
city’s transit bus or city ferry or special transit service as part of that
organization’s function or event, the organization shall submit a request in
writing to the department for the suspension of the fares. In its written
request, the organization shall:
(A)   Provide proof that it is a nonprofit organization exempt or qualified for
an exemption from federal income tax under § 501(c)(3) of the United States
Internal Revenue Code;
(B)   Submit a current audited financial statement of its organization and, if
the organization was required to file a federal income tax return for that
year, to submit its federal income tax return for the year before the submittal
of the request;
(C)   Submit a statement describing the scope of its events and activities, and
copies of all of the required approvals and permits that the organization must
obtain to hold the function or event;
(D)   Demonstrate the community benefits the city will gain from the promotion;
and
(E)   Demonstrate that a minimum of 30,000 persons will participate over a 24-
hour period in the events and activities related to the organization’s function
or event;
(2)   Demonstration projects for a period not exceeding 180 days; provided that
such suspension of any one or more of the following: the fare structure, the
special transit service fares, the supplemental bus service fares, or the
supplemental special transit service fares shall be for the purpose of
demonstrating the need for bus services, ferry services, or special transit
service, the economic viability of the demonstration projects, and operational
efficiencies of the city’s bus system or the city’s ferry system or the city’s
special transit service; and provided further, that a minimum of 50 percent of
the promotional, marketing, and operating cost of such demonstration project
shall be funded from private sector sources other than the city. The private
sector sources shall make a commitment to the city before the approval of the
demonstration project that they will fund their share of the costs of the
demonstration project;
Organizations that are eligible to request a demonstration project involving
the suspension of fares include the department, other government agencies,
private firms, business organizations, community groups, or any combination of
the foregoing organizations. Organizations shall submit in writing a request to
the department that a demonstration project be conducted. In its request, the
organization shall demonstrate the community benefits, such as increased
mobility, stimulation of the economy, and improved convenience to any one or
more of the following: bus riders, ferry riders, or special transit service
riders, that will be gained as a result of the demonstration project; and
(3)   Demonstration projects for a period not exceeding 365 days to begin July
1 of the year the resolution is adopted by the council; provided that such
suspension of the fare structure, the special transit service fares, the
supplemental bus service fares, or the supplemental special transit fares shall
be for the purpose of demonstrating the impact of bus services, ferry services,
or special transit service on traffic congestion, the fiscal viability of the
demonstration projects, or the impact of fare suspensions on operational
efficiencies of the city’s bus system, the city’s ferry system, or the city’s
special transit service; and provided further, that the council shall adopt the
resolution concurrently with final passage of the budget ordinances.
(b)   The department shall transmit to the council in writing its
recommendation to approve or disapprove any proposal submitted to the
department to conduct a promotional or demonstration project pursuant to this
section. With its written recommendation, the department shall submit the
reason or reasons for the department’s recommendation.
If the department recommends approval of the promotional or demonstration
project, the department shall also submit a draft council resolution providing
for the suspension of the fares. Included in the draft resolution shall be the
specific criteria that the department will use to evaluate the success or
failure of the promotional or demonstration project. If the promotional or
demonstration project involves the city bus system or the city ferry system, or
both, the department shall transmit with its recommendation a map of the bus
route or ferry route or routes that city buses or the city ferry, or both, will
follow during the promotional or demonstration project. If the bus or the ferry
route or routes to be followed during the promotional or demonstration project
is or are proposed to be changed, the department shall submit to the council,
at least seven days before the implementation of the new route or routes, a
revised map of the new route or routes to be followed.
(c)   Within 60 days of the completion of the promotional or demonstration
project, the department shall submit a report in writing to the council. In the
report, the department shall at a minimum:
(1)   Discuss the community benefits, if any, gained from the project,
including an estimate, where possible, of the number of new daily riders of the
city bus system or city ferry system, or of new special transit service riders
resulting from the project;
(2)   Include data on the number of riders using city transit buses or city
ferries, or special transit service vehicles during and as part of the
promotional or demonstration project and the cost to the city of the project;
(3)   Evaluate the overall success or failure of the project based on whether
the project met the specific criteria set forth in the council resolution
approving the project, which may include criteria specified by the council; and
(4)   Make recommendations on any future actions on similar requests to conduct
promotional or demonstration projects.
(d)   The private contractor providing city transit bus services, city ferry
services, special transit services, supplemental bus services, or supplemental
special transit services shall provide ridership data to assist the department
in evaluating the success or failure of the promotional and demonstration
projects approved in accordance with this section.
(Sec. 28-2.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 2, § 13-2.6) (Am.
Ords. 91-27, 96-11, 97-02, 01-62, 07-13, 08-4, 08-20)
§ 15B-2.7 Conditions for transit passes, identification cards, or programmed
city payment cards for reduced fare—Penalty.
(a)   For any transit pass, identification card, or programmed city payment
card issued under §§
15B-2.2,
15B-2.3,
15B-2.10,
15B-4.3, or
15B-4.5, collectively referred to in this section as "reduced fare
instruments," it shall be a violation of this article for any person to:
(1)   Transfer any of these reduced fare instruments to another person;
(2)   Allow another person to use any of these reduced fare instruments for
rides on the city transit system;
(3)   Alter any of these reduced fare instruments unless so authorized by the
department; or
(4)   Knowingly obtain, or attempt to obtain, any of these reduced fare
instruments based on a false application or certification.
(b)   Any person committing one or more violations of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(c)   The department is authorized to penalize any person in violation of this
section by:
(1)   Suspending the person's reduced fare instrument for a period of one year
from the date of conviction; or
(2)   If the remaining term of the reduced fare instrument is less than one
year from the date of conviction:
(A)   Suspending the reduced fare instrument for the remainder of the term; and
(B)   Prohibiting until one year from the date of conviction the renewal or
replacement, or issuance of a new reduced fare instrument.
(Sec. 28-2.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 2, § 13-2.7)
(Added by Ord. 21-7)
§ 15B-2.8 Reserved.
 
§ 15B-2.9 Police officers.
   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, uniformed and
nonuniformed police officers of the Honolulu police department carrying proper
identification, whether on duty or not, shall be allowed to use the city bus
system or city ferry system, or both, without paying any fare.
(1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 2, § 13-2.9) (Added by Ord. 96-55; Am. Ord. 07-13)
§ 15B-2.10 Transit fares for individuals with extremely low incomes.
(a)   Individuals who have received an eligibility letter from the Social
Security Administration for benefits under the Supplemental Security Income
program are eligible for the reduced transit fare upon the presentation of the
Supplemental Security Income eligibility letter to the department.
(b)   Individuals whose household incomes meet the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development guidelines for households with extremely low
income within the city for the applicable household size, may also qualify for
the reduced transit fare through application to the department of community
services. The department of community services shall be responsible for the
intake and processing of applications, determination of eligibility, and
communication of an applicant’s eligibility to the department.
(c)   The director of community services shall determine the eligibility of the
individual for the reduced transit fare established under this section upon
review and verification of an application to qualify for the fare. The
application form must be prescribed and furnished by the director of community
services. The director of community services may require proof of age, total
household income, and household size, and proof may include but will not be
limited to true copies of personal income tax returns, bank statements, or
other financial records. The director of community services may require
authorization from the household to enable the director of community services
to fully verify household income. The director of community services shall
determine whether an applicant qualifies for the reduced transit fare within 60
days of receipt of the completed application, and the decision of the director
of community services will be final. The determination of eligibility will
remain in effect for the period from the date of approval through the ending of
the fiscal year on June 30.
(d)   Eligible individuals may receive a city payment card programmed with
fares as follows:
(1)   A single ride fare of $1.25;
(2)   A daily maximum capped fare of $3;
(3)   A monthly maximum capped fare of $20; and
(4)   A prepaid fare of $45.
The reduced fares specified in this subsection are not applicable for rides on
the city paratransit system or for the special events service.
(e)   The department of community services may adopt rules in accordance with
HRS Chapter 91 to implement this section.
(f)   Availability of this program is limited to a city subsidy of $1,500,000
per fiscal year, unless additional appropriations of general funds or noncity
funds are approved.
(1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 2, § 13-2.10) (Added by Ord. 21-7; Am. Ord. 22-35 ,
23-21)
§ 15B-2.11 Reserved.
§ 15B-2.12 City payment card—Maximum capped fares.
(a)   Fares charged by the multimodal municipal transportation system may be
paid using city payment cards, at multimodal municipal transportation system
facilities, and on city transit system vehicles equipped with fare validators.
When a city payment card is tapped on a fare validator, the applicable fare
will be deducted from the value stored on the card.
(b)   For the city bus system, the city rail system, and the city paratransit
system, after a passenger taps a city payment card on a fare validator on a
city transit bus, city rail vehicle, or city paratransit vehicle, or at a city
rail system facility, and the applicable fare is deducted, no additional fares
will be deducted for additional bus, rail, or paratransit rides within a period
of two and one-half hours following the initial tap; provided that the same
city payment card is used for each ride.
(c)   Only city payment cards programmed for fares under the adult passenger
category are transferable. City payment cards programmed for lower fares under
other passenger categories are not transferable, and use of such city payment
cards by anyone other than the authorized and eligible passenger for whom it
was programmed will be considered fare evasion and subject to appropriate
penalties pursuant to §
15B-2.7.
(d)   For each city payment card, fares for rides on the city bus system and
city rail system will be deducted until the cumulative amount of fares paid
during a period of time equals the maximum capped fare as specified in §
15B-2.1 for that period.
(1)   If total bus and rail fares charged to a single city payment card reach
the daily maximum capped fare as specified in §
15B-2.1, within a service day, no additional fares will be deducted from the
stored value of that city payment card for additional bus and rail rides during
the remainder of that service day.
(2)   If total bus and rail fares charged to a single city payment card reach
the monthly maximum capped fare as specified in §
15B-2.1, within a calendar month, no additional fares will be deducted from the
stored value of that city payment card for additional bus and rail rides during
the remainder of that calendar month.
(e)   Passengers may purchase a monthly or annual pass by paying the fee set
forth in the fare structure table as specified in §
15B-2.1, and the monthly or annual pass may be programmed to a city payment
card.
(Added by Ord. 21-7; Am. Ord. 22-35 )
§ 15B-2.13 Student transit pass program.
(a)   Establishment. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the
department is authorized to establish a program to provide transit passes for
students enrolled at participating schools to attend school and off-campus
educational and non-educational activities. For the purposes of this section,
“participating school” means any State department of education school; provided
that the appropriate State administrators at the State department of education
agree with the director to participate in the program. Under the program, the
department must issue student transit passes entitling the student pass holder
to bus and rail rides, valid during the academic school year for which the
transit pass is issued.
(b)   Program eligibility. A student enrolled at a participating school may
participate in the program; provided that the State department of education
approves the student’s completed application and submits the student’s
information to the department in accordance with criteria established by the
department in conjunction with the State department of education.
(c)   Student transit passes; restrictions on usage. Based on the student
information provided by the State department of education, the department must
provide the student transit passes for the academic program year. The
department may restrict the use of a student transit pass as may be needed and
appropriate to ensure student safety and accountability.
(d)   Program. The student transit pass program will provide the number of
transit passes as may be required by the participating schools by academic
program year, commencing on August 1 and ending on May 31 of each academic
program year. The terms for the student transit passes for each academic year
must be negotiated and agreed upon between the department and the State
department of education. The fare for students to whom the transit passes are
issued must be paid by the State department of education at the fare negotiated
rather than a fare established under §
15B-2.1(b); provided that the fare for the student transit pass program must be
established so that the total revenue collected for the student transit pass
program is not less than the total revenue that would be collected pursuant to
§
15B-2.1(b), based upon projected participating student usage. Projections must
be evaluated annually, based upon actual ridership data for participating
students.
(e)   Annual Report. For each year of the program, the department must submit a
report on the program to the council no later than 60 days following the
scheduled end of the academic program year. The report must include, at a
minimum:
(1)   A discussion of the benefits, if any, gained from the program, including
a voluntary survey of the participating students and schools for the purpose of
collecting and analyzing data necessary to identify and determine riding trends
and monitor student usage;
(2)   An analysis of the method of implementation of the student transit pass
program, the cost of the program, and the number of student transit passes
issued and used during the academic program year;
(3)   An assessment and evaluation of the overall status or success of the
program, and identification of the criteria used to measure success, including
but not limited to increased participation by students in off-campus and after-
school academic and non-academic activities; and
(4)   Recommendations on whether to continue, modify, or discontinue the
student transit pass program, including an assessment of the availability of
alternative private transit services for the participating schools for the
following academic program year.
(Added by Ord. 24-6)
Editor’s note:
   In accordance with Ord. 24-6, any program for student fares established
pursuant to this section may be retroactively applied to encompass the entire
2023 - 2024 academic program year.
ARTICLE 3: ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED ON THE MULTIMODAL MUNICIPAL TRANSPORTATION
SYSTEM
Sections
   
15B-3.1   Passenger code of conduct—Prohibited activities—Enforcement
   
15B-3.2   Signs required
   
15B-3.3   Removal or defacing of signs
   
15B-3.4   Reserved
   
15B-3.5   Penalty
§ 15B-3.1 Passenger code of conduct—Prohibited activities—Enforcement.
(a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
City Rail Station. A city transit system facility that is part of the city rail
system where passengers may board or alight from a train. The term includes the
designated paid fare areas, boarding platforms, and passenger concourses.
Disability. Has the same meaning as defined in 49 CFR § 37.3.
Individual with a Disability. Has the same meaning as defined in 49 CFR § 37.3.
Multimodal Municipal Transportation Facility or City Transit System Facility.
Includes all land, property, structures, or equipment for providing public
transit services as part of the public transportation systems of the city. The
terms include but are not limited to: bus shelters; repair and maintenance
facilities; bus transit stations or centers; elevators, escalators, and
adjoining stairways and ramps; rail repair and maintenance facilities; rail
platforms, guideways, guideway piers, auxiliary buildings; rail transit
stations or centers; turn around loops; parking installations and park and ride
facilities; and passenger shelters (including the space below the roofline of
any shelter), ramps, and pedestrian bridges connecting rail stations; with the
primary purpose of the operation or support of a public transit vehicle or
providing transportation services to passengers on a city transit system
vehicle.
Service Animal. Has the same meaning as defined in 49 CFR § 37.3.
(b)   It is a violation of this section for any person to engage in the
following conduct while on a city transit system vehicle or at a multimodal
municipal transportation facility:
(1)   Carrying or possessing any live animal, except a service animal under the
control of and accompanied by the individual with a disability owning the
service animal or to whom the service animal has been furnished or a small
animal kept in an enclosed and secured container that fits on a passenger’s lap
or under the seat in a manner that does not block the aisle in the city transit
system vehicle; provided that nothing in this subdivision will be construed as
prohibiting a police officer from carrying or possessing an animal used for law
enforcement purposes;
(2)   Discarding, disposing of, placing, throwing, or dropping any litter, as
defined in HRS § 339-1, except into receptacles designated for that purpose;
(3)   Smoking an electronic or tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe, or any other
nicotine-containing substance, inhaling liquid vapor through use of a heated
device, or carrying any heated, lighted, or smoldering substance, in any form
for the purpose of delivering nicotine or nicotine-related products, but not
including nicotine products used to reduce nicotine addiction that are not
smoked, inhaled, or heated such as gum or patches;
(4)   Carrying or possessing any flammable, combustible, explosive, corrosive,
or highly toxic liquid or other substance, article, or material which is likely
to cause harm to others or to emit any foul or noxious dust, mist, fume, gas,
vapor, or odor; provided that nothing contained in this subdivision will be
construed as prohibiting a person from carrying or possessing any match or any
cigar, cigarette, or pipe lighter that is not lighted or smoldering;
(5)   Using or playing any electronic device, musical instrument, or other
sound-producing or sound-emitting device unless the device is connected to a
headphone or earphone that limits the sound produced or emitted to the
individual user; provided that nothing in this subdivision will be construed as
prohibiting any authorized transit personnel from using such device for
official business;
(6)   Throwing or placing hot burning substances or objects such as cigars,
cigarettes, or the contents of a burning pipe, in, upon, or in close proximity
to any city transit system vehicle or city transit system facility that is
combustible or susceptible to damage by heat, fire, or explosion;
(7)   Spitting, expectorating, or urinating or defecating in, on, or from any
city transit vehicle or city transit system facility; provided that nothing
contained in this subdivision will be construed as applying to any person who
cannot comply with this subdivision as a result of a disability, age, or a
medical condition;
(8)   Obstructing, impeding, hindering, interfering with, or otherwise
disrupting the safe and efficient operation of any city transit system vehicle,
or the performance of official duties by any authorized transit personnel
working on the multimodal municipal transportation system;
(9)   Harassing or intimidating others by doing any one or more of the
following:
(A)   Engaging in a course of conduct, including violent, threatening, or
disruptive behavior or conduct, that:
(i)   Is intended and likely to provoke a violent response;
(ii)   Places another person in reasonable fear of imminent physical harm,
including but not limited to following a person around or about a city transit
system vehicle, designated paid fare area, or city transit system facility; or
(iii)   Prevents or delays the movement or departure of a person through
coercion or intimidation;
(B)   Continuing a course of conduct that may reasonably be expected to result
in fear, alarm, or serious offense to other passengers or any authorized
transit personnel working on the multimodal municipal transportation system
after having received a lawful directive to cease the conduct or depart the
city transit system vehicle or city transit system facility by any authorized
transit personnel; or
(C)   Propelling saliva, mucus, blood, urine, semen, feces, or other dangerous
or noxious substance at other passengers, or at any authorized transit
personnel working on the multimodal municipal transportation system;
(10)   Knowingly failing or refusing to pay the full applicable fare for
transportation or to present a valid pass, identification card, or other
permissible fare medium for transportation on or within the city transit system
when boarding a city transit system vehicle, entering a city rail station, or
entering a designated paid fare area;
(11)   Displaying or offering for sale, selling, or distributing goods or
services without prior written authorization from the department;
(12)   Refusing or failing to immediately cease and desist from doing any
activity in violation of this section after being requested to do so by any
authorized transit personnel working on the multimodal municipal transportation
system;
(13)   Refusing or failing to immediately exit a city transit system vehicle or
city rail station after being requested to do so by any authorized transit
personnel working on the multimodal municipal transportation system;
(14)   Knowingly entering or remaining unlawfully in or upon city transit
system facilities or premises that:
(A)   Are fenced or enclosed in a manner designed to exclude the general
public; or
(B)   Displays a sign giving reasonable notice and reading as follows: “Private
Property- No Trespassing,” “City and County of Honolulu Property - No
Trespassing,” or displaying a substantially similar message; provided that the
sign must contain letters no less than 2 inches in height and be placed at
reasonable intervals no less than three signs to a mile along the boundary line
of the land, where applicable, or in a manner and position as to be clearly
noticeable at the entrance way, from outside the boundary line; and
(15)   Knowingly opening or unfastening on any city transit system vehicle, or
in a multimodal municipal transportation facility or city transit system
facility, any door, panel, cabinet, closet, locker, or similar vehicle or
facility structure, or turning on or off or manipulating any switch, lever, or
mechanism, that is prohibited from access by the general public.
(c)   It is a violation of this section for any person to engage in the
following conduct while on a city transit system vehicle:
(1)   Consuming any form of food or beverage or carrying or possessing any food
or beverage in a container other than a container that is tightly closed,
covered, or packaged so as to minimize the possibility of accidental spillage
when the container is shaken or dropped; provided that nothing contained in
this subdivision will be construed as prohibiting the carrying or possession of
groceries in a suitable bag or other container;
(2)   Failing or refusing to vacate seats designated as priority seating for
senior citizens and persons with a disability, or the fold down or other
movable seat area designated for wheelchair securement on a multimodal
municipal transportation vehicle, when requested to do so by any authorized
transit personnel; provided that nothing contained in this subdivision will be
construed as requiring other senior citizens or individuals with a disability
to vacate seats designated as priority seating for senior citizens and
individuals with a disability; and provided further, that nothing contained in
this subdivision will be construed as requiring any authorized transit
personnel to enforce a request that other passengers move from the priority
seating area or wheelchair securement area;
(3)   Occupying more than one seat, including placing objects, belongings,
shoes, or feet on adjoining seats; or
(4)   Storing belongings, baggage, and oversized and bulky items in the aisles
of a city transit system vehicle, or in a manner that protrudes into another
seat, otherwise interferes with, or causes discomfort to other passengers;
provided that storage of such items in a designated storage area is authorized
on city transit system vehicles equipped with designated storage areas.
(d)   Carriages or Strollers.
(1)   City rail vehicle. After boarding a city rail vehicle, a carrier or
stroller must be folded and stowed in a manner not to impede other passengers,
unless it is occupied by a child. A child may be permitted to travel on a city
rail vehicle in a carriage or stroller only under the following circumstances:
(A)   There is adequate space in the priority seating area for the carriage or
stroller;
(B)   The carriage or stroller will not block the aisle or otherwise impede
passengers; and
(C)   The carriage or stroller must remain under the control of an adult at all
times, and, if brakes are available, parked with its brakes locked.
(2)   City transit bus. After boarding a city transit bus, a child must be
removed from the carriage or stroller and transferred to a seat (or held by an
adult), and the carriage or stroller must be folded and stowed out of the way
so that it does not impede passengers.
(3)   Priority seating areas. Whenever a senior citizen or an individual with a
disability wishes to sit in the priority seating area, or whenever any
authorized transit personnel of the multimodal municipal transportation vehicle
recognizes that the person has a right to sit in the priority seating area, the
authorized transit personnel shall instruct the adult responsible for the
carriage or stroller that:
(A)   The child must be removed from the carriage or stroller and transferred
to a seat (or held by an adult); and
(B)   The carriage or stroller must be folded and stowed out of the way so that
it does not impede passengers.
(e)   Commercial shopping carts.
(1)   A person may not bring or carry a commercial shopping cart aboard any
multimodal municipal transportation vehicle. Non-commercial, individual-sized
grocery storage carts not exceeding 18 inches deep, 18 inches wide and 30
inches high (excluding wheels and handles), are allowed; provided that they do
not block aisles, stairways, or doorways; and provided further, that a person
who transfers to a paratransit vehicle is required to comply with the policies
and procedures for customer bags and luggage, including emptying the cart and
consolidating the items into two small bags or small luggage to carry and hold
on their lap, and having the cart secured and stowed out of the way so that it
does not impede passengers.
(2)   A person may not abandon a commercial shopping cart upon a multimodal
municipal transportation facility.
(f)   Animals.
(1)   Except as provided in subdivision (2), a person may not bring or carry
aboard a multimodal municipal transportation vehicle or be present in or upon a
multimodal municipal transportation facility with an animal.
(2)   Service animals, pets, and police dogs may be brought or carried aboard a
multimodal municipal transportation vehicle or be present in or upon a
multimodal municipal transportation facility; provided that:
(A)   Service animals. Service animals must be under the control of their
handler, be housebroken, and be restrained by a leash, harness, or other device
made for the purpose of controlling the movement of an animal. A service animal
may be carried on its handler’s person but may not occupy a separate seat;
(B)   Pets.
(i)   The animal must be kept and held at all times within an enclosed and
secured container appropriate and constructed for carrying the size and type of
animal;
(i)   The container does not block an aisle, stairway, or doorway;
(iii)   The animal can be transported without risk of injury to the animal and
without risk of harm or inconvenience to other passengers or authorized transit
personnel; and
(iv)   The animal can be transported in accordance with this article; and
(C)   Police dogs. Police dogs must be fully trained and accompanied by an
officer.
(g)   An authorized transit personnel may refuse to allow any person to board a
city transit system vehicle when:
(1)   The person appears to be intoxicated;
(2)   The person is engaged in activities that, if such activities occurred in
the city transit system vehicle, would violate this section or any other law;
or
(3)   It appears that the person intends to engage in an activity on a city
transit system vehicle that is in violation of this section.
Any authorized transit personnel may refuse to transport any such person who
has already boarded the city transit system vehicle or entered a city rail
station, and the authorized transit personnel may cause such person to be
removed from the city transit system vehicle or city rail station or facility.
It is a violation of this section for a person to board a city transit system
vehicle after being requested not to do so by authorized transit personnel for
the reasons specified in this section.
(i)   Enforcement. Any authorized police officer, upon arresting a person for a
violation of this section, shall take the name and address of the alleged
violator and shall issue to the alleged violator a summons or citation
hereinafter described, notifying the person to answer the complaint to be
entered against the person at a place and at a time provided in the summons or
citation: except that, the officer may make a physical arrest in instances
when:
(1)   The alleged violator refuses to provide the police officer with such
person’s name and address or any proof thereof as may be reasonably available
to the alleged violator;
(2)   The alleged violator fails or refuses to immediately cease and desist
from a prohibited activity or to immediately exit the city transit system
vehicle or city rail station, as determined by an authorized transit personnel,
or a police officer if the officer is on the city transit system vehicle, after
the alleged violator is issued a summons or citation; or
(3)   The alleged violator has previously been issued a summons or citation for
a substantially similar offense within a one-year period.
(j)   There will be provided for use by police officers and other duly
authorized special officers, including but not limited to contracted security
officers and agents of the city transit system, a form of summons or citation
for use in citing violators of this article where the circumstances do not
mandate the physical arrest of the violators. The form of the summons or
citation will be commensurate with the form of other summonses or citations
used in modern methods of arrest, so designed to include all necessary
information to make the same valid within the laws and rules of the State of
Hawaii and the city. The form and content of the summons or citation will be
adopted or prescribed by the administrative judge of the district court;
provided that the administrative judge may approve the use of a form of summons
or citation previously adopted or prescribed for other offenses and the
approval will be deemed to meet the requirements of this subsection. In every
case where a citation is issued, the original of the citation must be given to
the alleged violator; provided that the administrative judge of the district
court may prescribe that the alleged violator be given a copy of the citation
and provide for the disposition of the original and any other copies. Citations
must be consecutively numbered, and each copy must bear the same number as the
original.
(k)   This article is in addition to and in no way limits any other federal,
State, or city law, ordinance, or rule.
(Sec. 28-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 3, § 13-3.1) (Am.
Ords. 91-27, 96-67, 97-02, 03-27, 06-52, 07-13, 08-20, 23-21)
§ 15B-3.2 Signs required.
   The department shall require the conspicuous display within each city
transit system vehicle of a sign clearly citing the passenger code of conduct
and prohibited activities set forth in this article.
(Sec. 28-3.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 3, § 13-3.2) (Am.
Ords. 91-27, 97-02, 07-13, 08-20, 23-21)
§ 15B-3.3 Removal or defacing of signs.
   A person may not remove or deface signs required to be erected by or under
the authority of this article.
(Sec. 28-3.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 3, § 13-3.3) (Am.
Ord. 23-21)
§ 15B-3.4 Reserved.
 
§ 15B-3.5 Penalty.
(a)   Any person committing, aiding, abetting, or assisting in any manner
another person in violating one or more provisions of this article may be
subject to either:
(1)   Criminal prosecution, which may result in a court-ordered fine not
exceeding $500, or imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or both;
or
(2)   Civil penalties imposed by the department pursuant to rules adopted in
accordance with HRS Chapter 91, which may include fines, or suspension of
transportation services on the city transit system, as allowed by law.
(b)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in this section, any person
who makes, sells, issues, or knowingly uses or possesses any imitation or
counterfeit transit pass, coupon, or city payment card will be fined not more
than $2,000, imprisoned for not more than one year, or both.
(c)   Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a
separate offense and is punishable as such under this section.
(d)   Any authorized police officer, upon arresting a person for a violation of
this article, shall take the name and address of the alleged violator and shall
issue to that person a summons or citation hereinafter described, notifying the
person to answer to the complaint to be entered against the person at a place
and at a time provided in the summons or citation, except that the officer may
make a physical arrest in instances when:
(1)   The alleged violator refuses to provide the officer with such person’s
name and address or any proof thereof as may be reasonably available to the
alleged violator;
(2)   The alleged violator fails or refuses to immediately cease and desist
from the prohibited activity or to immediately exit the city transit system
vehicle, as determined by authorized transit personnel, or any police officer,
after the alleged violator is issued a summons or citation; or
(3)   The alleged violator has previously been issued a summons or citation for
a substantially similar offense within a one-year period.
(e)   There will be provided for use by police officers a form of summons or
citation for use in citing violators of this article where the circumstances do
not mandate the physical arrest of the violators. The form of the summons or
citation will be commensurate with the form of other summonses or citations
used in modern methods of arrest, so designed to include all necessary
information to make the same valid within the laws and rules of the State and
the city. The form and content of the summons or citation will be adopted or
prescribed by the administrative judge of the district court; provided that the
administrative judge may approve the use of a form of summons or citation
previously adopted or prescribed for other offenses and such approval will be
deemed to meet the requirements of this subsection. In every case where a
citation is issued, the original must be given to the alleged violator;
provided that the administrative judge of the district court may prescribe that
the alleged violator be given a copy of the citation and provide for the
disposition of the original and any other copies. Citations must be
consecutively numbered, and each copy must bear the same number as its
original.
(f)   This article is in addition to and in no way limits any other federal,
State, or city law, ordinance, or rule.
(Sec. 28-3.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 3, § 13-3.5) (Am.
Ords. 96-67, 07-13, 23-21)
ARTICLE 4: SPECIAL TRANSIT SERVICE
Sections
   
15B-4.1   Authorization
   
15B-4.2   Eligibility
   
15B-4.3   Access
   
15B-4.4   Appeal
   
15B-4.5   Fare
   
15B-4.6   Service
   
15B-4.7   Evaluation board
§ 15B-4.1 Authorization.
   The department shall provide a special transit service and establish
policies and guidelines for its operation. The policies and guidelines must
conform to the short range transit plan and any update. The department may
contract the private, nonprofit corporation established under
Article 8 to manage, operate, and maintain the special transit service on
behalf of the city.
(Sec. 28-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 4, § 13-4.1) (Am.
Ords. 91-27, 96-30, 97-02, 08-20, 14-24, 17-52)
§ 15B-4.2 Eligibility.
(a)   Any person desiring a certification to use the special transit service
shall first file an application on forms furnished by the department, or by any
entity authorized by the department. The application may include a
certification by the applicant’s health care professional that the applicant
has a physical or mental disability that precludes the applicant from using the
city bus system.
(b)   An applicant must be certified to be paratransit eligible according to
the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA); 49 CFR Part 37, Subpart F; §
37.123 to use the special transit service. Such certification must be made by
either the department or by any entity it so authorizes. The applicant shall
participate in an in-person ADA paratransit eligibility assessment as required
by the department or the authorized entity.
(c)   Persons accompanying an ADA paratransit eligible individual must be
registered in advance with the transit management services contractor and must
be provided service as follows.
(1)   One other person in addition to the personal care attendant accompanying
the ADA paratransit eligible individual may be provided service if the ADA
paratransit eligible individual is traveling with a personal care attendant.
(2)   A family member or friend will be regarded as a person accompanying the
ADA paratransit eligible individual, unless the family member or friend is
acting in the capacity of a personal care attendant.
(3)   Additional persons accompanying the ADA paratransit eligible individual
must be provided service; provided that space is available for them on the
paratransit vehicle carrying the ADA paratransit eligible individual and that
transportation of the additional persons will not result in a denial of service
to ADA paratransit eligible persons.
(4)   To be considered as “accompanying” the eligible person for purposes of
this subsection, the other persons must have the same origin and destination as
the ADA paratransit eligible individual.
(Sec. 28-4.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 4, § 13-4.2) (Am.
Ords. 91-27, 93-90, 97-02, 08-20, 17-52)
§ 15B-4.3 Access.
(a)   Each certified passenger shall be issued a paratransit eligibility
identification card, without charge, specifically endorsed for the special
transit service by the department or its designated representative.
(b)   Such paratransit eligibility identification card shall be shown at
boarding to the operator and each certified passenger shall pay the fare
established in §
15B-4.5 of this article. Nonpayment of a fare shall result in boarding being
denied.
(c)   The paratransit eligibility identification card shall be effective for
four years from the approval of the application for eligibility. It may be
renewed thereafter upon the expiration of the prior term; provided the person
requesting such renewal demonstrates at each renewal date that such applicant’s
mental or physical condition warrants continued status as ADA paratransit
eligible as certified in §
15B-4.2.
(d)   A paratransit eligibility identification card effective for less than
four years may be issued to a person with a disability whose disabling
condition, that prevents the applicant from using the city bus system, is not
expected to remain for four years. Such paratransit eligibility identification
card shall be effective for any appropriate period equal to the expected
duration of the person’s disabling condition. Should a person’s inability to
use the city bus system continue beyond the temporary period, the person must
reapply.
(e)   An application for renewal of a paratransit eligibility identification
card may be made up to 60 days before the date of expiration.
(f)   A paratransit eligibility identification card may be recalled from time
to time at the discretion of the department for recertification or statistical
purpose. The department may extend the effective date of the paratransit
eligibility identification card when the paratransit eligibility identification
card is recalled for recertification or statistical purpose to reduce large
fluctuations in paratransit eligibility identification card renewals in future
years.
Paratransit eligibility identification cards issued after a recall may have
physical characteristics different from those issued before the recall.
(g)   Any person holding a paratransit eligibility identification card issued
under this section shall relinquish such paratransit eligibility identification
card if issued a person with a disability identification card or senior citizen
identification card under §
15B-2.2 or
15B-2.3.
(Sec. 28-4.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 4, § 13-4.3) (Am.
Ords. 91-27, 91-70, 93-90, 97-02, 08-20)
§ 15B-4.4 Appeal.
   Any person denied a paratransit eligibility identification card may appeal
under the procedures established in § 15B-2.2(j) and (k).
(Sec. 28-4.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 4, § 13-4.4) (Am.
Ords. 91-70, 08-20)
§ 15B-4.5 Fare.
(a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ADA Complementary Paratransit Service Standards. Regulatory requirements for
the special transit service imposed by the federal government pursuant to 49
CFR Subtitle A, § 37.131.
Agency-Sponsored Fare. A fare for a one-way passenger trip on the special
transit service paid for in whole or in part by a qualified human service
organization, as defined in this section.
Agency Trip. A one-way passenger trip taken by a paratransit eligible
individual to the site of a program administered by a qualified human service
organization, as defined in this section, for trips guaranteed to the
organization.
Core Service Area. The corridor extending a width of .75 of a mile on each side
of a fixed route. The corridor includes the area within a .75 of a mile radius
of either terminus of a fixed route. The corridor also includes an area of not
more than 1 square mile that does not fall within a corridor, but is entirely
surrounded by corridors.
Qualified Human Service Organization. An organization that serves persons who
qualify for human service or transportation-related programs or services due to
disability, income, or advanced age and whose services to such persons include
the purchase of agency-sponsored fares, and receives funding, directly or
indirectly from the programs listed in Appendix A of 49 CFR Part 604.
(b)   Single fare.
(1)   Any person issued a paratransit eligibility identification card under §
15B-4.3 and any person accompanying the ADA paratransit eligible individual
shall pay a fare of $2.25 per person per one-way passenger trip either in cash,
by coupon, or by city payment card programmed for the paratransit fare, except
as provided in §
15B-2.6. Revenues from the fare will be deposited into the transportation fund.
(2)   There is established herein a paratransit fare program for individuals
with extremely low incomes as follows:
(A)   Individuals who have received an eligibility letter from the Social
Security Administration for benefits under the Supplemental Security Income
program are eligible for the reduced paratransit fare upon the presentation of
the Supplemental Security Income eligibility letter to the department.
(B)   Individuals whose household incomes meet the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development guidelines for households with extremely low
income within the city for the applicable household size, may also qualify for
the reduced paratransit fare through application to the department of community
services as provided hereinbelow:
(i)   The department of community services shall be responsible for the intake
and processing of applications, determination of eligibility, and communication
of an applicant’s eligibility to the department;
(ii)   The application form must be prescribed and furnished by the director of
community services;
(iii)   The director of community services may require proof of age, total
household income, and household size, and proof may include but is not limited
to true copies of personal income tax returns, bank statements, or other
financial records;
(iv)   The director of community services may require authorization from the
household to enable the director to fully verify household income;
(v)   The director of community services shall determine whether an applicant
qualifies for the reduced transit fare within 60 days of receipt of the
completed application, and the decision of the director of community services
will be final; and
(vi)   The determination of eligibility will remain in effect for the period of
one year.
(C)   Eligible individuals shall receive a city payment card programmed with a
paratransit fare cap of $2 for a one-way trip.
(D)   The department of community services may adopt rules in accordance with
HRS Chapter 91 and having the force and effect of law to implement the
paratransit fare program established by this subsection.
(3)   Any person to whom a current paratransit eligibility identification card
has been issued under §
15B-4.3 shall pay a single ride fare in accordance with §
15B-2.1 to ride a transit bus or city rail system, either by using a programmed
city payment card or, for the city bus system, payment may also be made in cash
upon display to the bus operator of the paratransit eligibility identification
card; except that the single ride fare must not apply when a special event fare
is charged under §
15B-2.1.
(c)   Fares for services that exceed ADA complementary paratransit service
standards.
(1)   The department may charge a premium fee in addition to the single fare
for a one-way passenger trip on the special transit service for services that
exceed ADA complementary paratransit service standards, including but not
limited to the following:
(A)   Same-day one-way passenger trip reservations by paratransit eligible
individuals;
(B)   Passenger trip reservations by paratransit eligible individuals to or
from locations outside the core service area for the special transit service;
and
(C)   Passenger trip reservations by paratransit eligible individuals outside
the hours and days of fixed route service regularly provided by the city bus
system.
(2)   The department may negotiate with a qualified human service organization
and charge a fare higher than the single fare for agency-sponsored fares and
agency trips, provided that the fare charged cannot exceed applicable rules set
by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services for paratransit services.
(d)   A programmed city payment card will be issued to paratransit eligibility
ID holders for the reduced fare on the city bus system and city rail system for
paratransit eligibility ID holders as specified in §
15B-2.1. The reduced fare is not applicable when fares for special event
services are charged or for rides on the city paratransit system. Use of this
programmed city payment card is subject to §
15B-2.7. In the event of loss or theft, the person to whom the programmed city
payment card was issued shall notify the department immediately. Thereafter,
the programmed city payment card issued to that person will be invalidated, and
a replacement programmed city payment card may be issued to that person upon
payment of the fee for a replacement card as specified in §
2-12.2.
(e)   A personal care attendant shall pay no fare at any time when accompanying
an ADA paratransit eligible individual and performing services as the
individual’s personal care attendant.
(Sec. 28-4.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 4, § 13-4.5) (Am.
Ords. 91-27, 91-70, 93-90, 95-22, 97-02, 01-20, 01-62, 03-27, 07-13, 08-20, 09-
28, 17-52, 20-19, 21-13, 22-35 )
§ 15B-4.6 Service.
   Until such time as the special transit service is adequate to serve all
eligible persons, service shall be supplied on a space available basis. The
department shall provide such service by either advance reservation,
subscription, call response, or combination thereof as will most effectively
meet the needs of ADA paratransit eligible persons.
   The department may adopt rules in accordance with HRS Chapter 91 to
implement this section.
(Sec. 28-4.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 4, § 13-4.6) (Am.
Ords. 91-27, 93-90, 97-02, 08-20)
§ 15B-4.7 Evaluation board.
   The director may appoint an advisory committee pursuant to Charter § 4-103
to serve as an evaluation board. The committee shall be comprised of 15 to 20
persons who are sympathetic with the concern of special transit service for
persons with disabilities. Their function shall be limited to counsel and
advice in the form of at least a regular semiannual evaluation of the special
transit service to determine the adequacy of service and to submit any
recommendations for its improvement to the department.
(Sec. 28-4.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 4, § 13-4.7) (Am.
Ords. 91-27, 91-70, 93-90, 97-02, 08-20)
ARTICLE 5: TAXICAB SUBSIDIES
Sections
   
15B-5.1   Authorization
   
15B-5.2   Eligibility
   
15B-5.3   Rules
§ 15B-5.1 Authorization.
   The department may establish a taxicab subsidy program as a transportation
alternative for riders certified to use the special transit service established
under
Article 4.
(1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 5, § 13-5.1) (Added by Ord. 17-52)
§ 15B-5.2 Eligibility.
(a)   Taxicab subsidies authorized under this article may only be issued to and
used by persons certified to use the special transit service established under
Article 4.
(b)   Persons certified to use the special transit service established under
Article 4 may use subsidies issued under this article to pay for all or a
portion of the cost of trips taken on taxicabs, as defined and regulated
pursuant to
Chapter 36, Article 1, for their daily transportation needs.
(c)   Trips taken by persons using taxicab subsidies issued through the program
established under this article will be separate from the special transit
service established under
Article 4.
(1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 5, § 13-5.2) (Added by Ord. 17-52)
§ 15B-5.3 Rules.
(a)   The department may adopt rules under this article in accordance with HRS
Chapter 91 to implement the program.
(b)   Before the adoption of rules, the department may initiate a pilot program
to evaluate the effectiveness of taxicab subsidies as a transportation
alternative for persons certified to use the special transit service
established under
Article 4.
(1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 5, § 13-5.3) (Added by Ord. 17-52)
ARTICLE 6: CITY BUS SYSTEM
Sections
   
15B-6.1   City bus system
   
15B-6.2   Contracts for management, operation, and maintenance of city bus
system
   
15B-6.3   Reserved
   
15B-6.4   Reserved
   
15B-6.5   Reserved
   
15B-6.6   Reserved
   
15B-6.7   Reserved
   
15B-6.8   Zero emissions buses
§ 15B-6.1 City bus system.
(a)   The department shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of
the city bus system:
(1)   In accordance with the Charter, this chapter, and other applicable
ordinances; and
(2)   Within the limits of available council appropriations and:
(A)   In the most efficient and effective manner; and
(B)   In accordance with sound management practices.
(b)   Subject to council appropriations, the department shall establish the
routes, schedules, and levels of service of the city bus system. The routes,
schedules, and levels of service shall be in conformance with the short range
transit plan and any update.
(c)   Fares for passengers of the city bus system will be as established under
Article 2. The department shall not:
(1)   Charge a single cash fare, monthly transit pass fare or bus token,
coupon, or approved card fare that differs from that established or permitted
under
Article 2;
(2)   Charge a fare when
Article 2 exempts a passenger from payment of a fare; or
(3)   Charge a fee for the issuance of a transit pass, unless expressly
authorized under
Article 2.
(d)   The department shall have the power to establish or designate park and
ride facilities to be served by the city bus system. Park and ride facilities
established or designated by the department shall be:
(1)   In conformance with the short range transit plan and any update; and
(2)   In compliance with development plan and zoning ordinances and maps, the
building code and fire code, and other applicable laws or ordinances concerning
land use, planning, and building construction.
Park and ride facilities “established” by the department mean facilities under
the management of the department.
Park and ride facilities “designated” by the department mean those which,
although served by the city bus system, are not under the management of the
department.
(1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 6, § 13-6.1) (Added by Ord. 91-27; Am. Ords. 93-56,
96-58, 97-02, 03-27, 08-20, 21-7)
§ 15B-6.2 Contracts for management, operation, and maintenance of city bus
system.
(a)   The department shall contract with the private, nonprofit corporation
established under
Article 8 to manage, operate, and maintain the city bus system, and may
contract with the private, nonprofit corporation established under
Article 8 to manage, operate, and maintain the city special transit service on
behalf of the city.
(b)   The department may contract with private entities, including the private,
nonprofit corporation established under
Article 8, to manage, operate, and maintain the supplemental bus service on
behalf of the city.
(1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 6, § 13-6.2) (Added by Ord. 91-27; Am. Ords. 96-30,
97-02, 08-20, 17-52)
§ 15B-6.3 Reserved.
 
§ 15B-6.4 Reserved.
 
§ 15B-6.5 Reserved.
 
§ 15B-6.6 Reserved.
 
§ 15B-6.7 Reserved.
 
§ 15B-6.8 Zero emissions buses.
(a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Bus Stop. Any place where the director has directed the placement of a bus stop
sign designating a location where the city's transit bus service stops to
service passengers. Such sign may include route numbers and regulatory and
other information.
Multi-Modal Transit Center. Any bus transit center along the route of the
Honolulu High-Capacity Transit Corridor Project.
Pollutant. Hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, and lead.
Zero Emissions Bus. A bus that produces zero exhaust emissions of any pollutant
and includes electric battery powered buses and hydrogen-fuel cell powered
buses.
(b)   The director shall consider using zero emissions buses to service routes
with at least one bus stop at or within 100 yards of a Honolulu High-Capacity
Transit Corridor Project rail station or a multi-modal transit center.
(Added by Ord. 18-31)
ARTICLE 7: RESERVED
 
ARTICLE 8: TRANSIT MANAGEMENT SERVICES CONTRACTOR
Sections
   
15B-8.1   Authority to contract with a private, nonprofit corporation to serve
as transit management services contractor
   
15B-8.2   Retention of private, nonprofit corporation to serve as transit
management services contractor
   
15B-8.3   Contract for management, operation, and maintenance of city bus
system and special transit service
   
15B-8.4   Obligations and responsibilities of transit management services
contractor
   
15B-8.4A   Obligations and responsibilities of the special transit service
contractor if other than the transit management services contractor
   
15B-8.5   Obligations and responsibilities of the department
   
15B-8.6   Collective bargaining agreements with bus and special transit service
personnel
   
15B-8.7   Performance audit
   
15B-8.8   Prohibition on use of bus or special transit service personnel for
other than official duties
   
15B-8.9   Integration of city bus system and special transit service
§ 15B-8.1 Authority to contract with a private, nonprofit corporation to serve
as transit management services contractor.
   The council makes the following findings:
(1)   The City and County of Honolulu is a body politic and corporate;
(2)   As a body politic and corporate, the city may exercise functions
expressed in or necessarily implied from authority granted by the State of
Hawaii;
(3)   HRS Chapter 51 gives each county the “power to provide mass
transportation service, whether directly, jointly or under contract with
private parties, without the county or private parties being subject to the
jurisdiction and control of the public utilities commission in any manner”;
(4)   The department is:
(A)   An agency of the city, a body politic, and corporate in itself; and
(B)   Charged by the city with the proprietary function of providing mass
transportation service for the people of the city;
(5)   The “mass transportation service” that may be provided by the department
pursuant to the Charter and ordinance consists of city bus and special transit
service;
(6)   The department’s procurement of services from a private, nonprofit
corporation to manage the city bus and special transit service is necessary to:
(A)   Provide the mass transportation service in the most efficient and
effective manner and in accordance with sound management practices; and
(B)   Preserve and provide continuity in the rights, interests, and labor
relations status of bus and special transit service personnel;
(7)   The City and County of Honolulu, through a city agency, has the power to
effectuate the formation of and contract with a private, nonprofit corporation
to serve as the transit management services contractor for the following
reasons:
(A)   HRS Chapter 51 confers broad authority upon the city to provide mass
transportation service;
(B)   HRS Chapter 51 authorizes the city to provide mass transportation service
under contract with a private party;
(C)   The power to effectuate the formation of and contract with a private,
nonprofit corporation to provide mass transportation service, as a proprietary
function, is necessarily implied under HRS Chapter 51; and
(D)   State law does not expressly prohibit the city from effectuating the
formation of and contracting with a private, nonprofit corporation; and
(8)   The public interest is further advanced by expressly conferring upon the
department the power to effectuate the formation of and contract with a
private, nonprofit corporation to manage, operate, and maintain the city bus
system and special transit service.
(1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 8, § 13-8.1) (Added by Ord. 96-30; Am. Ord. 08-20)
§ 15B-8.2 Retention of private, nonprofit corporation to serve as transit
management services contractor.
(a)   The department shall:
(1)   Retain the private, nonprofit corporation that was formed at the request
of the department pursuant to ordinance, and which served as the bus management
services contractor since January 1, 1993; and
(2)   Enter into a transit management services contract with such private,
nonprofit corporation.
To fulfill the city’s requirements, the department shall expand the obligations
and responsibilities of the private, nonprofit corporation in accordance with
this section.
(b)   As a condition of the transit management services contract, the private,
nonprofit corporation shall provide in its articles of incorporation that:
(1)   The purpose of the corporation is to manage, operate, and maintain the
city bus system. The purpose of the corporation may include management,
operation, and maintenance of the special transit service and other transit-
related services on behalf of and for the city;
(2)   The election of directors of the corporation will be subject to the
approval of the department, which approval will not be unreasonably withheld;
(3)   The department may remove any director of the corporation when the
department determines that the removal is required to fulfill the best
interests of the city bus system or special transit service; and
(4)   The corporation shall conform with applicable ordinances.
(c)   From April 1, 1997, the private, nonprofit corporation is the transit
management services contractor, and may be deemed the special transit service
contractor for the purposes of this chapter.
(d)   This section is not to be construed as precluding the department from
contracting with others to provide bus and special transit services to
supplement the city bus and special transit systems.
(1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 8, § 13-8.2) (Added by Ord. 96-30; Am. Ords. 08-20,
17-52)
§ 15B-8.3 Contract for management, operation, and maintenance of city bus
system and special transit service.
(a)   In accordance with §§
15B-8.1,
15B-8.2,
15B-6.2, and
15B-4.1, the department shall contract with the private, nonprofit corporation
to manage, operate, and maintain the city bus system, and may contract with the
private, nonprofit corporation to manage, operate, and maintain the special
transit service on behalf of the city. Under the contract, the private,
nonprofit corporation:
(1)   Shall be an independent contractor in relation to the city;
(2)   Shall be the employer of record of bus personnel, who are employees of
the private, nonprofit corporation under 29 USC § 152(3), and who are not
public employees under HRS Chapter 89. The private, nonprofit corporation is
also the employer of record of special transit service personnel should the
contractor be retained under contract to manage, operate, and maintain the
special transit service on behalf of the city;
(3)   Is an instrumentality of the city for appropriate purposes other than for
labor and employment purposes;
(4)   Shall manage, operate, and maintain the city bus system and special
transit service, as applicable, in the most efficient and effective manner and
in accordance with sound management practices; and
(5)   Shall have no purpose, except the management, operation, and maintenance
of the city bus system and special transit service, as applicable, and the
provision of transit-related services on behalf of and for the city.
(b)   The term of the contract will be set by the department, provided that
such term cannot be less than five years. The term may encompass a fiscal
period for which council appropriations are unavailable. If so, the contract
must include conditions specifying that:
(1)   The term of the contract is subject to the availability of council
appropriations;
(2)   The council is not obligated to appropriate funds for the contract; and
(3)   The failure of the council to appropriate funds for the contract does not
constitute a breach by the department or city.
(c)   For the purposes of Charter § 9-305, inclusion in the contract of the
conditions specified under subsection (b):
(1)   Will be sufficient for approval by the director of budget and fiscal
services as to the availability of funds for the contract; and
(2)   Are a prohibition on extending the contract beyond the term of an
appropriation to finance an obligation of the department.
(d)   Under the contract:
(1)   Reimbursements to the private, nonprofit corporation for the operation
and maintenance expenses of the city bus system and special transit service are
not income or profit of the corporation;
(2)   Reimbursements for expenses incurred by the corporation’s directors and
officers in the performance of official duties:
(A)   Are operation expenses of the city bus system or special transit service,
as applicable; and
(B)   Are not a distributed share of the income or profit of the corporation;
and
(3)   The operating revenues derived from the city bus system and special
transit service will be income of the city, not of the corporation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 8, § 13-8.3) (Added by Ord. 96-30; Am. Ords. 08-20,
17-52)
§ 15B-8.4 Obligations and responsibilities of transit management services
contractor.
(a)    Under the transit management services contract, the transit management
services contractor, at a minimum, shall have the following general obligations
and responsibilities for the city bus system and, if applicable, the special
transit service, excluding any supplemental bus service or supplemental special
transit service provided by the department:
(1)   Be directly responsible and accountable to the director for carrying out
the policies established by the department for the management, operation, and
maintenance of the city bus system and, if applicable, the special transit
service;
(2)   Provide sufficient and qualified personnel to manage the city bus system
and, if applicable, the special transit service;
(3)   Employ sufficient and qualified personnel for the city bus system and, if
applicable, the special transit service, in accordance with applicable law and
obligations;
(4)   Manage the labor and personnel relations with all bus and, if applicable,
special transit service personnel;
(5)   Comply with all applicable labor and employment laws, including but not
limited to 29 USC § 158, 29 USC § 185, and 49 USC § 5333(b), and observe all
applicable collective bargaining agreements and obligations pursuant to federal
labor laws;
(6)   Be responsible and accountable for all real and personal property
furnished by the city to the contractor;
(7)   Allow the department, managing director, and council to conduct financial
and performance audits of the city bus system and, if applicable, the special
transit service, and cooperate during the conduct of the audits;
(8)   Recommend to the director annual operating and capital budgets in the
format required by the department of budget and fiscal services;
(9)   Collect revenues derived by the city bus system and, if applicable, the
special transit service, and, on behalf of the department, transmit the
revenues to the director of budget and fiscal services for deposit into the
appropriate fund;
(10)   Operate the city bus system in accordance with routes, schedules, and
levels of service established pursuant to §
15B-6.1;
(11)   If applicable, operate the special transit service in accordance with
the policies and guidelines established pursuant to §
15B-4.1; and
(12)   Maintain, inspect, and repair city transit buses; special transit
service vehicles, if applicable; and other vehicles provided by the department.
(b)   The department may procure from the transit management services
contractor, under the transit management services contract, other services,
obligations, and responsibilities that are not contrary to this chapter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 8, § 13-8.4) (Added by Ord. 96-30; Am. Ords. 08-20,
17-52)
§ 15B-8.4A Obligations and responsibilities of the special transit service
contractor if other than the transit management services contractor.
(a)   If the special transit service contractor is an entity other than the
transit management services contractor, the special transit service contractor,
at a minimum, shall have the following general obligations and responsibilities
for the special transit service, excluding any supplemental special transit
service provided by the department:
(1)   Be directly responsible and accountable to the director for carrying out
the policies established by the department for the management, operation, and
maintenance of the special transit service;
(2)   Provide sufficient and qualified personnel to manage the special transit
service;
(3)   Employ sufficient and qualified special transit service personnel in
accordance with applicable law and obligations;
(4)   Manage the labor and personnel relations with all special transit service
personnel;
(5)   Comply with all applicable labor and employment laws, including but not
limited to 29 USC § 158; 29 USC § 185; and 49 USC § 5333(b), and observe all
applicable collective bargaining agreements and obligations pursuant to federal
labor laws;
(6)   Be responsible and accountable for all real and personal property
furnished by the city to the contractor;
(7)   Allow the department, managing director, and council to conduct financial
and performance audits of the city special transit service and cooperate during
the conduct of the audits;
(8)   Operate the special transit service in accordance with the policies and
guidelines established pursuant to §
15B-4.1; and
(9)   Maintain, inspect, and repair city special transit services vehicles, and
other vehicles provided by the department.
(b)   The department may procure from the special transit service contractor
other services, obligations, and responsibilities that are not contrary to this
chapter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 8, § 13-8.4A) (Added by Ord. 17-52)
§ 15B-8.5 Obligations and responsibilities of the department.
(a)   Under the transit management services contract, the department shall have
the following general obligations and responsibilities:
(1)   Be responsible for paying the necessary and legitimate management,
operation, and maintenance expenses of the city bus system and special transit
service;
(2)   Establish the routes, schedules, and levels of service for the city bus
system as required under §
15B-6.1;
(3)   Establish the policies and guidelines for the operation of the special
transit service as required under §
15B-4.1;
(4)   Ensure compliance with arrangements required by the federal Secretary of
Labor pursuant to § 13(c) of the Urban Mass Transportation Act, as amended, to
protect the interests of bus personnel and, if applicable, special transit
service personnel;
(5)   Furnish to the contractor the use of the properties and facilities
required to operate the city bus system and special transit service, which
shall include the following:
(A)   Maintenance facilities and shop equipment;
(B)   City transit buses and support vehicles;
(C)   Special transit service vehicles;
(D)   Offices, office equipment, furniture, and fixtures; and
(E)   Data processing equipment; and
(6)   Have the right to perform financial and management audits of the city bus
system, special transit service, and transit management services contractor.
(b)   The department may assume, under the transit management services
contract, other obligations and responsibilities that are not contrary to this
chapter.
Under no circumstances, however, shall the department assume any obligation or
responsibility that may jeopardize the private employment status of bus or
special transit service personnel and their coverage under the National Labor
Relations Board.
(1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 8, § 13-8.5) (Added by Ord. 96-30; Am. Ord. 08-20)
§ 15B-8.6 Collective bargaining agreements with bus and special transit service
personnel.
(a)   With respect to collective bargaining agreements with bus and special
transit service personnel:
(1)   The transit management services contractor shall be the employer that
shall have all responsibilities and prerogatives of an employer, as defined in
29 USC § 152(2), in dealing with labor organizations;
(2)   The transit management services contractor shall advise the department of
significant labor relations developments, but shall not be bound by any
recommendations or advice of the department;
(3)   The department shall not have the power to approve or disapprove any
collective bargaining agreement negotiated by the transit management services
contractor or any of the terms contained therein; and
(4)   All cost items shall be negotiated or established by the transit
management services contractor, subject to funding limits established by the
council through the budget process.
(b)   Applicable collective bargaining agreements may include provisions
concerning personnel who retired from service with the bus management services
contractor or any predecessor thereof, subject to funding limits established by
the council through the budget process.
(c)   If an impasse in collective bargaining negotiations for a labor agreement
covering bus or special transit service personnel exists, the transit
management services contractor shall invoke the services of the Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Service and engage in other good faith efforts to
settle disputes with the assistance of any available governmental mediation or
fact-finding resources, consistent with 29 USC § 158(d).
(1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 8, § 13-8.6) (Added by Ord. 96-30; Am. Ord. 08-20)
§ 15B-8.7 Performance audit.
(a)   The department shall conduct an audit of the performance of the city bus
system and special transit service at intervals deemed appropriate by the
department, to supplement ongoing financial, regulatory compliance, and
performance reviews, and audits conducted by federal, State, and local
entities; provided that an audit must be conducted at least once every five
years. Audits conducted by the department under this section must be submitted
to the mayor and council within 180 days of completion.
(b)   This section is not to be construed as preventing the council or managing
director from conducting a performance audit of the city bus system or special
transit service when deemed necessary.
(1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 8, § 13-8.7) (Added by Ord. 96-30; Am. Ord. 08-20, 17-
52)
§ 15B-8.8 Prohibition on use of bus or special transit service personnel for
other than official duties.
(a)   The transit management services contractor or principal of the contractor
shall not direct or allow bus or special transit service personnel, during
hours of employment for the contractor, to perform duties:
(1)   That are not required for the operation or maintenance of the city bus
system or special transit service; and
(2)   That benefit, in an individual capacity:
(A)   Any principal of the contractor; or
(B)   Any director, officer, or employee of the department.
(b)   Any compensation to bus or special transit service personnel for the
performance of duties prohibited under this section shall not be a necessary
and legitimate expense payable by the city.
(c)   For the purposes of this section, “principal of the contractor” means a
director or officer of the transit management services contractor.
(1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 8, § 13-8.8) (Added by Ord. 96-30; Am. Ord. 08-20)
§ 15B-8.9 Integration of city bus system and special transit service.
(a)   Any of the services to be provided by the transit management services
contractor under this chapter may be provided either by the transit management
services contractor or by a private entity that is under contract with the
transit management services contractor, and all references to the transit
management services contractor in this chapter shall be deemed to refer to the
transit management services contractor or to a private entity that is under
contract with the transit management services contractor.
(b)   Except if expressly provided otherwise, this chapter shall not require
the transit management services contractor to maintain any particular degree of
separation between the city bus system and special transit service. If deemed
necessary or desirable for the public interest, the transit management services
contractor may integrate all or part of the operations of the city bus system
and special transit service. The integration may include the sharing of
facilities, vehicles, equipment, materials, supplies, personnel, and
administrative services, subject to applicable laws and contractual
obligations.
(1990 Code, Ch. 13, Art. 8, § 13-8.9) (Added by Ord. 96-30; Am. Ord. 08-20)
ARTICLE 9: RESERVED
 
ARTICLE 10: RESERVED
 
ARTICLE 11: RESERVED
 
ARTICLE 12: LYING DOWN AT BUS STOPS
Sections
   
15B-12.1   Declaration of legislative intent - Purpose
   
15B-12.2   Prohibition
   
15B-12.3   Penalty
   
15B-12.4   Department to post sign and may set demarcation line
   
15B-12.5   Rules
§ 15B-12.1 Declaration of legislative intent–Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to prohibit, subject to exceptions, persons
from lying down within bus stop areas.
   The council of the City and County of Honolulu finds:
(a)   The city has invested significant public resources in the development and
maintenance of city bus stops, including the benches and shelters that are
intended to serve patrons of the city’s bus system and are necessary to the
city’s provision of convenient and efficient bus service, which for many Oahu’s
residents, is an essential mode of transportation to get to and from work, to
move about from place to place, and to access entertainment, goods, and
services.
(b)   Bus stop areas are created and maintained for the primary purpose of
enabling safe and convenient access to the city’s bus system. Lying down in bus
stop areas is not a customary use of a bus stop. Persons who lie down in bus
stops impede and deter others from using the city’s bus system; thus, they
discourage residents from using the bus to get to and from work, and residents
and visitors from using the bus system to get from place to place to access
local shops, restaurants, entertainment, and goods and services.
(c)   The need to maintain access to the city’s bus system through the bus
stops is greatest during the hours from 4:00 a.m. of one day and 1:00 a.m. of
the following day when the city’s bus system is primarily in operation. Persons
who lie down in bus stop areas during this period threaten their own safety and
the safety of bus patrons, especially the elderly, disabled, vision-impaired,
and children, who are put at increased risk when they are unable to safely sit
or stand at a bus stop or safely board or alight from a city bus because
persons are lying down in the bus stop area.
(d)   The prohibition against lying down in bus stop areas set forth in this
ordinance leaves intact the individual’s right to speak, protest or engage in
other lawful activity in any bus stop area consistent with the individual’s
free speech rights. In addition, the prohibition contains exceptions for
medical emergencies, and expressive activities, among others.
(e)   The council acknowledges that there are reasons why one might lie down in
a bus stop area. The city has offered and continues to offer services to those
engaged in lying down in a bus stop area who appear to be in need, or to those
who request service assistance. However, in many cases, these persons refuse
such services or continue the conduct despite the accessibility of these
services. The city will continue to invest in services for those in need, and
to make efforts to maintain and improve safety in bus stop areas for everyone.
A law enforcement officer may not issue a citation to a person for a violation
of this ordinance without first warning the person that lying down in a bus
stop area is unlawful.
(f)   Bus patrons are discouraged from using bus stop areas if persons are
lying down in the bus stop area or on the sidewalks immediately abutting the
bus stop area, deterring and discouraging persons from accessing and using the
city bus system as a means of transportation.
(Added by Ord. 18-5)
§ 15B-12.2 Prohibition.
(a)   No person may lie down in a designated bus stop area, or on a tarp,
towel, blanket, sleeping bag, bedding, chair, bench, tent floor, cardboard, or
any other object or material located in a designated bus stop area, between the
hours of 4:00 a.m. on one day and 1:00 a.m. of the following day.
(b)   Subsection (a) does not apply to any person:
(1)   Unable to comply with the direction of a law enforcement officer given
under subsection (c) due to a medical condition or emergency;
(2)   Engaged in an expressive activity;
(3)   Engaged in a maintenance, repair, or construction activity on behalf of a
governmental entity or a public utility; or
(4)   Under the age of six years old who is lying down in a baby carriage,
stroller, or carrier, or is lying down while being held or carried by a person
who is not lying down.
(c)   No person may be cited for a violation of this article unless the person
continues to engage in the conduct prohibited by this article after having been
notified by a law enforcement officer that the conduct is unlawful.
(d)   No person may raise as a defense to a prosecution under this article that
they were participating in an expressive event or activity, unless they
notified the law enforcement officer prior to or at the time of the citation
that they were engaging in an expressive activity, or unless it would have been
clearly evident to a reasonably observant person that the lying down was part
of an expressive activity.
(Added by Ord. 18-5)
§ 15B-12.3 Penalty.
   A violation of this article is punishable by a fine of up to $50 for each
offense.
(Added by Ord. 18-5)
§ 15B-12.4 Department to post sign and may set demarcation line.
   The department shall post a sign at each designated bus stop area indicating
that lying down within such area and facility is prohibited. This requirement
may be fulfilled either by posting a new sign or by modifying an existing sign
to provide notice of the prohibition.
(Added by Ord. 18-5)
§ 15B-12.5 Rules.
   The director may, pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, adopt rules having the force
and effect of law for the implementation, administration, and enforcement of
this article.
(Added by Ord. 18-5)
ARTICLE 13: AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATORS
Sections
   
15B-13.1   Definitions
   
15B-13.2   Requirement to provide automated external defibrillators
   
15B-13.3   Administering agency
   
15B-13.4   Notification
   
15B-13.5   Maintenance
§ 15B-13.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Automated External Defibrillator. A portable electronic device, approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration, that is capable of diagnosing
cardiac arrhythmias and that uses defibrillation to reestablish an effective
cardiac rhythm.
Revenue Service. The time when a train is available to carry passengers and
provide transit service. Trains operated in fare-free service are considered in
revenue service. Revenue service excludes train testing and maintenance.
Train. Four passenger cars coupled together and propelled by self-contained
motor equipment to provide transit service on a fixed rail guideway system
operated by the city.
(Added by Ord. 21-10; Am. Ord. 22-18 )
§ 15B-13.2 Requirement to provide automated external defibrillators.
   Every train in revenue service, as defined in this article, must have
installed and maintained therein automated external defibrillators in
accordance with the requirements of this article. At least two automated
external defibrillators that are accessible to employees and the public, as
applicable, must be placed in each train in revenue service. Appropriate
signage must be posted to indicate the location of the automated external
defibrillators.
(Added by Ord. 21-10; Am. Ord. 22-18 )
§ 15B-13.3 Administering agency.
   The department of transportation services or another city agency designated
by the mayor shall administer this article.
(Added by Ord. 21-10; Am. Ord. 22-18 )
§ 15B-13.4 Notification.
   The administering agency shall notify the Honolulu emergency services
department, emergency medical services division, of the existence, location,
and type of automated external defibrillator installed in each train.
(Added by Ord. 21-10; Am. Ord. 22-18 )
§ 15B-13.5 Maintenance.
   The administering agency shall conduct periodic inspections of all automated
external defibrillators that have been installed in trains to ensure that they
are maintained in an operative condition, and are replaced or repaired where
defective, all according to the operation and maintenance guidelines set forth
by the manufacturer.
(Added by Ord. 21-10; Am. Ord. 22-18 )
ARTICLE 14: CITY TRANSIT SYSTEM
Sections
   
15B-14.1   General provisions
   
15B-14.2   Operating revenues
   
15B-14.3   Use of designated transit facilities
   
15B-14.4   Park-and-ride facilities
§ 15B-14.1 General provisions.
(a)   A city payment card is accepted on all modes throughout the city transit
system and is the sole accepted form of payment on the city rail system. The
department may program and issue city payment cards for specific discounted
users, including but not limited to senior citizens, youth, and persons with
disabilities under §
15B-2.2.
(b)   To use the city transit system, prior to boarding a city transit system
vehicle or entering a designated paid fare area, a person must pay the full
applicable fare or present a valid transit pass, identification card, city
payment card, or other fare medium for transportation on or within the city
transit system; provided that when paying a cash fare, a passenger may overpay
the fare, but will not receive any change if doing so.
(c)   Fares for passengers of the city transit system are as established under
this chapter. The department may not:
(1)   Charge or collect a single cash fare, transit pass fare or bus token,
coupon or city payment card, which differs from the fares established or
permitted under this chapter;
(2)   Charge or collect a fare when this chapter or adopted council resolution
exempts a passenger from payment of a fare; or
(3)   Charge a fee for the issuance of a transit pass, unless expressly
authorized under this chapter.
(d)   The department is authorized to establish and administer a transit
voucher program that provides for the sale of transit vouchers to employers in
the city. The department may establish a price for the transit vouchers
consistent with the amount employers are allowed to provide each employee as a
tax-free benefit for transit commuting costs pursuant to Internal Revenue Code,
26 USC § 132. Transit vouchers may be redeemed for transit passes, coupons, or
any other fare medium at satellite city halls and other convenient locations in
the city where transit passes, coupons, city payment cards, or any fare media
are sold.
(e)   The department is authorized to adopt and implement a system policing
plan for the city transit system, and the individual component systems,
including the city bus system, city rail system, and city paratransit system,
for the purpose of maintaining safety, security, and reliable service of the
systems.
(f)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, uniformed and
nonuniformed police officers of the Honolulu police department carrying proper
identification, whether on duty or not, are allowed to use the city transit
system and access any city transit system facility without paying any fare.
(g)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, any authorized
transit personnel while in the performance of the person’s official and
authorized duties for the multimodal municipal transportation system is allowed
to use the city transit system and access any city transit system facility
without paying any fare.
(Added by Ord. 23-21)
§ 15B-14.2 Operating revenues.
(a)   All operating revenues derived from the city transit system are public
funds, including revenues from:
(1)   Cash fares;
(2)   Sales of transit passes, vouchers, coupons, or city payment cards;
(3)   Balances loaded on to city payment cards;
(4)   Contracts authorizing the use of the city transit system logos or seals
as provided for in this chapter;
(5)   Advertising; and
(6)   Rental or lease of or concessions on real property managed by the
department or transit management services contractor and used for the city
transit system.
(b)   Operating revenues derived from the city transit system must be deposited
into the transportation fund.
(Added by Ord. 23-21)
§ 15B-14.3 Use of designated transit facilities.
   When permitted by federal, State, and city law or regulation, the director
may designate certain transit facilities as available for use by the public.
The terms and conditions of use, including any fees therefor, will be
determined by the director. Fees collected from use of designated transit
facilities will be deposited into the transportation fund.
(Added by Ord. 23-21)
§ 15B-14.4 Park-and-ride facilities.
   The department has the power to establish or designate park-and-ride
facilities to be served by the city transit system. Park-and-ride facilities
established or designated by the department must be:
(1)   In conformance with the short-range transit plan and any updates; and
(2)   In compliance with development plan and zoning ordinances and maps, the
building code and fire code, and other applicable laws or ordinances concerning
land use, planning, and building construction.
   Park-and-ride facilities “established” by the department mean facilities
under the management of the department. Park-and-ride facilities “designated”
by the department mean those which, although served by the city transit system,
are not under the management of the department.
(Added by Ord. 23-21)
ARTICLE 15: ADVERTISING ON THE MUNICIPAL MULTIMODAL TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
Sections
   
15B-15.1   Advertising
§ 15B-15.1 Advertising.
(a)   Advertising inside city transit system vehicles and at city transit
system facilities. The department, through the department of budget and fiscal
services, may rent or let advertising spaces, including in electronic
advertising devices, inside city transit system vehicles and at city transit
system facilities; provided that the following may not be accepted:
(1)   Advertising that bears the name, signature, picture, or likeness of any
elected federal, State, or city official, or of any candidate for federal,
State or city elective office;
(2)   Advertising that is so objectionable under contemporary community
standards as to be reasonably foreseeable that it will result in harm to,
disruption of, or interference with the transportation system;
(3)   Advertising that contains pictures, words, or symbols of an obscene,
lewd, lascivious, or indecent character;
(4)   Advertising that promotes any illegal, indecent, or immoral purpose; and
(5)   Advertising of any product or service that is prohibited by law to be
sold or offered for sale to minors.
The department shall set the rates for the renting or letting of advertising
spaces; provided that the department may make advertising spaces available for
announcements of a public service, civic, or charitable nature free of charge.
(b)   Advertising on exterior of city transit vehicles.  No advertising is
allowed on the exterior of any city transit system vehicle; provided that any
word, phrase, seal, logo, or brand identifying the city, department, city
transit system or component system, management services contractor, or any
word, phrase, letter, or number that identifies the transit route, origin,
special event, destination or fleet inventory designation, or any safety
message is not considered advertising and may be placed on the exterior of a
city transit vehicle.
(Added by Ord. 23-21)
TITLE V: BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION CODES
   Chapters
      
16.   BUILDING CODE
      
16A.   HOUSING CODE
      
16B.   BUILDING ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
      
16C.   BUILDING MANAGEMENT
      
17.   ELECTRICAL CODE
      
18.   FEES AND PERMITS FOR BUILDING, ELECTRICAL, PLUMBING, AND SIDEWALK CODES
      
18A.   GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
      
19.   PLUMBING CODE
      
20.   FIRE CODE OF THE CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU
CHAPTER 16: BUILDING CODE
Editor’s note:
   In accordance with Ord. 24-15, building permit applications and construction
documents submitted to the building official before August 9, 2024 shall be
reviewed for compliance with the code in effect at the time of their
submission. Revisions to building permit applications and construction
documents submitted to the building official before August 9, 2024 may comply
with the building code in effect when the original application and construction
documents were submitted to the building official; provided that an applicant
is not prohibited from complying with Ord. 24-15 instead of the building code
in effect when a building permit application and plans were submitted to the
building official.
Articles
   
1.   Adoption of the Hawaii State Building Code and Hawaii State Residential
Code
   
2.   Relocation of Buildings
   
3.   Factory-Built Buildings
   
4.   Thatched Material on Exterior of Building—Protection Against Exposure
Fires
   
5.   Energy Conservation
   
6.   Residential Swimming Pools
   
7.   Public Swimming Pools
   
8.   Termite-Infested Lumber
   
9.   Adoption of the Hawaii State Existing Building Code
   
10.   Violations and Penalties
   
11.   Regulations Within Flood Hazard Districts and Development Adjacent to
Drainage Facilities
   
12.   Indigenous Hawaiian Architecture
   
13.   Hawaii Residential Safe Room
   
14.   Adoption of the State- and City-Owned High Occupancy Buildings—Design
Criteria for Enhanced Hurricane Protection Areas
   
15.   Baby Diaper-Changing Accommodations
   
16.   Automated External Defibrillators
   
17.   Shower Facilities
ARTICLE 1: ADOPTION OF THE HAWAII STATE BUILDING CODE AND
HAWAII STATE RESIDENTIAL CODE
Sections
   
16-1.1   Hawaii State Building Code
   
16-1.2   Adoption of the Hawaii State Residential Code
§ 16-1.1 Hawaii State Building Code.
   The Hawaii State Building code, as adopted by the State of Hawaii on April
20, 2021, which adopts with modifications, the International Building Code,
2018 Edition (First Printing), published by the International Code Council,
Inc., 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001, is adopted by
reference and made part hereof, subject to the following amendments:
(1)   Amending Subsection 101.1. Subsection 101.1 is amended to read:
101.1 Title. These regulations are part of the Building Code of the City and
County of Honolulu, hereinafter referred to as “this code”.
(2)   Amending Section 101.4. Section 101.4 is amended to read:
101.4 Referenced Codes. The codes referenced in Sections 101.4.1 through
101.4.9 shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the
prescribed extent and scope of each such reference. Sections 101.4.1 through
101.4.9 are amended and a new Section 101.4.8 is added to read:
101.4.1 Gas. Whenever the term International Fuel Gas Code is used in this
code, it shall mean the provisions of ROH Chapter 19, Plumbing Code. The
provisions of ROH Chapter 19 apply and are incorporated into this code.
101.4.2 Mechanical. Provisions in the International Mechanical Code are not
adopted by this code but may be considered for guidance.
101.4.3 Plumbing. Whenever the International Plumbing Code is referenced, the
provisions of ROH Chapter 19, Plumbing Code, shall apply.
101.4.4 Fire prevention. Whenever the provisions of the International Fire Code
are referenced, the provisions of ROH Chapter 20, Fire Code of the City and
County of Honolulu, shall apply to matters affecting or relating to structures,
processes and premises from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from the
storage, handling or use of structures, materials or devices; from conditions
hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or
premises; and from the construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal
of fire suppression and alarm systems or fire hazards in the structure or on
the premises from occupancy or operation.
101.4.5 Energy. Whenever the term International Energy Conservation Code is
used, it shall mean the provisions of ROH Chapter 16B, Building Energy
Conservation Code.
101.4.6 Existing buildings. Whenever the term International Existing Building
Code is used in this code, the provisions of ROH Chapter 16, Article 9, shall
apply to matters governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy,
addition to and relocation of existing buildings.
101.4.7 Electrical Codes. Whenever the term International Electrical Code is
used in this code, the provisions of ROH Chapter 17, Electrical Code, shall
apply.
101.4.8 Fixed transit and passenger rail systems. The provisions of the
Standard for Fixed Guideway Transit and Passenger Rail Systems, NFPA 130, shall
apply to fixed guideway transit and passenger rail stations to the prescribed
extent of this standard.
101.4.9 Housing Code. Whenever the term Housing Code is used in this code, the
provisions of ROH Chapter 16A, Housing Code, shall apply.
(3)   Amending Section 102.4.2. Section 102.4.2 is amended by deleting the word
“International” throughout the section.
(4)   Amending Subsection 102.6. Subsection 102.6 is amended to read:
102.6 Existing structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the
date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change,
except as otherwise specifically provided in this code, the International
Existing Building Code, and the Fire Code, provided such continued use does not
constitute a hazard to the general safety and welfare of the occupants and to
the public.
(5)   Adding Section 103. Section 103 of the International Building Code, 2018
Edition. is added by reference and made a part of this code, except Sections
103.2 and 103.3. which are amended to read:
103.2 Building official appointment authority. In accordance with the
prescribed procedures and with the approval of the appointing authority, the
building official shall have the authority to appoint technical officers,
inspectors, plan examiners and other personnel necessary to support this code
enforcement agency. The building official may designate such inspectors or
employees as may be necessary to carry out the functions of this code
enforcement agency. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the
building official.
103.3 Deputies. The building official may deputize volunteers to temporarily
carry out functions of the code enforcement agency in the event of a major
natural disaster.
(6)   Adding Section 104. Section 104 of the International Building Code, 2018
Edition, is added by reference and made a part of this code. Section 104.11 is
amended, and Section 104.11.3 is added, to read:
104.11 Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment.
The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any
material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically
prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has been approved.
An alternative material, design, or method of construction shall be approved
where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and
complies with the intent of the provisions of this code and that the material,
method, or work offered is, for the purpose intended, not less than the
equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness,
fire resistance, durability, and safety. Where an application for approval of
an alternative material, design, or method of construction is submitted to the
building official for approval, but is not approved, the building official
shall respond in writing to the applicant, stating the reasons why the
submitted alternative was not approved.
104.11.3 Technical assistance. To determine the acceptability of technologies,
processes, products, facilities, materials and uses attending the design,
operation or use of a building or premises subject to inspection by the
building code official, the building code official is authorized to require the
owner or owner’s authorized agent to provide, without charge to the
jurisdiction, a technical opinion and report. The opinion and report shall be
prepared by a qualified engineer, specialist, laboratory, or fire safety
specialty organization acceptable to the building code official and shall
analyze the fire safety properties of the design, operation or use of the
building or premises and the facilities and appurtenances situated thereon, to
recommend necessary changes. The building code official is authorized to
require design submittals to be prepared by, and bear the stamp of, a
registered design professional.
(7)   Adding Section 105. A new Section 105 is added to read:
SECTION 105
PERMITS
The provisions of ROH Chapter 18 apply.
(7a)   Adding the title of Section 106 and Sections 106.2 and 106.3. The title
of Section 106 and Sections 106.2 and 106.3 of the International Building Code,
2018 Edition, are added by reference and made a part of this code.
(8)   Adding Section 107. Section 107 of the International Building Code, 2018
Edition, is added by reference and made a part of this code, except that
Section 107.1 is amended, and Section 107.1.1 is added, to read:
107.1 General. See ROH Chapter 18.
107.1.1 Conflicts. In the event of a conflict between Section 107 of this Code
and ROH Chapter 18, both codes will be given effect to the maximum extent
possible, such that one code will not by implication nullify any requirements
arising under the other code. If a conflict is irreconcilable and cannot be
resolved without nullifying the provisions of one code, the conflict will be
resolved in favor of ROH Chapter 18.
(9)   Amending Sections 107.2, 107.2.1, 107.2.2, 107.2.3, 107.2.6, 107.2.6.1,
and 107.2.7, and adding Sections 107.2.6.2, 107.2.9, 107.2.9.1, and 107.2.10.
Sections 107.2, 107.2.1, 107.2.2, 107.2.3, 107.2.6, 107.2.6.1, and 107.2.7 of
the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, are amended, and Sections
107.2.6.2, 107.2.9, 107.2.9.1, and 107.2.10 are added, to read:
107.2 Construction documents. Construction documents shall be in accordance
with Sections 107.2.1 through 107.2.8 of this code.
107.2.1 Information on construction documents. Construction documents shall be
dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are
permitted when approved by the building official. Construction documents shall
be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the
work proposed and show in detail that it shall conform to the provisions of
this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined
by the building official.
For construction of new buildings, the construction documents shall include but
are not limited to, the building occupancy group classification, the building
height and area, the classification of the buildings as to type of construction
and their fire and smoke protection features.
107.2.2 Fire protection system shop drawings. When automatic sprinkler systems
are installed, construction drawings shall contain all information as required
by the referenced installation standards in International Building Code Chapter
9.
For new installations, the construction drawings shall include but not limited
to, the spacing, location, and position of all fire sprinklers heads, the
sprinkler system monitoring and alarm system information, the system riser and
fire department connection details with their location.
For existing construction, the construction drawings shall include but not
limited to, the locations of the existing and final fire sprinkler heads
affected by the proposed work.
Working drawings shall be required for new installations. The drawings shall
include but are not limited to, existing systems that increase the coverage
areas, change the hazard classification, provide in-rack sprinkler systems, and
identify any storage in excess of 12 feet in height. Drawings for the fire
protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate conformance with this code
and the construction documents and shall be submitted by the fire protection
special inspector in accordance to International Building Code Section 919.
107.2.3 Means of egress. The construction documents shall show in sufficient
detail the location, construction, size and character of all portions of the
means of egress in compliance with the provisions of this code. In other than
occupancies in Groups R-2, R-3, and I-1, the construction documents shall
designate the number of occupants to be accommodated on every floor, and in all
rooms and spaces.
107.2.6 Site plan. In addition to the plot plan required in ROH Chapter 18, the
construction documents submitted with the application for a permit shall be
accompanied by a site plan showing to scale: the size and location of new
construction and any existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines,
the established street grades and the existing and proposed finished grades
and, as applicable, location of fire hydrants, fire department apparatus roads,
flood hazard areas, floodways, and design flood elevations; and it shall be
drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of
demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and location
and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site
or plot.
107.2.6.1 Special flood hazard areas. Where base flood elevations are not
specified, they shall be established in accordance with ROH Chapter 21A.
107.2.6.2 Topographic survey. For new or additions to structures and buildings,
on properties where the elevation difference on that site is 5 feet (1,524 mm)
or more, there shall be provided a topographic survey of the existing site.
107.2.7 Erosion and sediment control measures. An erosion sediment Control Plan
(ESCP) shall be prepared in compliance with ROH Chapter 18A and the Rules
Relating to Water Quality, Chapter 3 of the Administrative Rules, Title 20,
Department of Planning and Permitting. The ESCP shall provide the best
management practices (BMP) and good housekeeping practices during construction
to minimize the discharge of runoff containing sediment and pollutants into the
receiving waters.
107.2.9 Installation and operation of stationary storage battery systems. Where
an energy storage system is designed to provide electrical power to a building
or facility the following information shall be provided:
(a)   Location and layout diagram of the room in which the stationary storage
battery system is to be installed.
(b)   Details on hourly fire-resistance-rated assemblies provided.
(c)   Quantities and types of storage batteries and battery systems.
(d)   Manufacturer’s specifications, ratings and listings of storage batteries
and battery systems.
(e)   Details on energy management systems.
(f)   Location and content of signage.
(g)   Details on fire-extinguishing, smoke detection and ventilation systems.
(h)   Rack storage arrangement, including seismic support criteria.
107.2.9.1 Hazard mitigation analysis. A failure modes and effects analysis
(FMEA) or other approved hazard mitigation analysis shall be provided under any
of the following conditions:
(a)   Battery technologies not specifically identified in Table 2704.2 of this
code are provided.
(b)   More than one stationary storage battery technology is provided in a room
or indoor area where there is a potential for adverse interaction between
technologies.
(c)   Where allowed as a basis for increasing maximum allowable quantities in
accordance with Section 2704.2.9 of this code.
107.2.10 Mechanical ventilation. Where mechanical ventilation is used for
dwelling units, there must be submitted a letter of certification that the
proposed design was reviewed by a professional mechanical engineer licensed in
the State of Hawaii, to be in conformance with ANSI/ASHRAE 62.1 and 62.2. This
engineer cannot be the design professional engineer in responsible charge of
the plans and will be the special inspector required by Section 1705.
(10)   Amending Section 107.3.1. Section 107.3.1 of the International Building
Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read:
107.3.1 Approval of construction documents. ROH Chapter 18 applies in lieu of
this section.
(11)   Amending Section 107.3.4. Section 107.3.4 of the International Building
Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read:
107.3.4 Design professional in responsible charge. All plans and specifications
relating to work that affects the public safety or health and for which a
building permit is required shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a
duly licensed professional engineer or architect, and construction shall be
under the observation of a duly licensed professional engineer or architect, as
required by HRS Chapter 464.
(12)   Amending Section 107.3.4.1. Section 107.3.4.1 of the International
Building Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read:
107.3.4.1 Deferred submittals. Deferral of any submittal items shall have the
approval of the building official before the permit is approved. The design
professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the
construction documents for review by the building official.
Documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered
design professional in responsible charge who shall review them and forward
them to the building official with a notation indicating that the deferred
submittal documents have been reviewed and found to be in general conformance
to the design of the building.
(13)   Amending Section 107.4. Section 107.4 of the International Building
Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read:
107.4 Amended construction documents. Work shall be done in accordance with the
approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that
are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be
resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents. The
building official may approve the amended set of construction documents if they
comply with the provisions of this code and all other applicable laws. If the
building official is unable to approve the amended set of construction
documents, the work not shown in the approved construction documents shall be
removed and shall not be at the expense of the City.
(14)   Adding Section 108. Section 108 of the International Building Code, 2018
Edition, is added by reference and made a part of this code, except Section
108.1, which is amended to read:
108.1 General. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for
temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to
time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The
building official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause.
Exemption: See ROH Section 18-3.4.
(15)   Adding Section 109. Section 109 is added to read:
SECTION 109
FEES
ROH Chapter 18 will apply.
(16)   Adding Section 110. Section 110 of the International Building Code, 2018
Edition, is added by reference and made a part of this code, except Sections
110.3, 110.3.3, 110.3.5, 110.3.9, 110.3.10, and 110.3.11, which are amended to
read:
110.3 Required inspections. The building official, upon notification, shall
make the inspections set forth in Sections 110.3.3, 110.3.5, 110.3.9, 110.3.10,
and 110.3.11 of this code.
110.3.3 Lowest floor elevation. In flood hazard areas, upon placement of the
lowest floor, including the basement, and prior to further vertical
construction, an elevation certification required in Section 1612.4 shall be
submitted to the building official.
110.3.5 Lath and/or gypsum board inspection. To be made after all lathing and
gypsum board, interior and exterior, in construction required to be fire-
resistive, is in place but before any plastering is applied or before gypsum
board joints and fasteners are taped and finished.
Exception: Lath and gypsum board installed in Group U Occupancies.
110.3.9 Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified in Sections
110.3.3 and 110.3.5, the building official is authorized to make or require
other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the
provisions of this code and other laws that are enforced by this code.
110.3.10 Special inspections.  The submitted plans shall have all special
inspections listed as a condition for permit issuance. Where special inspection
is required by this code, a complete list of the special inspections shall be
provided on the submitted plans as a condition for permit issuance. For special
inspections, see Sections 110, 919, 1704, 1705, and 1707.
110.3.11 Final inspection. A final inspection shall be made after all
construction is completed and prior to issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy.
(17)   Adding Section 111. Section 111 of the International Building Code, 2018
Edition, is added by reference and made a part of this code, except Section
111.1, which is amended to read:
111.1 Change of occupancy. A building or structure shall not be used or
occupied, and a change of occupancy of a building or structure or portion
thereof shall not be made, until the building official has issued a certificate
of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of
occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the
provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction.
Exception:
1.   Certificates of occupancy are not required for work exempt from permits in
accordance with ROH Chapter 18.
2.   The provisions of Section 111.1 are not applicable to the following:
(a)   For R-3 Occupancies, see Residential Code Section R110.1.
(b)   Group U Occupancies.
(c)   For work exempted from permits.
(17a)   Adding Section 112. Section 112 of the International Building Code,
2018 Edition, is added by reference and made a part of this code.
(18)   Adding Section 113. Section 113 is added to read:
SECTION 113 - BOARD OF APPEALS
113.1 Creation of Board of Appeals. There shall be and is hereby created a
building board of appeals consisting of nine members who shall be qualified by
experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building
construction and fire safety and who shall be appointed by the mayor with the
approval of the council. Four members shall be currently licensed as engineers
or architects with the State of Hawaii board of registration of professional
engineers, architects, land surveyors, and landscape architects. One member
shall be qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to
electrical work. One member shall be qualified by experience and training to
pass on matters pertaining to plumbing work. Two members shall be qualified by
experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to fire safety. One
member shall be a general contractor licensed under HRS Chapter 444. The
members of the board shall serve for terms of five years and until their
successors have been appointed and qualified. Any vacancy occurring other than
by expiration of a term of office shall be filled for the remainder of such
unexpired term in the same manner as for an original appointment. The board
shall select a chair and vice-chair annually. Board members serving on the
effective date of this code shall continue to serve for the remainder of their
appointed terms.
113.2 Board action. All board action requires an affirmative vote of five or
more board members.
113.3 Power and duties. The board powers and duties include:
113.3.1 Conduct a Hearing based on the decision of a building official. Hear
and determine appeals from the decisions of the building official in the
administration of the Building Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, Housing
Code, Building Energy Conservation Code, and ROH Chapter 18, including but not
limited to, matters involving any approval or denial, the use of new or
alternate materials, types of construction, equipment, devices or appliances,
administrative enforcement, and the issuance, suspension or revocation of
permits issued under ROH Chapter 18.
In the case of any denial of the use of new or alternative materials, types of
construction, equipment, devices or appliances, an appeal may be sustained if
the record shows that: (1) the new or alternate materials, types of
construction, equipment, devices or appliances meet the required standards
established by the codes being appealed from; (2) permitting the use thereof
shall not jeopardize life, limb or property; and (3) the use shall not be
contrary to the intent and purpose of the code being appealed from. The
appellant shall pay all expenses necessary for tests that may be ordered by the
board.
In all cases not involving the use of new or alternate materials, an appeal
shall only be sustained if the record shows that the decision of the building
official is based on an erroneous finding of material fact, is based on
arbitrary or capricious decision making, or is a manifest abuse of discretion.
The board may reverse, affirm or modify, in whole or in part, the appealed
decision.
113.3.2 Conduct a hearing based on the decision of the fire code official. The
board of appeals shall hear and determine appeals from the decisions of the
fire official in the administration of the Fire Code, including the suspension
or revocation of permits issued pursuant to the Fire Code, and any denial of
the use of new or alternate materials, types of construction, equipment,
devices or appliances. The standard of review for the use of new or alternate
materials, types of construction, equipment, devices or appliance shall be the
same as for Section 113.3.1.
113.3.3 Conduct a hearing based on a variance to the code. The board of appeals
shall hear and determine petitions for varying the application of the Building
Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, Fire Code, or Building Energy
Conservation Code. A variance may be granted if the board finds: (1) that the
strict application, operation or enforcement of the code provision or
provisions being appealed from would result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship to the applicant; (2) that safety to life, limb, and
property shall not be jeopardized; and (3) that the granting of a variance
would not be injurious to the adjoining lots and the buildings thereon, would
not create additional fire hazards and would not be contrary to the purposes of
the code and public interest. In making its determination, the board shall take
into account the character, use, and type of occupancy and construction of
adjoining buildings, buildings on adjoining lots and the building involved.
113.3.4 Conduct a hearing based on administrative enforcement of ROH Chapter
13, Article 4 (Litter Control). The board of appeals shall hear and determine
appeals from the decisions of the building official in the administration
enforcement of ROH Chapter 13, Article 4. An appeal shall only be sustained if
the record shows that the decision of the building official is based on an
erroneous finding of material fact, is based on arbitrary or capricious
decision making, or is a manifest abuse of discretion. The board may reverse,
affirm or modify, in whole or in part, the appealed decision.
113.3.5 Conduct a hearing based concerning summary removal of unlawful signs
pursuant to ROH Chapter 13, Article 14 (“Unlawful Signs Within Street Rights-
of-Way and Public Malls”). The board of appeals shall hear and determine
appeals concerning the summary removal of unlawful signs pursuant to ROH
Chapter 13, Article 14. Such appeals shall be limited to a determination of
whether a sign was properly removed pursuant to the provisions of that article.
An appeal shall only be sustained if the record shows that the decision of the
building official is based on an erroneous finding of material fact, is based
on arbitrary or capricious decision making, or is a manifest abuse of
discretion. The board may reverse, affirm or modify, in whole or in part, the
appealed decision.
113.3.6 Conduct a Hearing based on the building official decision to issue,
suspend or revoke. Appeals from the decisions of the building official to
issue, suspend, or revoke permits shall be in writing and filed with the board
within ten (10) working days of the permittee’s receipt of the notice of
issuance, suspension, or revocation. In all other cases, appeals from the
decisions of the building official and fire official shall be in writing and
filed within thirty (30) calendar days of the appealed decision.
113.4 Compensation. Each member of the board shall be compensated at the rate
of $20 per day for each day’s actual attendance at a meeting, but such
compensation shall not exceed, in the aggregate, $60 in any one month.
113.5 Procedure. The proceedings of the board shall be subject to the
provisions of HRS Chapter 91. The board shall adopt reasonable rules and
regulations for conducting its meetings, hearings, and investigations in
conformity therewith and may impose reasonable fees to cover the costs of such
proceedings.
113.6 Fees. The filing fee for a petition for appeal from a decision of the
Authority Having Jurisdiction in the administration of the Building Code,
Electrical Code, Fire Code, Plumbing Code, Housing Code, ROH Chapter 13,
Article 4, ROH Chapter 18 and the Building Energy Conservation Code or an
application for varying the application of the Building Code, Electrical Code,
Plumbing Code, Fire Code, or Building Energy Conservation Code, shall be
$600.00. No petition for appeal shall be filed without payment of said fee.
(19)   Adding Section 114. Section 114 is added to read:
SECTION 114 - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
For violation and penalty provisions, see ROH Chapter 16, Article 10.
(20)   Adding Section 115. Section 115 is added to read:
SECTION 115 - STOP WORK ORDER ROH Chapter 18 will govern the issuance of stop
work orders.
(21)   Adding Section 116. Section 116 of the International Building Code, 2018
Edition, is added by reference and made a part of this code, except Sections
116 through 116.4, which are amended to read:
SECTION 116 - UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT
116.1 General. All buildings or structures that are structurally unsafe or not
provided with adequate egress; or that constitute a fire hazard; or that are
otherwise dangerous to human life; or that in relation to their existing use
constitute a hazard to safety, health, or public welfare by reason of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, or
abandonment, as specified in this code or any other effective ordinance are,
for the purpose of this section, unsafe buildings. An unsafe building shall
also include a building that is dangerous, as defined by International Existing
Building Code Chapter 2. All such unsafe buildings or structures are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation,
demolition, removal, or other methods ordered by the building official.
116.2 Notice to owner. If the building official determines that a structure or
use or occupancy of a structure is unsafe, the building official may issue an
order to any person who may be affected by the unsafe conditions, including,
without limitation, the owner of the structure and its occupants. The order may
restrict or prohibit the use of the unsafe structure and restrict or prohibit
access to the unsafe structure. The building official may also order the owner
of a structure or its occupants to take any actions that the building official
deems reasonably necessary to reduce or eliminate risks to persons or property
arising from the unsafe or unsanitary conditions identified by the building
official. Such actions may include, without limitation, vacating the structure,
securing the structure from entry, the immediate repair of the structure, and
the demolition and removal of the structure.
In addition to actions authorized above, the building official may issue orders
to show cause, requiring the persons concerned by the order to appear before
the building official and show why the building official should not issue an
order relating to an unsafe structure. The building official’s discretion to
issue an order to show cause does not prohibit the person concerned by the
order relating to an unsafe structure from timely writing the building official
to contest the building official’s determination to issue an order relating to
an unsafe structure.
The building official may also enter into consent orders that are agreed to by
the building official and persons concerned by an unsafe structure. A consent
order entered into by the building official may require the responsible persons
to take specific actions to address unsafe or unsanitary conditions associated
with an unsafe structure and pay agreed upon penalties upon such terms as the
building official deems appropriate.
Service of any notice or order issued under this section must be made by hand
delivery or certified mail, with return receipt requested; provided that if the
building official is unable to serve the notice or order by hand delivery or
certified mail, the building official may then serve the notice or order by
posting a copy of the notice or order in a conspicuous location on the property
and publishing a copy of the same in a newspaper of general circulation within
the City and County of Honolulu for not less than once each week in four
successive weeks. Service by publication shall be deemed complete upon the last
publication required by this section if a copy of the notice or order was also
posted on the property as required by this section.
116.3 Posting of signs. The building official may post signage on a property
with an unsafe structure stating: “DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. DEPARTMENT
OF PLANNING AND PERMITTING, CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU.” Such notice shall not
be removed without written permission of the building official, and no person
shall enter the building except for the purpose of making the required repairs
or of demolishing the building.
116.4 Action by the building official. If the responsible persons do not comply
with an order issued under Section 116.2 or if immediate action is reasonably
necessary to prevent significant harm to persons or property, the building
official may secure an unsafe structure from entry, repair the structure, or
demolish the unsafe structure, in whole or in part, to reduce or eliminate the
risk of harm. When the building official takes action pursuant to this section,
the persons responsible for the unsafe building will be responsible for all
costs incurred by the City and shall reimburse the City all incurred costs
within 30 days of receiving a request for payment from the building official.
If the responsible persons do not reimburse the City within 30 days of
receiving a request for payment, the building official may collect the costs by
any lawful means, including attaching the debt to any real property owned by
the responsible persons and foreclosing on the lien. The building official
shall serve notices of actions taken pursuant to this section and requests for
payment by hand delivery or certified mail, with return receipt requested.
However, if the building official is unable to serve a notice or a request for
payment by hand delivery or certified mail, the building official may then
serve a notice or request for payment by posting a copy of the notice or
request for payment in a conspicuous location on the property and publishing a
copy of the same in a newspaper of general circulation within the City and
County of Honolulu for not less than once each week in four successive weeks.
Service by publication shall be deemed complete upon the last publication
required by this section if a copy of the notice or order was also posted on
the property as required by this section.
(22)   Amending Section 202. Section 202 is amended as follows:
(a)   By adding the following definition immediately before the definition of
“ACCREDITATION BODY”:
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). See ROH Chapter 21, Article 10.
(b)   By adding the following definition, immediately before the definition of
“ATRIUM”:
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES. An assisted living facility as defined in section
HRS Section 321-15.1 and Hawaii Administrative Rules (“HAR”) Section 11-90-
2 that is licensed by the State of Hawaii.
(c)   By amending the definition of “building” to read:
BUILDING. Any structure that is used or intended to be used for any use or
occupancy. The term includes structures mounted on wheels such as a trailers,
wagons and vehicles that are used for business, storage or as living quarters
if they do not regularly travel off-site and have current vehicle registrations
and safety checks. The term does not include push wagons that do not exceed 25
square feet in area, medical trailers, and vehicles that are undergoing repair
and not used for any purpose.
(d)   By adding the following definition immediately before the definition of
“BUILDING HEIGHT”:
BUILDING ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS. Energy standards as specified in ROH
Chapter 16B.
(e)   By amending the following definition to read:
BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Director of Planning and Permitting of the city or the
director’s authorized representative.
(f)   By adding the following definition of “CARPORT” immediately before the
definition of “CAST STONE”:
CARPORT. A private garage that is either: (1) 100 percent open on one side and
with 50 percent net openings on another side or that is provided with an
equivalent of such openings on two or more sides or (2) 100 percent open on one
side and 25 percent open on another side with the latter opening so located to
provide adequate cross ventilation may be considered a carport when approved by
the building official.
(g)   By adding the following definition, immediately before the definition of
“CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE”:
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION. A certificate stating that work was done in
compliance with approved construction documents.
(h)   By adding the following definition immediately before the definition of
“CLEAN AGENT”:
CITY. The City and County of Honolulu.
(i)   By adding the following definition immediately before the definition of
“ELEVATOR GROUP”:
ELECTRICAL CODE. Electrical standards as specified in ROH Chapter 17.
(j)   By adding the following definition immediately before the definition of
“FENESTRATION” to read:
FENCE. A structure of permanent material such as wrought iron, wire, wood,
vinyl, plastic, etc., with post foundations, erected for purposes of enclosure,
division of property, or decoration.
(k)   By adding the following definitions, immediately before the definition of
“FIRE COMMAND CENTER” to read:
FIRE CODE. Wherever specific reference is made to Fire Code, the Fire Code
shall be ROH Chapter 20.
FIRE CODE OFFICIAL. The fire chief or other designated authority charged with
the administration and enforcement of the Fire Code, or a duly authorized
representative.
(l)   By amending the following definition to read:
FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE. The distance measured from the building face to the
closest lot line, to the centerline of a street, alley or public way, or to an
imaginary line between two buildings on the property. For the purposes of this
section, lot lines established within a joint, cluster, or similar development
under the Land Use Ordinance, boundary lines established for condominium
ownership purposes only and development under the jurisdiction of the State of
Hawaii, shall not be considered as boundary lines. The distance shall be
measured at right angles from the face of the wall.
(m)   By adding the following definition, immediately before the definition of
“HOUSING UNIT,” to read:
HOUSING CODE. Housing standards as specified in ROH Chapter 16A.
(n)   By adding the following definition, immediately before the definition of
“LEVEL OF EXIT DISCHARGE,” to read:
LAND USE ORDINANCE. Land use standards as specified in ROH Chapter 21.
(o)   By adding the following definition, immediately before the definition of
“[BS] POLYPROPYLENE SIDING,” to read:
PLUMBING CODE. Plumbing standards as specified in ROH Chapter 19.
(p)   By adding the following definition, immediately after the definition of
“PRIMARY STRUCTURAL FLAME,” to read:
PRIVATE NUISANCE. A nuisance in fact that does not affect the health, safety,
or welfare of the general public.
(q)   By adding the following definition, immediately after “WALL, NONLOAD-
BEARING,” to read:
WALL, SITE. A structure of stone, brick, masonry, concrete, or other similar
permanent material, raised to some height and erected for purposes of
enclosure, division of property or decoration.
(r)   By amending the following definition to read:
WINDBORNE DEBRIS REGION. Areas in Hawaii where the basic design wind speed is
140 mph (62.59 m/s) or greater. For Risk Category II buildings and structures
the windborne debris region will be based on Figure 26.5-2B of ASCE 7. For Risk
category III buildings and structures, the windborne debris region shall be
based on Figure 26.5-2C of ASCE 7. For Risk Category IV buildings, the
windborne debris region will be based on Figure 26.5-2D of ASCE7. This
definition amends Section W102 of Appendix W.
(23)   Amending Section 304.1. Section 304.1 is amended by deleting “Ambulatory
care facilities” from Business Group B occupancy.
(24)   Amending Section 310.4. Section 310.4 is amended to read:
310.4 Residential Group R-3. Residential occupancies where the occupants are
primarily permanent in nature and not classified as Group R-1, R-2, R-4, R-5 or
I, including:
Adult residential care homes
Assisted living facilities
Buildings that do not contain more than two dwelling units
Boarding houses (non-transient) with 16 or fewer occupants
Congregate living facilities (non-transient) with 16 or fewer occupants
Lodging houses (transient) with five or fewer guest rooms and 10 or fewer
occupants
Residential Care facilities that provide accommodations for five or fewer
persons receiving care
(25)   Amending Section 310.4. Section 310.4 is amended by adding a new section
310.4.3 to read:
310.4.3 Assisted living facilities within a dwelling.  Assisted living
facilities for not more than six occupants, excluding staff, receiving care
that are within a single-family dwelling are classified as an Residential Group
R-4 occupancy. Residents shall meet the ability to evacuate requirements and
other limitations as required in Group I-1.
(26)   Amending Section 310.5. Section 310.5 is amended by adding the following
group category before “Social rehabilitation facilities” to read:
“Small intermediate care facility” shall be as defined by the Chapter 11-99,
Hawaii Administrative Rules (Department of Health).
(27)   Amending Section 310.5. Section 310.5 is amended by amending the second
paragraph of this section to read:
Group R-4 occupancies are permitted to comply with the International
Residential Code provided an automatic sprinkler system is installed in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.3, except as otherwise provided for in this
code.
(28)   Amending Section 310. Section 310 is amended by adding Section 310.6 to
read:
310.6 Residential Group R-5 transient dwellings.  Residential Group R
occupancies where the occupants are transient in nature and not classified as
Group R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or I, including:
Congregate living facilities (transient) with 16 or fewer occupants Boarding
houses (transient)
Group R-5 occupancies shall be provided with an automatic sprinkler system
installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 and shall be permitted to be
constructed in accordance with the International Residential Code.
(29)   Deleting Section 403.3.3. Section 403.3.3 is deleted in its entirety.
(30)   Amending Section 403.4.2. Section 403.4.2 is amended to read:
403.4.2 Fire alarm system. A fire alarm system shall be provided in accordance
with the Fire Code.
(31)   Amending Subsection 403.4.5. Subsection 403.4.5 is amended to read:
403.4.5 Emergency responder radio coverage. Emergency responder radio coverage
shall be provided in accordance with the Fire Code.
(32)   Amending Subsection 403.4.6. Subsection 403.4.6 is amended to read:
403.4.6 Fire command. Fire command stations shall comply with the Fire Code.
(33)   Amending Section 403.5.4. Section 403.5.4 is amended by adding the
following exception to read:
Exception: When the required exit ways are exterior exit stairways or ramps,
the exterior stairways and ramps shall have natural ventilation in accordance
with International Building Code Section 909.20.3.
(34)   Amending Section 404.2. Section 404.2 is amended to read:
404.2 Use. The floor of the atrium shall not be used for other than low fire
hazard uses and only approved materials and decorations in accordance with the
Fire Code shall be used in the atrium space.
Exception: The atrium floor area is permitted to be used for any approved use
where the individual space is provided with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with International Building Code Section 903.3.1.1.
(35)   Amending Section 406.6.2. Section 406.6.2 is amended to read:
406.6.2 Ventilation. A mechanical ventilation system and exhaust system shall
be provided in accordance with the Chapter 11-39, Hawaii State Administrative
Rules (Department of Health), or any successor rules duly adopted by the
Department of Health.
(36)   Amending Section 413. Section 413 is amended by amending Section 413.1
and adding Table 413.1 and Sections 413.1.1 through 413.1.14 to read:
413.1 General. Fire protection and life-safety features for high-piled areas
shall be in accordance with Sections 413.1.1 through 413.1.14, of this code and
the Fire Code.
TABLE 413.1
GENERAL FIRE PROTECTION AND LIFE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
                                                           SOLID-PILED STORAGE SHELF
          SIZE OF ALL STORAGE AREA                         STORAGE AND PALLETIZED
          HIGH-                                            STORAGE
COMMODITY PILED                                                      MAXIMUM     MAXI
CLASS     AREA    AUTOMATIC     FIRE      SMOKE            MAXIMUM   PERMISSIBLE MUM
          (SQUARE FIRE          DETECTION AND     DRAFT    PILE      STORAGE     PILE
          FEET)   EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM    HEAT    CURTAINS DIMENSION HEIGHT      VOLUME
                  SYSTEM                  REMOVAL          (FEET)    (FEET)      (CUBIC
                                                                                 FEET)
                                                            SOLID-PILED STORAGE SHELF
          SIZE OF ALL STORAGE AREA                          STORAGE AND PALLETIZED
          HIGH-                                             STORAGE
COMMODITY PILED                                                       MAXIMUM     MAXI
CLASS     AREA    AUTOMATIC     FIRE      SMOKE             MAXIMUM   PERMISSIBLE MUM
          (SQUARE FIRE          DETECTION AND HEAT DRAFT    PILE      STORAGE     PILE
          FEET)   EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM    REMOVAL  CURTAINS DIMENSION HEIGHT      VOLUME
                  SYSTEM                                    (FEET)    (FEET)      (CUBIC
                                                                                  FEET)
          2,501 -
          12,000  Yes           Not       Not      Not      100       40          400,000
          Public                required  required required
          access
          2,501 -
          12,000                Not       Not      Not
          Nonpub  Yes           required  required required 100       40          400,000
         lic
I-IVa     access
          2,501 -
          12,000
          Nonpub  Not required  Yes       Yes      Yes      100       30          200,000
          lic
          access
          Greater               Not                Not
          than    Yes           required  Yes      required 100       40          400,000
          12,000
          501 -
          2,500   Yes           Not       Not      Not      50        30          75,000
          Public                required  required required
          access
          501 -
          2,500                 Not       Not      Not
          Nonpub  Yes           required  required required 50        30          75,000
         lic
High      access
hazardb   501 -
          2,500
          Nonpub  Not required  Yes       Yes      Yes      50        30          50,000
          lic
          access
          Greater               Not                Not
          than    Yes           required  Yes      required 50        30          75,000
          2,500
 
a.   Commodity classification I-IV, defined in the Fire Code.
b.   High Hazards, defined in Section 415.
413.1.1 Extent and type of protection. When required, fire detection systems,
smoke and heat removal, draft curtains and automatic sprinkler design density
shall extend the lesser of 15 feet (4,572 mm) beyond the high-piled storage
area or to a permanent partition. Where portions of high-piled storage areas
have different fire protection requirements because of commodity, method of
storage or storage height, the fire protection features shall be based on the
most restrictive design method.
413.1.2 Separation of high-piled storage areas. High-piled storage areas shall
be separated from other portions of the building where required by Sections
413.1.2.1 through 413.1.2.2.
413.1.2.1 Separation from other uses. Mixed occupancies shall be separated in
accordance with International Building Code Sections 508 and 509.
Adoption of the Hawaii State Building Code and Hawaii State Residential
Code   § 16-1.1
413.1.2.2 Multiple high-piled storage areas. Multiple high-piled storage areas
shall be in accordance with Section 413.1.2.2.1 or 413.1.2.2.2 of this code.
413.1.2.2.1 Aggregate area. The aggregate area of all high-piled storage areas
within a building, unless such areas are separated from each other by 1-hour
fire barriers constructed in accordance with International Building Code
Section 707. Openings in such fire barriers shall be protected by openings
having a 1-hour fire protection rating.
413.1.2.2.2 Multiclass high-piled storage areas. High-piled storage areas
classified as Class I through IV not separated from high-piled storage areas
classified as high hazard shall utilize the aggregate of all high-piled storage
areas as high hazard. To be considered as separated, 1-hour fire barriers shall
be constructed in accordance with International Building Code Section 707.
Openings in such fire barriers shall have a 1-hour fire protection rating.
Exception: Designation based on engineering analysis.
413.1.3 Automatic sprinklers. Automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with the
Fire Code.
Exception: High-expansion foam extinguishing systems installed in addition to
automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with the Fire Code.
413.1.4 Fire detection. Fire detection shall comply with the Fire Code.
413.1.5 Smoke and heat removal. Where smoke and heat removal are required by
International Building Code Section 910, smoke and heat vents shall be
provided.
413.1.6 Building access. Fire apparatus access roads shall comply with the Fire
Code.
413.1.7 Access doors. Fire department access doors shall be provided in
accordance with this section. Access doors shall be accessible without the use
of a ladder.
413.1.8 Number of doors required. A minimum of one access door shall be
provided in each 100 linear feet (30,480 mm), or fraction thereof, of the
exterior walls that face required fire apparatus access road. The required
access doors shall be distributed such that the linear distance between
adjacent access doors does not exceed 100 feet (30,480 mm).
413.1.9 Door size and type. Access doors shall not be less than 3 feet (914 mm)
in width and 6 feet 8 inches (2,032 mm) in height. Access doors shall be of the
pivoted or side-hinged swinging type.
413.1.10 Designation of storage heights. A visual method of indicating the
maximum allowable storage height shall be provided within stock or storage
areas.
413.1.11 Aisles. Aisles providing access to exits and fire department access
doors shall be provided in high-piled storage areas exceeding 500 square feet
(46 m2) in accordance with Sections 413.1.11.1.1 to 413.1.11.1.2 of this code.
Aisles separating storage piles or racks shall comply with NFPA 13. Aisles
shall also comply with International Building Code Chapter 10.
413.1.11.1 Width. Aisle width must be in accordance with Sections 413.1.11.1.1
and 413.1.11.1.2.
Exceptions:
1.   Aisles crossing rack structures or storage piles, which are used only for
employee access, must be a minimum of 24 inches (610 mm) wide.
2.   Aisles separating shelves classified as shelf storage must be a minimum of
30 inches (762 mm) wide.
413.1.11.1.1 Sprinklered Buildings. Aisles in sprinklered buildings shall be
not less than 44 inches (1,118 mm) wide. Aisles shall be not less than 96
inches (2,438 mm) wide in high-piled storage areas exceeding 2,500 square feet
(232 m2) in area that are accessible to the public and designated to contain
high-hazard commodities.
Exception: Aisles in high-piled storage areas exceeding 2,500 square feet (232
m2) in area, that are accessible to the public and designated to contain high-
hazard commodities, are protected by a sprinkler system designed for multiple-
row racks of high-hazard commodities shall be a minimum of 44 inches (1,118 mm)
wide.
413.1.11.1.2 Nonsprinklered buildings. Aisles in nonsprinklered buildings shall
be a minimum of 96 inches (2,438 mm) wide.
413.1.11.2 Clear height. The required aisle width shall extend from floor to
ceiling. Rack structural supports and catwalks are allowed to cross aisles at a
minimum height of 6 feet 8 inches (2,032 mm) above the finished floor level,
provided that such supports do not interfere with fire department hose stream
trajectory.
413.1.11.3 Dead ends. Dead-end sides shall be in accordance with International
Building Code Chapter 10.
413.1.12 Portable fire extinguishers. Portable fire extinguishers shall comply
with the Fire Code.
413.1.13 Housekeeping and maintenance.
413.1.13.1 Rack structures. The structural integrity of racks must be
maintained.
413.1.13.2 Ignition sources. Hot ashes, cinders, smoldering coals or greasy or
oily materials subject to spontaneous ignition shall not be deposited in a
combustible receptacle, within 10 feet (3,048 mm) of other combustible material
including combustible walls and partitions or within 2 feet (610 mm) of
openings to buildings.
413.1.13.3 Smoking. Smoking shall be prohibited in high-piled storage areas.
Approved “No Smoking” signs shall be conspicuously posted throughout the high-
piled storage areas.
413.1.13.4 Aisle maintenance. When restocking is not being conducted, aisles
shall be kept clear of storage, waste material and debris. Fire department
access doors, aisles and exit doors shall not be obstructed. During restocking
operations using manual stocking methods, a minimum unobstructed aisle width of
24 inches (610 mm) shall be maintained in 48-inch (1,219 mm) or smaller aisles,
and a minimum unobstructed aisle width of one-half of the required aisle width
shall be maintained in aisles greater than 48 inches (1,219 mm). During
mechanical stocking operations, a minimum unobstructed aisle width of 44 inches
(1,118 mm) shall be maintained in accordance with Section 413.1.11 of this
code.
413.1.13.5 Pile dimension and height limitations. Pile dimensions and height
limitations must comply with Table 413.1.
413.1.13.6 Array. Where an automatic sprinkler system design utilizes
protection based on a closed array, array clearances shall be provided and
maintained as specified by the standard used.
413.1.13.7 Flue spaces. Flue spaces shall be provided in accordance with Table
413.2 of this code. Required flue spaces shall be maintained.
413.1.14 Storage arrangement. Storage arrangement shall be in accordance to
Sections 34.7.3.1 and 34.7.3.2 of the Fire Code.
(37)   Amending Section 413.2. Section 413.2 is amended by adding Table 413.2
to read:
TABLE 413.2
REQUIRED FLUE SPACES FOR RACK STORAGE
                         SPRINKLER AT THE CEILING WITH IN-RACK
              AUTOMATIC  OR WITHOUT MINIMUM IN-RACK    SPRINKLERS NON-SPRINKLER
RACK          SPRINKLER  SPRINKLERS                    AT EVERY   ED
CONFIGURATION PROTECTION                               TIER
                         ≤ 25 feet
              Storage    Option 1 Option 2 > 25 feet   Any height Any height
              height
TABLE 413.2
REQUIRED FLUE SPACES FOR RACK STORAGE
                                    SPRINKLER AT THE CEILING    IN-RACK    NON-
              AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER   WITH OR WITHOUT MINIMUM IN- SPRINKLERS SPRINKLER
RACK          PROTECTION            RACK SPRINKLERS             AT EVERY   ED
CONFIGURATION                                                   TIER
                                    ≤ 25 feet        > 25                Any
              Storage height        Option  Option 2   feet     Any height height
                                    1
Single-row               Sizeb      3       Not        3 inches Not        Not
rack          Transverse            inches  Applicable          Required   Required
              flue space Vertically Not     Not                 Not        Not
                         aligned    Require Applicable Yes      Applicable Required
                                    d
              Longitudinal flue     Not     Not        Not      Not        Not
              space                 Require Applicable Required Required   Required
                                    d
Double-row               Sizeb      6       3 inches   3 inches Not        Not
rack          Transverse            inchesa                     Required   Required
              flue space Vertically Not     Not                 Not        Not
                         aligned    Require Required   Yes      Applicable Required
                                    d
              Longitudinal flue     Not                         Not        Not
              space                 Require 6 inches   6 inches Required   Required
                                    d
Multi-row                Sizeb      6       Not        6 inches Not        Not
rack          Transverse            inches  Applicable          Required   Required
              flue space Vertically Not     Not                 Not        Not
                         aligned    Require Applicable Yes      Applicable Required
                                    d
              Longitudinal flue     Not     Not        Not      Not        Not
              space                 Require Applicable Required Required   Required
                                    d
Flue spaces will comply with subsection 413.1.13.7 and 2015 International Fire Code,
Table 3208.3.
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm
a.   Three-inch transverse flue space shall be provided not less than every 10 feet
where ESFR sprinkler protection is provided.
b.   Random variations are allowed, provided that the configuration does not
obstruct water penetration.
 
(38)   Amending Section 420.2. Section 420.2 is amended by adding Exception 4
to read:
4.   Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) shall be permitted to be separated from the
primary dwelling unit with single layer of 5/8-inch Type X gypsum board or the
equivalent fire resistive construction on the walls and ceilings of the ADU
portion.
(39)   Amending Section 423. Section 423 is amended to read:
SECTION 423
COMMUNITY STORM SHELTERS
423.1 General. In addition to other applicable requirements in this code,
designated community storm shelters shall be constructed in accordance with
ICC-500.
423.1.1 Scope.  This section applies to the construction of storm shelters
constructed as separate detached buildings or constructed within buildings for
the purpose of providing safe refuge from storms that produce high winds, such
as hurricanes. Such structures shall be designated to be hurricane shelters.
423.2 Definitions.  The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of
this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code, have the meanings shown
herein:
COMMUNITY STORM SHELTER. A building, structure, or portion thereof, receiving
FEMA grants to be designated by the grantee to be designed and constructed in
accordance with ICC/NSSA 500 Standard on the Design and Construction of Storm
Shelters and designated for use during a severe wind storm event such as a
hurricane.
(40)   Amending Chapter 4. Chapter 4 is amended by adding Section 429 to read:
SECTION 429
HAWAII RESIDENTIAL SAFE ROOM
See ROH Chapter 16, Article 13.
(41)   Amending Chapter 4. Chapter 4 is amended by adding Section 430 to read:
SECTION 430
STATE- AND COUNTY-OWNED PUBLIC HIGH OCCUPANCY BUILDINGS—DESIGN CRITERIA FOR
ENHANCED HURRICANE PROTECTION AREAS
See ROH Chapter 16, Article 14.
(42)   Amending Chapter 4. Chapter 4 is amended by adding Section 431 to read:
SECTION 431
FENCES
431.1 General.  Fences shall be constructed in accordance with this code, the
Land Use Ordinance, and ROH § 15-24.6. In areas where fence height is not
regulated under the Land Use Ordinance, fences over 6 feet (1,829 mm) in height
are subject to the approval of the fire department as to access.
431.2 Barbed or razor wire fences.  Barbed or razor wire must not be used for
construction of any fence.
Exceptions:
1.   Barbed or razor wire may be used in fences enclosing the following
premises; provided that barbed or razor wire must be placed along or above the
height of 6 feet from the ground, subject to the approval of the fire
department;
1.1   Any “public utility” as defined in HRS § 269-1;
1.2   Premises in industrial zoned districts and used for storage or handling
of hazardous materials, and premises zoned I-2 or I-3, intensive or waterfront
industrial districts that are used for industrial purposes and are not adjacent
to premises used for other purposes;
1.3   Zoos for keeping animals and birds for public view or exhibition;
1.4   Jails, prisons, reformatories, and other institutions involved in law
enforcement or military activities where security against entry is an important
factor; and
1.5   State of Hawaii operated airports, harbors, maintenance yards, and the
premises of other government agencies where security against unauthorized entry
is an important factor.
2.   Barbed wire may be used in fences enclosing premises used for pasturing
cattle or raising swine.
(43)   Amending Chapter 4. Chapter 4 is amended by adding Section 432 to read:
SECTION 432
AGRICULTURAL BUILDINGS
432.1 Appendix C. Appendix C, Group U - Agricultural Buildings is by reference
incorporated herein and made a part of this code.
(44)   Amending Chapter 4. Chapter 4 is amended by adding Section 433 to read:
SECTION 433
PASSENGER RAIL STATIONS AND BUILDINGS
433.1 Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to buildings
that connect to passenger rail stations constructed in accordance to NFPA 130.
433.1.1 Passenger rail station fire separation line. For the purpose of this
section, a passenger rail station fire separation line shall be established.
The passenger rail station fire separation line shall define the extent of the
passenger rail station. Buildings and parking structures shall be outside of
the passenger rail station fire separation line and are not considered as part
of the passenger rail station. Where a building is above or below a passenger
rail station, the building shall be of Type I or II construction, and there
shall be a minimum two-hour fire resistance rated horizontal assembly
constructed in accordance with International Building Code Section 711.
433.1.2 Fire-resistance-rated separation. A building shall be separated from
the passenger rail station by a fire wall complying with International Building
Code Section 706.
Exception: The exterior walls of a building separated from a passenger rail
station, which complies with International Building Code Table 602.
433.1.3 Openings between passenger stations and buildings. Except for the
separation between Group R sleeping units and the passenger rail stations,
openings between passenger rail stations and buildings of Type I or II
construction need not be protected.
433.1.4 Parking garages. An attached garage for the storage of passenger
vehicles having a capacity of not more than nine persons and open parking
garages shall be separated from the passenger rail station by not less than
two-hour fire barrier constructed in accordance with International Building
Code Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with
International Building Code Section 711, or both.
Openings between the passenger rail station and an attached garage shall not be
required to be protected with fire protection rated openings; provided that all
of following conditions are met:
(a)   The openings do not exceed 25 percent of the area of the fire barrier in
which they are located.
(b)   Means are provided to prevent spilled fuel from accumulating adjacent to
the openings and entering the passenger rail station.
(c)   Physical means are provided to prevent vehicles from being parked or
driven within 10 feet (3,048 mm) of the openings.
(d)   Parking garages, open or enclosed that are separated from the passenger
rail station, shall comply with the provisions of International Building Code
Table 602.
(e)   Pedestrian walkways and tunnels that connect garages to passenger rail
stations shall be constructed in accordance with International Building Code
Section 3104.
433.1.5 Kiosks. Kiosks and similar structures (temporary or permanent) shall
not be located within 20 feet of a passenger rail station and shall meet the
following requirements:
(a)   Combustible kiosks or other structures shall be constructed of fire-
retardant treated wood complying with International Building Code Section
2303.2.
(b)   Foam plastics having a maximum heat release rate not greater than 100 kW
(105 Btu/h) when tested in accordance with the exhibit booth protocol UL 1975
or when tested in accordance with NFPA 289 using the 20 kW ignition source.
(c)   Aluminum composite material (ACM) meeting the requirements of Class A
interior finish in accordance to International Building Code Chapter 8 when
tested as an assembly in the maximum thickness intended.
(d)   The horizontal separation between kiosks or grouping thereof and other
structures shall be not less than 20 feet (6,096 mm).
(e)   Each kiosk or similar structure or grouping thereof shall have an area
not greater than 300 square feet (28 m2).
433.1.6 Children’s play structures. Children’s play structures shall comply
with International Building Code Section 424. The horizontal separation between
the passenger rail station and children’s play structures shall be not less
than 20 feet (6,096 mm). The horizontal separation between children’s play
structures, kiosks and similar structures shall be not less than 20 feet (6,096
mm). Children’s play structure groupings shall have an area not greater than
300 square feet (28 m2).
433.2 Means of egress. Required means of egress for buildings or structures
connected to passenger rail stations shall be provided independent of the
passenger rail station. The occupant load of the building opening into the
passenger rail station shall not be included in determination means of egress
requirements of the passenger rail station. Building exits terminating at the
passenger rail station shall be considered as a dead end.
(45)   Amending Chapter 4. Chapter 4 is amended by adding Section 434 to read:
SECTION 434
STANDBY POWER
434.1 Installation. Installation of standby power systems shall be in
accordance with International Building Code Section 2702 and the Electrical
Code.
434.2 Operations and Maintenance. Operation and maintenance of standby power
systems shall be in accordance with the Fire Code.
(46)   Amending Section 501.1. Section 501.1 is amended to read:
501.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter control the height, area, and
location of structures hereafter erected and additions to existing structures.
(47)   Amending Section 501. Section 501 is amended by adding Section 501.2 to
read:
501.2 Location of building for fire department access. Fire department access
shall be as required by the Fire Code.
(48)   Amending Section 504. Section 504 is amended by adding Sections 504.5
and 504.5.1 to read:
504.4 Stair enclosure pressurization increase. For Group R-1 and R-
2 occupancies in buildings of VA, IV, or IIA construction equipped throughout
with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with International
Building Code Section 903.3.1.1, the maximum number of stories permitted in
accordance with International Building Code Section 504.4, may be increased by
one additional story and 20 feet of height in accordance with International
Building Code Section 504.3, provided the interior exit stairways and ramps are
pressurized in accordance with International Building Code Sections 909.11 and
909.20 with 2 hour fire-rated shaft construction or the exit stairways are
designed in accordance with the open exterior stairway requirements of Section
1027 of this code and the International Building Code.
504.5.1 Special Provisions. Group R-1 and R-2 meeting the requirements of
Section 504.5 shall be permitted to be constructed as separate and distinct
building as allowed in Section 510.2 of this code.
(49)   Amending Section 506.3.1. Section 506.3.1 is amended by adding an
Exception to read:
Exception: For the purposes of this section, an adjoining private right-of-way
may be considered a public way if it meets Section 502.1, and the owner of the
premises for which the building permit application is filed, owns a portion
thereof.
(50)   Amend Table 509. In the left column (Room or Area), line entry for
Stationary storage battery systems is amended to read:
TABLE 509
INCIDENTAL USES
 
ROOM OR AREA                              SEPARATION AND/OR PROTECTION
Stationary storage battery systems having 1 hour in Group B, F, M, S, and U
an energy capacity greater than the       occupancies;
threshold quantity specified in Section   2 hours in Group A, E, I, and R
907.2.22                                  occupancies
 
(51)   Amending Section 510. Section 510 is amended by adding Section 510.10 to
read:
510.10 Carport. A carport constructed of Type V-B construction on a hillside
may exceed one story in height provided the space below the carport floor is
unused or used for Group U occupancy only.
(52)   Amending Table 602. Table 602 is amended by adding Footnote “j” for
Occupancy Group S-2 to read:
j.   For a Group S-2 open parking garage building or portion of a building that
is less than 55 feet in height measured from grade plane with a Group R
residential occupancy, the openings in the exterior wall with a fire separation
distance 5 feet (1,523 mm) or greater shall not be required to have a fire-
resistive rating when the Group S-2 open parking is protected with an automatic
fire sprinkler system.
(53)   Amending Section 603.1. Section 603.1 is amended by adding Item 27 to
read:
27.   Wood construction shall be permitted for mezzanines constructed in
buildings of Type IIB construction, subject to the following:
27.1   Mezzanines shall conform to Section 505.
27.2   The aggregate area of these mezzanines shall be included in the
determination of the floor area and shall be included in calculating the
allowable floor area of the stories in which the mezzanines are located.
27.3   Mezzanine floors, including supporting beams, girders, and columns shall
be of 1-hour fire-resistive construction.
27.4   Fire sprinkler substitutions for 1-hour construction is not permitted.
(54)   Amending Section 901.2. Section 901.2 is amended by deleting the word
“International” in the first paragraph and adding a second paragraph to read:
Fire protection systems shall be installed, repaired, operated, and maintained
in accordance with this code and the Fire Code. Where the Fire Code conflicts
with the provisions of this code or any other code, the provisions that result
in the greatest protection to the public, as determined by the building
official in consultation with the fire code official will control.
(55)   Amending Section 903.1.1. Section 903.1.1 is amended to read:
903.1.1 Alternative protection. Alternate automatic fire-extinguishing systems
complying with Section 904 shall be permitted in lieu of automatic sprinkler
protection where recognized by the applicable standard and approved by the
building official and the fire code official.
(56)   Amending Section 903.1. Section 903.1 is amended by adding Section
903.1.2 to read:
903.1.2 Storage height signage. In any building requiring an automatic
sprinkler system, with a ceiling height greater than 12 feet (3,658 mm), a
readily visible, metal sign, with letters painted or stenciled, not less than 1
inch (25 mm) high on a contrasting background that states the maximum storage
height allowable for the installed sprinkler system, shall be placed next to
the main shutoff valve of the automatic sprinkler riser.
(57)   Amending Section 903.2.7.1. Section 903.2.7.1 is amended by deleting the
word “International.”
(58)   Amending Section 903.2.8.1. Section 903.2.8.1 is amended to read:
903.2.8.1 Group R-3.  An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with International Residential Code Section R313 is permitted in lieu of
providing a private water system and fire hydrant for fire protection.
(59)   Amending Section 903.2.8. Section 903.2.8 is amended by adding Section
903.2.8.5 to read:
903.2.8.5 Group R-5. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.3 shall be permitted in Group R-5 occupancies.
(60)   Amending Section 903.2.11.1. Section 903.2.11.1 is amended by amending
Item 2 to read:
2.   Openings entirely above the adjoining ground level totaling at least 20
square feet (1.86 m2) in each 50 linear feet (15,240 mm), or fraction thereof,
of exterior wall in the story on at least one side. The required opening shall
be distributed such that the lineal distance between adjacent openings does not
exceed 50 feet (15,240 mm). The height of the bottom of the clear opening shall
not exceed 44 inches (1,118 mm) measured from the floor. Such required openings
shall be unobstructed by sunshades, louvers, grillwork, or other construction
of the exterior wall that prevent or hinder access to the openings by fire
department personnel.
(61)   Amending Section 903.2.11.1.1. Section 903.2.11.1 is amended to read:
903.2.11.1.1 Opening dimensions and access. Openings shall have a minimum
dimension of not less than 30 inches (762 mm). Access to such openings shall be
provided for the fire department from the exterior and shall not be obstructed
in a manner such that firefighting or rescue cannot be accomplished from the
exterior. Such required openings shall be unobstructed by sunshades, louvers,
grillwork, or other construction on the exterior wall that prevents or hinders
access to the openings by the fire department personnel.
(62)   Amending Section 903.3.1.1.1. Section 903.3.1.1.1 is amended by adding
Item 7 to read:
7.   Closets having an area of less than 24 square feet (2.29 m2) in individual
dwelling units in R-2 occupancies shall not be required to be sprinklered.
Closets that contain equipment such as washers, dryers, furnaces, or water
heaters shall be sprinklered regardless of size.
(63)   Amending Section 904.2. Section 904.2 is amended to read:
904.2 Automatic fire-extinguishing systems. Automatic fire-extinguishing
systems may be installed as an alternative to the required automatic sprinkler
systems of Section 903 if the building official, in consultation with the fire
code official, determines that the alternative system provides reasonably
similar levels of fire protection.
(64)   Amending Section 904.2.2. Section 904.2.2 is amended as follows:
904.2.2 Commercial hood and duct systems. Commercial hood and duct systems
shall be required by Section 11-39-3(7), Hawaii Administrative Rules
(Department of Health). Each Type I hood and duct system shall be protected by
an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system installed in accordance to the
Fire Code.
(65)   Amending Section 905.1. Section 905.1 is amended to read:
905.1 General. Standpipe systems shall be provided in new buildings and
structures in accordance with this section. Fire hose threads used in
connection with standpipe systems shall be approved and shall be compatible
with fire department hose threads. All hose connection outlets shall be
installed so that a 12-inch (305 mm) long wrench may be used in connecting the
hose with clearance for the wrench on all sides of the outlet. The location of
the fire department hose connection shall be approved by the fire code
official. All horizontal runs of standpipe systems shall be sloped to a drain
valve at the low point of the system, the drain valve shall be arranged to
discharge at an approved location.
(66)   Amending Section 905.2. Section 905.2 is amended to read:
905.2 Installation standard. Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance
with this section and NFPA 14. Fire department connections for standpipe
systems shall be in accordance with Section 912. When water pressure at a
standpipe outlet exceeds 175 psi static or residual at 250 gpm flow, a
pressure-reducing valve (PRV) shall be provided. The required pressure-reducing
valves shall be located at the hose valve outlet only. Only field-adjustable
valves shall be allowed. If special tools are required to make field
adjustments on PRVs, a minimum of four (4) such tools shall be provided at
locations approved by the fire code official.
(67)   Amending Section 905.3.2. Exception 2 of Section 905.3.2 is amended by
adding Exception 2 to read:
2.   Class I manual wet standpipes are allowed in buildings that are not high-
rise buildings.
(68)   Amending Section 905.4. Item 6 of Section 905.4 is amended to read:
6.   Where the most remote portion of a nonsprinklered floor or story is more
than 150 feet (45,720 mm) from a hose connection or the most remote portion of
a sprinklered floor or story is more than 200 feet (60,960 mm) from a hose
connection, additional hose connections shall be provided.
(69)   Amending Section 906.1. Section 906.1 is amended to read:
906.1 Where required. Portable fire extinguishers shall be provided in
occupancies and locations as required by the Fire Code.
(70)   Deleting Section 907. Section 907 is deleted in its entirety and
replaced with a new Section 907 to read:
SECTION 907
FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS
907.1 General. Fire alarm systems and their components shall be as required by
the Fire Code.
(71)   Amending Section 909.19. Section 909.19 is amended to read:
909.19 System acceptance. Buildings, or portions thereof, required by this code
to comply with this section shall not be issued a certificate of occupancy
until such time that the provisions of this section have been fully complied
with and that the fire department has received satisfactory instruction on the
operation, both automatic and manual, of the system and a written maintenance
program complying with the requirements of Chapter 11 of the Fire Code.
Exception: In buildings of phased construction, a temporary certificate of
occupancy, shall be allowed; provided that those portions of the building to be
occupied meet the requirements of this section for the operation of the system,
and that the remainder does not pose a significant hazard to the safety of the
proposed occupants or adjacent buildings.
(72)   Amending Section 909.20. Section 909.20 is amended to read:
909.20 Smokeproof enclosures. Where required by Section 1023.11, a smokeproof
enclosure shall be constructed in accordance with this section. A smokeproof
enclosure shall consist of an interior exit stairway or ramp that is enclosed
in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section 1023 and an open
exterior balcony or ventilated vestibule meeting the requirements of this
section. Where access to the roof is required by Section 1011.12, such access
shall be from the smokeproof enclosure where a smokeproof enclosure is
required.
(73)   Amending Subsection 910.2.2. Subsection 910.2.2 is amended to read:
910.2.2 High-piled combustible storage. Smoke and heat removal required by
Table 413.1 for buildings and portions thereof containing high-piled
combustible stock or rack storage in any occupancy group shall be installed in
accordance with Section 910.3 in unsprinklered buildings. In buildings and
portions thereof containing high-piled combustible storage equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, a
smoke and heat removal system shall be installed in accordance with Section
910.3 or 910.4. In occupied portions of a building equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, where the
upper surface of the story is not a roof assembly, a mechanical smoke removal
system in accordance with Section 910.4 shall be installed.
(74)   Amending Section 910.5. Section 910.5 is amended to read:
910.5 Maintenance. Smoke and heat vents and mechanical smoke removal systems
shall be maintained in accordance to the Fire Code.
(75)   Amending Section 911. Section 911 is amended to read:
911.1 General. See Fire Code.
(76)   Amending Section 912.4.3. Section 912.4.3 is amended and Sections
912.4.3.1 and 912.4.3.2 are added to read:
912.4.3 Physical protection. Where fire department connections are subject to
impact by a motor vehicle, vehicle impact protection shall be provided.
912.4.3.1 Posts. Guard posts shall comply with all of the following
requirements:
(a)   Constructed of steel not less than 4 inches (102 mm) in diameter and
concrete filled.
(b)   Spaced not more than 4 feet (1,219 mm) between posts on center.
(c)   Set not less than 3 feet (914 mm) deep in a concrete footing of not less
than a 15-inch (381 mm) diameter.
(d)   Set with the top of the posts not less than 3 feet (914 mm) above ground.
(e)   Located not less than 3 feet (914 mm) from the protected object.
912.4.3.2 Other barriers. Barriers, other than posts specified in Section
912.4.3.2, that are designed to resist, deflect or visually deter vehicular
impact commensurate with an anticipated impact scenario shall be permitted
where approved by the building official.
(77)   Amending Section 915.1. Section 915.1 is amended to read:
915.1 General. Carbon monoxide detection shall be installed in new buildings in
accordance with Sections 915.1.1 through 915.1.6. When the valuation of an
addition, alteration or repair to an existing dwelling and sleeping units
exceeds the valuation specified in ROH Chapter 18 and a permit is required, or
when one or more sleeping units are added or created in existing dwelling
units, carbon monoxide alarms shall be installed in the locations specified in
Section 915.2 and the installation shall be in accordance with Section 915.4.
Exceptions:
1.   Repairs to the exterior surfaces of an existing Group R occupancy are
exempt.
2.   Carbon monoxide alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated where
the code that was in effect at the time of construction did not require carbon
monoxide detectors to be provided.
3.   Carbon monoxide alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in
dwelling units that are not served from a commercial power source.
4.   A carbon monoxide detection system in accordance with Section 915.5 shall
be an acceptable alternative to carbon monoxide alarms.
(78)   Amending Section 916.2. Section 916.2 is amended to read:
916.2 Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in ROH Chapter 18.
(79)   Amending Section 916.7. Section 916.7, Item 2 is amended to read:
2.   For toxic gases, sample analysis shall be performed at intervals not
exceeding five minutes in accordance with the Fire Code.
(80)   Amending Section 916.11. Section 916.11 is amended to read:
916.11 Inspection, testing and sensor calibration. Gas detection systems and
sensors shall be inspected, tested, and calibrated in accordance with the Fire
Code.
(81)   Amending Section 918.1. Section 918.1 is amended to read:
918.1 General.  Emergency responder radio coverage shall be provided in all new
buildings in accordance with the Fire Code.
(82)   Amending Chapter 9. Chapter 9 is amended by adding Section 919 to read:
SECTION 919
FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS SPECIAL INSPECTIONS
919.1 General. Where application is made for construction as described in this
section, the owner or the licensed design professional in responsible charge,
acting as the owner’s agent shall employ one or more fire protection systems’
special inspectors to provide inspections during construction on the types of
work listed under Section 919. The fire protection system special inspector
shall be approved by the building official. These inspections are in addition
to the inspections specified in Section 110.
919.1.1 Building Permit Requirement. The submitted plans shall include a
statement of fire protection system inspection prepared by the licensed
engineer of record as a condition for permit issuance.
Exception: The building official may waive the requirements for the employment
of a special inspector if the construction is of minor nature.
919.1.2 Report Requirement. Fire protection system inspectors shall keep
records of inspections and shall review working drawings prior to installation.
The fire protection system inspector shall furnish inspection reports to the
owner, licensed engineer or architect of record, and other owner-designated
persons. Reports shall indicate that work inspected was done in conformance to
the applicable code and shall include, but not be limited to, working drawings
and acceptance tests required by this section.
All discrepancies shall be brought to the immediate attention of the contractor
for correction, then, if uncorrected, to the proper design professional and to
the building official.
The special inspector shall submit a final signed report stating that they have
reviewed the shop drawings and whether the work requiring special inspection
was, to the best of the inspector’s knowledge, in conformance to the approved
plans and specifications and the applicable workmanship provisions of this
code, this report shall include a copy of the shop drawings provided to the
building official prior to the final inspection.
919.2 Automatic Sprinkler Systems. Automatic systems shall be inspected and
evaluated in accordance to the requirements of Section 903.
(a)   During installation.
Exception: A special inspector need not be present continuously during the
installation of the sprinkler system; provided that the special inspector has
inspected for conformance with this code and approved plans prior to
concealment.
(b)   During acceptance tests as required by NFPA 13, 13R, and 13D.
919.3 Alternative Automatic Fire-Extinguishing Systems. Alternative automatic
fire-extinguishing systems shall be inspected and evaluated in accordance to
the requirements of Section 904.
(a)   During installation.
Exception: Special inspector need not be present continuously during the
installation of the alternate automatic fire extinguishing system provided the
special inspector has inspected for conformance with this code and approved
plans prior to concealment.
(b)   During tests as required by NFPA 11, 12, 12A, 16, 17, and 17A.
919.4 Standpipe Systems. Standpipe systems shall be inspected and evaluated in
accordance to the requirements of Section 905.
(a)   During installation.
Exception: A special inspector need not be present continuously during the
installation of the standpipe system; provided that the special inspector has
inspected for conformance with this code and approved plans prior to
concealment.
(b)   During acceptance tests as required by NFPA 14.
919.5 Smoke Control Systems. Smoke control systems shall be inspected and
evaluated in accordance to the requirements of Sections 909 and 1705.18.
(a)   During erection of ductwork and prior to concealment for the purposes of
leakage testing and recording device location.
(b)   Prior to occupancy and after sufficient completion for the purposes of
pressure difference testing, flow measurements, and detection and control
verification.
919.6 Fire pumps. Fire pump systems shall be inspected and tested in accordance
to the requirements of Section 913 of the Fire Code. An acceptance test shall
be performed and submitted to the building official.
(83)   Amending Section 1002.2. Section 1002.2 is amended to read:
1002.2 Fire safety and evacuation plans. Fire safety and evacuation plans shall
be as required by the Fire Code.
(84)   Amending Section 1005.7.1. Section 1005.7.1 is amended by adding
Exception 3 to read:
3.   Exterior screen and storm doors of individual units of Group R-2 and Group
R-3.
(85)   Amending Section 1006.3.3. Section 1006.3.3 is amended by adding
Conditions 6 through 6.15 to read:
6.   Not more than three stories of a Group R-2 occupancy are permitted to be
served by a single exit under the following conditions:
6.1   The building has not more than six stories above grade plane.
6.2   The building does not contain a boarding house.
6.3   There are no more than four dwelling units on any floor.
6.4   The building is of not less than one-hour fire-resistive construction and
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1. Residential-type sprinklers shall be used in all habitable
spaces in each dwelling unit.
6.5   There are no more than two single exit stairway conditions on the same
building.
6.6   An exterior stairway or interior exit stairway is provided. The interior
exit stairway, including any related exit passageway, shall be pressurized in
accordance with Section 909.20. Doors in the stairway shall swing into the
interior exit stairway regardless of the occupant load served; provided that
doors from the interior exit stairway to the building exterior are permitted to
swing in the direction of exit travel.
6.7   A corridor separates each dwelling unit entry/exit door from the door to
an interior exit stairway, including any related exit passageway, on each
floor. Dwelling unit doors shall not open directly into an interior exit
stairway. Dwelling unit doors are permitted to open directly into an exterior
stairway.
6.8   There are no more than 20 feet (6,096 mm) of travel to the exit stairway
from the entry/exit door of any dwelling unit.
6.9   Travel distance measured in accordance with Section 1016 does not exceed
125 feet.
6.10   The exit does not terminate in an egress court where the court depth
exceeds the court width unless it is possible to exit in either direction to
the public way.
6.11   Elevators are pressurized in accordance with International Building Code
Section 909.21 or shall open into elevator lobbies that comply with
International Building Code Section 713. Where approved by the building
official, natural ventilation is permitted to be substituted for pressurization
where the ventilation would prevent the accumulation of smoke or toxic gases.
6.12   Other occupancies are permitted in the same building; provided that they
comply with all the requirements of this code. Other occupancies shall not
communicate with the Group R occupancy portion of the building or with the
single-exit stairway.
Exception: Parking garages accessory to the Group R occupancy are permitted to
communicate with the exit stairway.
6.13   The exit serving the Group R occupancy does not discharge through any
other occupancy, including an accessory parking garage.
6.14   There shall be no openings within 10 feet (3,048 mm) of unprotected
openings into the stairway other than required exit doors having at least a
one-hour fire-resistance rating.
6.15   The minimum width of this stairway is not less than 48 inches.
(86)   Amending Section 1010.1.4.5. Section 1010.1.4.5 is amended by adding a
second paragraph to read:
For assembly occupancy groups A-2 and A-3 which are accessory to Group B, M, R-
1 and R-2, horizontal sliding or vertical security grilles are permitted at the
main exit and shall be secured in the fully opened position during periods that
the space is occupied. A readily visible durable sign is posted on the egress
side adjacent to the grille stating “THIS GRILLE TO BE SECURED IN THE OPEN
POSITION WHEN THIS SPACE IS OCCUPIED.” The sign shall be in letters not less
than 1 inch (25 mm) high on a contrasting background. Not more than one means
of egress shall be equipped with horizontal sliding or vertical security
grilles. The building official may order the removal of grilles due to
noncompliance with this section or the required signage.
(87)   Amending Section 1010.1.10. Section 1010.1.10 is amended by adding
Exception 3 to read:
3.   Double-acting screen doors used in conjunction with exit doors having
panic hardware in school cafeterias.
(88)   Amending Section 1011.2. Section 1011.2 is amended by adding Exception 4
to read:
4.   Private stairways serving an occupant load of less than five shall not be
less than 30 inches (76 mm) in width.
(89)   Amending Section 1015.4. Section 1015.4 is amended by adding Exception 7
to read:
7.   Guards in Group R-1 and R-2 occupancies shall not contain horizontal rails
other than top and bottom rails, or cut-outs or indentations greater than 1-3/
4 inches in width of protrusions that may provide a foothold for young
children.
(90)   Adding Section 1027.2. Section 1027.2 is added to read:
1027.2 Use in a means of egress. Exterior exit stairways shall not be used as
an element of a required means of egress for Group I-2 occupancies. For
occupancies in other than Group I-2, exterior exit stairways and ramps shall be
permitted as an element of a required means of egress for buildings.
(91)   Amending Section 1027.3. Section 1027.3 is amended by adding a second
and third paragraph to read:
Exterior exit stairways shall be arranged to avoid any impediments to their use
by persons having a fear of high places. Outside stairs more than six stories
above the grade plane shall be provided with an opaque visual obstruction not
less than 48 inches (1,220 mm) in height.
Materials providing visual obstruction shall be construction that restricts the
passage of light or sight, which may include a special architectural treatment
such as devices of metal or masonry screens and grilles that may serve as a
visual barrier. Guards constructed with materials meeting the requirements of
Section 1015 of this code and the International Building Code, 2018 Edition,
shall be considered to be a visual obstruction if not less than 48 inches in
height.
(92)   Amending Section 1027.6. Section 1027.6 is amended by amending Exception
4 to read:
4.   Separation from the interior of the building is not required for exterior
stairways or ramps connected to open-ended corridors; provided that Items 4.1
through 4.6 are met:
4.1   The building, including corridors, stairways, or ramps, shall be equipped
throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with International
Building Code Section 903.3.
4.2   The open-ended corridors comply with International Building Code Section
1018.
4.3   The open-ended corridors are connected on each end to an exterior exit
stairway or ramp complying with International Building Code Section 1026.
4.4   The exterior walls and openings adjacent to the exterior exit stairway or
ramp comply with International Building Code Section 1022.
4.5   At any location in an open-ended corridor where a change of direction
exceeding 45 degrees (0.79 rad) occurs, a clear opening of not less than 35
square feet (3.3 m2) or an exterior stairway or ramp shall be provided. Where
clear openings are provided, they shall be located so as to minimize the
accumulation of smoke or toxic gases.
4.6   Shall not be a required means of egress for buildings exceeding six
stories above grade plane or which are high-rise buildings.
(93)   Amending Section 1027. Section 1027 is amended by adding Section 1027.7
to read:
1027.7 Water accumulation. Exterior exit stairways and ramps shall be designed
to minimize water accumulation on their surfaces.
(94)   Amending Section 1030.3. Section 1030.3 is amended by adding Exceptions
1 and 2 to read:
1.   Glass jalousie bladed windows which are not safety glazed may be used for
emergency escape or rescue.
2.   Escape or rescue windows in Group R-1 and R-2 occupancies opening into an
exterior exit balcony serving more than two dwelling units or hotel guest rooms
shall be permitted to have a finished sill height not more than 68 inches (172
mm) above the floor.
(95)   Amending Section 1102.1. Section 1102.1 is amended to read:
1102.1 Design. Buildings and facilities shall be designed and constructed to be
accessible in accordance with this code and ICC A117.1. Conformance with the
design and construction requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act
Accessibility Guidelines administered by the Department of Justice or the Fair
Housing Act Accessibility Guidelines administered by the Department of Housing
and Urban Development shall be equivalent to meeting the accessibility of this
code. Construction of public buildings or facilities in compliance with HRS
Section 103-50 shall be equivalent to meeting the accessibility of this code.
At the time of submittal of an application for a building permit, the applicant
shall state on the plans that the project is subject to the above requirements.
(96)   Amending Section 1202.1. Section 1202.1 is amended to read:
1202.1 General. Buildings shall be provided with natural ventilation in
accordance with International Building Code Section 1202.5, or mechanical
ventilation in accordance with the State of Hawaii, Title 11, Administrative
Rules of the Department of Health, Chapter 39, or ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 62.2.
(97)   Amending Section 1202.2.1. Section 1202.2.1 is amended to read:
1202.2.1 Ventilated attic and rafter space. Attics and enclosed rafter spaces
where ceilings are applied directly to the underside of roof rafters shall have
cross ventilation for each separate space by ventilating openings protected
against the entrance of rain. Blocking and bridging shall be arranged so as not
to interfere with the movement of air. An airspace of not less than 1 inch (25
mm) shall be provided between the insulation and the roof sheathing. The net
free ventilating area shall not be less than 11150th of the area of the space
ventilated.
(98)   Amending Section 1202.2.1. Section 1202.2.1 is amended by adding
Exceptions 3 through 3.3 to read:
3.   The attic space shall be permitted to be unvented when the design
professional determines it would be beneficial to eliminate ventilation
openings to reduce salt-laden air and to maintain relative humidity to 60
percent or lower to:
3.1   Avoid corrosion to steel components;
3.2   Avoid moisture condensation in the attic space; or
3.3   Minimize condensation in the attic space, or ventilation by maintaining
satisfactory space conditions in both the attic and occupied space below.
(99)   Amending Section 1202.5.1. Section 1202.5.1 is amended to read:
1202.5.1 Ventilation area required. The operable area of the openings to the
outdoors shall be not less than five percent of the floor area being
ventilated.
(100)   Amending Section 1202.5.1.1. Section 1002.5.1.1, Exception 1 is amended
and Exception 2 is added to read:
1.   Exterior openings required for ventilation shall be permitted to open into
a sunroom with thermal isolation or a patio cover; provided that the openable
area between the sunroom addition or patio cover and the interior room shall
have an area of not less than 10 percent of the floor area of the interior room
or space, but not less than 20 square feet (1.86 m2). The openable area of the
opening to the outdoors shall be based on the total floor area being
ventilated.
2.   For Residential Group R-2, when the openings are obstructed, a licensed
mechanical engineer shall provide a mechanical ventilation system in accordance
with International Mechanical Code Section 403 or ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 62.2.
(101)   Amending Section 1204.2. Section 1204.2 is amended to read:
1204.2 Natural light. The minimum net glazed area shall be not less than 10
percent of the floor area of the room served.
(102)   Amending Section 1204.2.2. Section 1204.2.2 is amended by adding
Exceptions 3 and 4 to read:
3.   Residential Group R-3 and R-4, lighting shall be in accordance with
International Residential Code Section R303.
4.   For Residential Group R-1 and R-2, artificial light is only permitted for
adjoining spaces complying with International Building Code Section 1204.2.1
when the openings are obstructed thereby inhibiting the flow of natural light.
(103)   Deleting Section 1206. Section 1206 is deleted in its entirety.
(104)   Amending Section 1207.2. Section 1207.2 is amended by adding Exception
5 to read:
5.   For individual dwelling units 400 square feet or less in floor area
excluding lofts, see Section 1207.5 of this code.
(105)   Amending Section 1207. Section 1207 is amended by adding Sections
1207.5 through 1207.5.2.4 to read:
1207.5 Lofts. A floor level within a dwelling unit located more than 30 inches
(762 mm) above the main floor, open to the main floor on one or more sides with
a ceiling height of less than 6 feet 8 inches (2,032 mm) and used as a living
or sleeping space.
1207.5.1 Minimum loft area and dimensions. Lofts used as a sleeping or living
space shall meet the minimum area and dimensions requirements of Sections
1207.5.1.1 through 1207.5.1.3 of this code.
1207.5.1.1 Minimum area. Lofts shall have a floor area of not less than 35
square feet (3.25 m2) and the aggregate area shall not exceed one-quarter of
the floor area of the dwelling unit.
1207.5.1.2 Minimum dimensions. Lofts shall be not less than 5 feet (1,524 mm)
in any horizontal dimension.
1207.5.1.3 Height effect on loft area. Portions of a loft with a sloped ceiling
measuring less than 3 feet (914 mm) from the finished floor to the finished
ceiling shall not be considered as contributing to the minimum required area
for the loft.
1207.5.2 Loft access. The access to and primary egress from lofts shall be of
any type described in Sections 1207.5.2.1 through 1207.5.2.3 of this code.
1207.5.2.1 Stairways. Stairways accessing lofts shall comply with Section
1207.5.2.1.1 of this code.
1207.5.2.1.1 Width. Stairways accessing a loft shall not be less than 17 inches
(432 mm) in clear width at or above the handrail. The width below the handrail
shall be not less than 20 inches (508 mm).
1207.5.2.1.2 Headroom. The headroom in stairways accessing a loft shall be not
less than 6 feet 2 inches (1,880 mm), as measured vertically, from a sloped
line connecting the tread or landing platform nosing in the middle of their
width.
1207.5.2.1.3 Thread and risers. Risers for stairs accessing a loft shall be not
less than 7 inches (178 mm) and not more than 12 inches (305 mm) in height.
Tread depth and riser height shall be calculated in accordance with one of the
following formulas:
(a)   The tread depth shall be 20 inches (508 mm) minus four-thirds of riser
height;
(b)   The riser height shall be 15 inches (381 mm) minus three-fourths of the
thread depth.
1207.5.2.1.4 Landing platforms. The top tread and riser of stairways accessing
lofts shall be constructed as a landing platform where the loft ceiling height
is less than 6 feet 2 inches (1,880 mm) where the stairway meets the loft. The
landing platform shall be 18 inches to 22 inches (457 mm to 559 mm) in depth
measured from the nosing of the landing platform to the edge of the loft and 16
to 18 inches (406 mm to 457 mm) in height measured from the landing platform to
the loft floor.
1207.5.2.1.5 Handrails. Handrails shall comply with International Building Code
Section 1014.
1207.5.2.1.6 Stairway guards. Guards at open sides of stairways shall comply
with International Building Code Section 1015.
1207.5.2.2 Ladders.  Ladders accessing lofts shall comply with Section
1207.5.3.1.
1207.5.2.2.1 Size and capacity. Ladders accessing lofts shall have a rung width
of not less than 12 inches (305 mm) and 10-inch (254 mm) to 14-inch (356 mm)
spacing between rungs. Ladders shall be capable of supporting a 200-pound (75
kg) load on any rung. Rung spacing shall be uniform within ½ inch (12.7 mm).
1207.5.2.2.2 Incline. Ladders shall be installed at 70 to 80 degrees from
horizontal.
1207.5.2.3 Loft Guards. Loft guards shall be located along the open side of
lofts. Loft guards shall be not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in height or one-
half of the clear height to the ceiling, whichever is less.
1207.5.2.4 Emergency Escape and Rescue. Lofts used as sleeping space shall meet
the requirements of International Building Code Section 1030 for emergency
escape and rescue openings.
(106)   Amending Section 1301.1. Section 1301.1 is amended to read:
1301.1 Scope. For Energy Efficiency, buildings shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with ROH Chapter 16B.
(107)   Amending Section 1502.1. Section 1502.1 is amended to read:
1502.1 General. Design and installation of roof drainage systems must comply
with International Building Code Section 1502 and all applicable Plumbing Code
requirements. Roof drains discharge at the public way shall be in accordance
with ROH Chapter 43, Article 11.
(108)   Amending Section 1502.2. Section 1502.2 is amended to read:
1503.4.1 Secondary (emergency overflow) drains or scuppers. Where roof drains
are required, secondary (emergency overflow) roof drains or scuppers shall be
provided where the roof perimeter construction extends above the roof in such a
manner that water shall be entrapped if the primary drains allow buildup for
any reason. The installation and sizing of secondary emergency overflow drains,
leaders, and conductors shall comply with the Plumbing Code.
(109)   Amending Chapter 15. Chapter 15 is amended by adding Section 1513 to
read:
SECTION 1513
MISCELLANEOUS ROOFTOP STRUCTURES
1513.1 General. Cabanas, trellises, and other similar structures on roof tops
shall conform to all of the following:
(a)   Have a headroom clearance of not less than 7 feet 6 inches (2,286 mm).
(b)   Be not more than 225 square feet (93 m2) in area.
(c)   Aggregate area of such structures shall not exceed 1,000 square feet in
area (413 m2).
(d)   Where the fire separation distance is greater than 10 feet (3,048 mm),
the structure shall be constructed of the type of materials specified by the
type of construction for exterior walls but shall not be required to comply
with fire resistive rating requirement.
(e)   The height of such structure shall not exceed 75 feet (22,860 mm) above
the fire department access road and shall be fire sprinklered when required by
other sections of this code.
(f)   Where the fire separation distance is greater than 20 feet (6,100 mm) the
structure shall be permitted to be constructed of fire-retardant-treated-wood.
(110)   Amending Section 1615. Section 1615 is amended by amending Section
1615.1 and adding Sections 1615.2, 1615.3, 1615.4, and 1615.5 to read:
1615.1 General. The design and construction of Risk Category III and IV
buildings and structures, where located in the Tsunami Design Zones defined in
the ASCE 7 Tsunami Design Geodatabase (version 2022-1.0), shall be in
accordance with Chapter 6 of ASCE 7-22, except as modified by this code.
1615.3 Definitions.
a.   Tsunami Design Geodatabase. The ASCE database (version 2022-1.0) of
Tsunami Design Zone maps and associated design data for the states of Alaska,
California, Hawaii, Oregon, and Washington.
b.   Tsunami Design Zone. An area identified on the Tsunami Design Zone map
between the shoreline and the inundation limit, within which certain structures
designated in Chapter 6 are designed for or protected from inundation.
1615.4 Lateral-Force Resisting Systems. Lateral-Force-Resisting System
Acceptance Criteria for structures designed to the requirements. For Seismic
Design Category A and B, the lateral-force-resisting system shall be designed
to resist the Maximum Considered Tsunami. For structures designed to the
requirements for Seismic Design Category C, D, E, or F, the lateral-force-
resisting system shall be deemed adequate if 0.75 0Eh exceeds the required
tsunami force FTSU, where Eh is the required seismic resistance and 0 is the
system overstrength as defined in Chapter 12 of the ASCE 7 standard. When the
inundated portions of Seismic Design Category C structures are detailed per
Seismic Design Category D, it shall be permitted to use the 0 system
overstrength corresponding to SDC D for the acceptance of the lateral-force-
resisting system for the overall tsunami force on the structure.
1615.5 Deep Foundations.  Buildings and structures on deep foundation systems
complying with Section 1810 shall be permitted to be deemed to satisfy ASCE 7
Section 6.12.2.4 Scour.
(111)   Amending Section 1704.2.1. Section 1704.2.1 is amended to read:
1704.2.1 Special inspector qualifications. Prior to the start of the
construction each special inspector shall provide written documentation to the
building official demonstrating their competence and relevant experience or
training in each type of inspection they shall perform. Inspector personnel
shall not be allowed to perform inspections without these qualifications unless
directly supervised by the qualified, responsible special inspector. Experience
or training shall be considered relevant when the documented experience or
training is related in complexity to the same type of special inspection
activities for projects of similar complexity and material qualities. These
qualifications are in addition to qualifications specified in other sections of
this code.
The registered design professional in responsible charge and engineers of
record involved in the design of the project are permitted to act as the
special inspector and their personnel are permitted to act as the special
inspectors for the work designed by them, provided they qualify as special
inspectors, with the exception of welding and high strength bolting.
(112)   Amending Section 1705. Section 1705 is amended by adding Section
1705.19 to read:
1705.19 Fire-protection systems. Special inspection for fire-protection systems
is required. See Section 901.2.
(113)   Amending Section 1705. Section 1705 is amended by adding Sections
1705.20 and 1705.21 to read:
1705.20 Termite protection. Where termite protection consists of soil
treatment, installation of termite barrier, structural lumber and pipe
penetrations for new wood frame residential buildings. Special inspection is
required.
1705.21 Soils and foundation.  Where soils conditions warrant a geotechnical
investigation or are specified in ROH Chapter 18A. Special inspection is
required.
(114)   Amending Section 1801.1. Section 1801.1 is amended by adding a second
paragraph to read:
Requirements governing excavation, grading, and earthwork construction,
including fills and embankments, are governed by ROH Chapter 18A.
(115)   Amending Section 1803.2. Section 1803.2 is amended to read:
1803.2 Inspection requirements. The building official shall be permitted to
require special inspections for requirements of ROH Chapter 16.
(116)   Amending Section 1803.5.2. Section 1803.5.2 is amended to read:
1803.5.2 Questionable soil. Where the classification, strength or
compressibility of the soil is in doubt or where a load-bearing value superior
to that specified in this code is claimed, or where there is known occurrence
of slippage, or properties that contain slopes of 15 percent or more, the
building official shall be permitted to require that a geotechnical
investigation be conducted. This section does not prohibit the building
official from requiring soils investigations for reasons other than those
stated here.
(117)   Amending Section 1805.4.3. Section 1805.4.3 is amended to read:
1805.4.3 Drainage discharge. The floor base and foundation perimeter drain
shall discharge by gravity or mechanical means into an approved drainage system
that complies with the Plumbing Code.
(118)   Amending Section 2403.5. Section 2403.5 is amended to read:
2403.5 Louvered windows or jalousies. Regular plate, sheet, or patterned glass
louvered windows and jalousies shall be no thinner than nominal 3/16 inch (4.8
mm) and no longer than 48 inches (1,219 mm). When other glass types are used,
design shall be submitted to the building official for approval. Exposed glass
edges shall be smooth. Wired glass with wire exposed on longitudinal edges
shall not be used in jalousies or louvered windows.
Exception: Pre-manufactured louvered window assemblies with certified test
reports by an independent AAMA certified testing laboratory, tested to AAMA/
WDMA/CSA 101/I.S.2/A440 or NAFS-1 or NAFS-2 standard or equivalent ASTM testing
criteria.
Exposed edges must be smooth. Wired glass with wire exposed on longitudinal
edges will not be used in jalousies of louvered windows.
(119)   Amending Section 2701.1. Section 2701.1 is amended to read:
2701.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter and NFPA 70 shall govern the
design, construction, erection and installation of the electrical components,
appliances, equipment and systems used in buildings and structures covered by
this code. The Fire Code and NFPA 70 shall govern the use and maintenance of
electrical components, appliances, equipment and systems. The International
Existing Building Code and the NFPA 70 shall govern the alteration, repair,
relocation, replacement, and addition of electrical components, appliances, or
equipment and systems.
(120)   Amending Section 2702.4. Section 2702.4 is amended to read:
Section 2702.4 Maintenance. Emergency and standby power systems shall be
maintained and tested in accordance with the Fire Code.
(121)   Amending Chapter 27. Chapter 27 is amended by adding Section 2703,
Section 2703.1, and Table 2703.2 to read:
SECTION 2703
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC POWER SYSTEMS
2703.1 General. Solar photovoltaic systems shall be installed in accordance
with the Fire Code. The electrical portion of solar PV systems shall be
installed in accordance with NFPA 70.
TABLE 2703.2
BATTERY STORAGE SYSTEM THRESHOLD QUANTITIES
BATTERY TECHNOLOGY CAPACITYa
BATTERY TECHNOLOGY         CAPACITYa
Flow Batteriesb            20 kWh
Lead Acid, All Types       70 kWh
Lithium, All Types         20 kWh
Nickel Cadmium (Ni-Cd)     70kWh
Sodium, All Types          20 kWhc
Other Battery Technologies 10 kWh
For SI:1 kilowatt hour = 3.6 megajoules.
a.   For batteries rated in amp-hours, kWh shall equal rated voltage times
amp-hour rating divided by 1000.
b.   Shall include vanadium, zinc-bromine, polysulfide-bromide, and other
flowing electrolyte-type technologies.
c.   70 kWh for sodium-ion technologies.
 
(122)   Amending Chapter 28. Chapter 28, Mechanical Systems, is deleted in its
entirety.
(123)   Amending Section 2901.1. Section 2901.1 is amended to read:
2901.1 Scope. Plumbing systems shall comply with the Plumbing Code.
(124)   Adding Section 2901. Section 2901 is amended by adding Section 2901.2
to read:
2901.2 Application.  The provisions of this Chapter apply to new construction.
(125)   Amending [P] Table 2902.1. [P] Table 2902.1 is amended to read:
[P] TABLE 2902.1
MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED PLUMBING FIXTURESa
                                         WATER       LAVATORIES
No. CLASSIFICATION OCCUPANCY DESCRIPTION CLOSETS                 BATHTUBS/ DRINKING     OTHER
                                         MALE FEMALE MALE FEMALE SHOWERS   FOUNTAINSe,f
[P] TABLE 2902.1
MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED PLUMBING FIXTURESa
                                            WATER        LAVATORIES
No. CLASSIFICATION OCCUPANCY DESCRIPTION    CLOSETS                  BATHTUBS/ DRINKING     OTHER
                                            MALE  FEMALE MALE FEMALE SHOWERS   FOUNTAINSe,f

                             Theaters and
                             other
                             buildings for  1 per 1 per     1 per                        1
1   Assembly       A-1d, h   the performing 125   65     200         –       1 per 500    service
                             arts and                                                       sink
                             motion
                             pictures
                             Nightclubs,
                             bars, taverns,                                                 1
                  A-2d, h   dance halls    1 per 1 per  1 per 75    –       1 per 500    service
                             and buildings  40    40                                        sink
                             for similar
                             purposes
                             Restaurants,                                                   1
                            banquet halls  1 per 1 per  1 per 200   –       1 per 500    service
                             and food       75    75                                        sink
                             courts
                             Auditoriums
                             without
                             permanent
                             seating, art
                             galleries,                                                     1
                  A-3d, h   exhibition     1 per 1 per  1 per 200   –       1 per 500    service
                             halls,         125   65                                        sink
                             museums,
                             lecture halls,
                             libraries,
                             arcades and
                             gymnasiums
                             Passenger                                                      1
                            terminals and  1 per 1 per  1 per 750   –       1 per 1,000  service
                             transportation 500   500                                       sink
                             facilities
                             Places of
                             worship and    1 per 1 per                                     1
                            other          150   75     1 per 200   –       1 per 1,000  service
                             religious                                                      sink
                             services
                                            1 per
                                            75    1 per
                                            for   40 for
                             Coliseums,     the   the
                             arenas,        first first
                             skating rinks, 1,500 1,520
                             pools and      and 1 and 1  1                                  1
                  A-4h      tennis courts  per   per 60 per  1 per  –       1 per 1,000  service
                             for indoor     120   for    200  150                           sink
                             sporting       for   the
                             events and     the   remain
                             activities     remai der
                                            nder  exceed
                                            excee ing
                                            ding  1,520
                                            1,500
                                            1 per
                                            75    1 per
                                            for   40 for
                             Stadiums,      the   the
                             amusement      first first
                             parks,         1,500 1,520
                             bleachers and  and 1 and 1  1                                  1
                  A-5h      grandstands    per   per 60 per  1 per  –       1 per 1,000  service
                             for outdoor    120   for    200  150                           sink
                             sporting       for   the
                             events and     the   remain
                             activities     remai der
                                            nder  exceed
                                            excee ing
                                            ding  1,520
                                            1,500
 
[P] TABLE 2902.1
MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED PLUMBING FIXTURESa
                                         WATER       LAVATORIES
No. CLASSIFICATION OCCUPANCY DESCRIPTION CLOSETS                 BATHTUBS/ DRINKING     OTHER
                                         MALE FEMALE MALE FEMALE SHOWERS   FOUNTAINSe,f
[P] TABLE 2902.1
MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED PLUMBING FIXTURESa
                                            WATER       LAVATORIES
No. CLASSIFICATION OCCUPANCY DESCRIPTION    CLOSETS                 BATHTUBS/ DRINKING     OTHER
                                            MALE FEMALE MALE FEMALE SHOWERS   FOUNTAINSe,f

                             Buildings for
                             the
                             transaction of
                             business,      1 per 25    1 per 40
                             professional   for the     for the
                             services,      first 50    first 80
                             other services and 1 per   and 1 per                          1
2   Business       B         involving      50 for the  80 for the  –       1 per 100    service
                             merchandise,   remainder   remainder                          sinkg
                             office         exceeding   exceeding
                             buildings,     50          80
                             banks, light
                             industrial,
                             and similar
                             uses
                             Educational                                                   1
3   Educational    E         facilities     1 per 50    1 per 50    –       1 per 100    service
                                                                                           sink
                             Structures in
                             which
                             occupants are
                             engaged in                                                    1
4   Factory and    F-1 and   work           1 per 100   1 per 100   –       1 per 400    service
    industrial     F-2       fabricating,                                                  sink
                             assembly, or
                             processing of
                             products or
                             materials
                             Residential                                                   1
5   Institutional  I-1       care           1 per 10    1 per 10    1 per 8   1 per 100    service
                                                                                           sink
                             Hospitals,
                             ambulatory     1 per per   1 per per                          1
                  I-2       nursing home   roomc       roomc       1 per 15  1 per 100    service
                             care                                                          sink
                             recipientb
                             Employees,
                            other than     1 per 25    1 per 35    –       1 per 100    –
                             residential
                             careb
                             Visitors,
                            other than     1 per 75    1 per 100   –       1 per 500    –
                             residential
                             care
                                                                                           1
                  I-3       Prisonsb       1 per cell  1 per cell  1 per 15  1 per 100    service
                                                                                           sink
                             Reformatories,
                             detention                                                     1
                  I-3       centers, and   1 per 15    1 per 15    1 per 15  1 per 100    service
                             correctional                                                  sink
                             centersb
                            Employeesb     1 per 25    1 per 35    –       1 per 100    –
                             Adult day care                                                1
                  I-4       and child day  1 per 15    1 per 15    1         1 per 100    service
                             care                                                          sink
                             Retail stores,
                             service
                             stations,                                                     1
6   Mercantile     M         shops,         1 per 500   1 per 750   –       1 per 1,000  service
                             salesrooms,                                                   sinkg
                             markets, and
                             shopping
                             centers
 
[P] TABLE 2902.1
MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED PLUMBING FIXTURESa
                                         WATER       LAVATORIES
No. CLASSIFICATION OCCUPANCY DESCRIPTION CLOSETS                 BATHTUBS/ DRINKING     OTHER
                                         MALE FEMALE MALE FEMALE SHOWERS   FOUNTAINSe,f
[P] TABLE 2902.1
MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED PLUMBING FIXTURESa
                                           WATER       LAVATORIES
No. CLASSIFICATION OCCUPANCY DESCRIPTION   CLOSETS                 BATHTUBS/ DRINKING     OTHER
                                           MALE FEMALE MALE FEMALE SHOWERS   FOUNTAINSe,f

                             Hotels,       1 per       1 per
                             motels,       sleeping    sleeping    1 per                  1 service
7   Residential    R-1       boarding      unit        unit        sleepi ng –          sink
                             houses                          unit
                             (transient)
                             Dormitories,
                             fraternities,
                  R-2       sororities,   1 per 10    1 per 10    1 per 8   1 per 100    1 service
                             and boarding                                           sink
                             houses (not
                             transient)
                                                                                          1 Kitchen
                                                                                          sink per
                                                                                          Dwell ing
                                           1 per                                          Unit; 1
                             Apartment     dwelling    1 per       1 per                  automatic
                  R-2       house         unit        dwelling    dwelli ng    –    clothes
                                                    unit        unit                   washer
                                                                                          connection
                                                                                          per 20
                                                                                          Dwelling
                                                                                          Units
                                                                                          1 Kitchen
                                                                                          sink per
                                                                                          Dwelling
                                                                                          Unit; 1
                             One- and two- 1 per       1 per 10    1 per                  automatic
                  R-3       family        dwelling             dwelli ng –          clothes
                             dwellings     unit                 unit                   washer
                                                                                          connection
                                                                                          per
                                                                                          Dwelling
                                                                                          Unit
                             Congregate
                             living        1 per 10    1 per 10                           1 service
                  R-3       facilities                      1 per 8   1 per 100    sink
                             with 16 or
                             fewer persons
                             Congregate
                             living                                                       1 service
                  R-4       facilities    1 per 10    1 per 10    1 per 8   1 per 100    sink
                             with 16 or
                             fewer persons
                             Structures
                             for the
                             storage of
                             goods,
8   Storage        S-1, S-2  warehouses,   1 per 100   1 per 100   –       1 per 1,000  1 service
                             store- houses                                                sink
                             and freight
                             depots, low
                             and moderate
                             hazard
a.   The fixtures shown are based on one fixture being the minimum required for the number of
persons indicated or any fraction of the number of persons indicated. The number of occupants shall
be determined by this code.
b.   Toilet facilities for employees shall be separate from facilities for inmates or care
recipients.
c.   A single-occupant toilet room with one water closet and one lavatory serving not more than two
adjacent patient sleeping units shall be permitted where such room is provided with direct access
from each patient sleeping unit and with provisions for privacy.
d.   The occupant load for seasonal outdoor seating and entertainment areas shall be included when
determining the minimum number of facilities required.
e.   The minimum number of required drinking fountains shall comply with Table 2902.1 and Chapter
11.
f.   Drinking fountains are not required for an occupant load of 15 or fewer.
g.   For business and mercantile occupancies with an occupant load of 15 or fewer, service sinks
shall not be required.
h.   See Section 303.2.1
i.   Where restaurants provide drinking water in a container free of charge, drinking fountains
shall not be required in those restaurants. In other occupancies where drinking fountains are
required, water dispensers shall be permitted to be substituted for more than 50 percent of the
required number of drinking fountains.
 
(126)   Amending Section 2902. Section 2902 is amended by adding Section 2902.7
to read:
2902.7 Toilet Facilities in Group A Occupancy. In a building or portion of a
building containing a new Group A Occupancy such as an entertainment center,
movie theatre, sports area, other similar occupancy, or alterations to existing
public assemblies exceeding $500,000, the number of water closets required for
females who are not employed in that building shall be at least twice the
number available of water closets required for males who are not employed in
that building or portion.
(127)   Amending Section 2902. Section 2902 is amended by adding Section 2902.8
to read:
2902.8 Urinals.  Urinals may be substituted for no more than 50 percent of the
required water closets.
(128)   Amending Section 3007.1. Section 3007.1 is amended to read:
3007.1 General. Where required by International Building Code Section 403.6.1,
every floor above and including the lowest level of fire department vehicle
access of the building shall be served by fire service access elevators
complying with International Building Code Sections 3007.1 through 3007.9.
Except as modified in this section, fire service access elevators shall be
installed in accordance with this chapter and ASME A17.1/CSA B44.
Exception: Elevators that only service an open or enclosed parking garage and
the lobby of the building shall not be required to serve as fire service access
elevators.
(129)   Amending Section 3007.6.1. Section 3007.6.1 is amended to read:
3007.6.1 Access to interior exit stairway or ramp. The enclosed fire service
access elevator lobby shall have direct access from the enclosed elevator lobby
to an enclosure for an interior exit stairway or ramp.
Exceptions:
1.   Access to an interior exit stairway or ramp shall be permitted to be
through a protected path of travel that has a level of fire protection not less
than the elevator lobby enclosure. The protected path shall be separated from
the enclosed elevator lobby through an opening protected by a smoke and draft
control assembly in accordance International Building Code Section 716.2.2.1.
2.   Access is permitted from an exterior exit stairway or ramp as provided.
(130)   Amending Section 3103.1. Section 3103.1 is amended to read:
3103.1 General. See ROH Section 18-3.4.
(131)   Amending Section 3105.2. Section 3105.2 is amended to read:
3105.2 Design and construction. Awnings and canopies shall be designed and
constructed to withstand wind or other lateral loads and live loads as required
by International Building Code Chapter 16 with due allowance for shape, open
construction, and similar features that relieve the pressures or loads.
Structural members shall be protected to prevent deterioration. Awnings shall
have frames of noncombustible material, fire-retardant-treated wood, wood of
Type IV sizes, or 1-hour construction with combustible or noncombustible covers
and shall be either retractable, folding, or collapsible. When collapsed,
retraced, or folded, the design shall be such that the awning does not block
any required exit.
Exceptions:
1.   A fixed awning not more than 10 feet (3,048 mm) in length may be erected
over a doorway to the building.
(132)   Amending Sections 3106.2 to 3106.5. Sections 3106.2 to 3106.5 are
amended to read:
3106.2 Thickness. The maximum height or thickness of a marquee measured
vertically from its lowest to its highest point shall not exceed 3 feet (914
mm).
3106.3 Roof construction. Where the roof or any part thereof is a skylight, the
skylight shall comply with the requirements of International Building Code
Section 2405. Plastic skylights shall comply with International Building Code
Section 2610.
Every roof and skylight of a marquee over a public right-of-way shall be sloped
to downspouts which shall conduct any drainage from the marquee under the
sidewalk to the curb.
3106.4 Location prohibited. Every marquee shall be so located as not to
interfere with the operation of any exterior standpipe or to obstruct the clear
passage of stairways or exits from the building or the installation or
maintenance of street lighting.
3106.5 Construction. A marquee shall be supported entirely from the building
and shall be constructed entirely of noncombustible materials.
Exception: Drop-off curtains may be suspended below the exterior periphery
provided a minimum clearance of 7 feet (2, 134 mm) from the sidewalk below is
maintained.
(133)   Section 3107.1. Section 3107.1 is amended to read:
3107.1 General. Signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained in
accordance with this code. Sign usage shall conform to ROH Chapter 21.
(134)   Amending Section 3109. Section 3109 is amended by adding the following
Sections to read:
3109.1 General. Swimming pools shall comply with the requirements of Sections
3109.2 through 3109.5 and other applicable sections of this code. These
provisions are applicable to the design and construction of public swimming and
wading pools. Those pools and spas covered by these regulations include
municipal, institutional, hotel, apartment, and similar type occupancies; and
hydrotherapy spas, therapeutic pools, and special pools of similar type usage.
Also covered are swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs for one-family and two-
family dwellings, and similar type pools; and ornamental pools. This code
establishes minimum standards to provide a reasonable level of safety and
protection of health, property, and public welfare by regulating and
controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials,
location, and maintenance or use of pools and spas.
3109.2 Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment.
The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any
design or material or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically
prescribed by this code; provided that any such alternative has been approved.
An alternative material, design or method of construction may be approved where
the code official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies
with the intent of the provisions of this code and that the materials, methods
of work are reasonably equivalent to the standards in this code with respect to
quality, strength, effectiveness, durability and safety. Where the alternative
material, design or method of construction is not approved, the code official
shall respond in writing, stating the reason why the alternative was not
approved.
3109.3 Public Swimming Pool. Public swimming pools are structures intended for
swimming, recreational bathing or wading that contain water over 24 inches (610
mm) deep to include in-ground, above-ground and on-ground pools; hot tubs; spas
and fixed-in-place wading pools. Public pools, other than a residential pool
that is intended to be used for swimming or bathing and is operated by an
owner, lessee, operator, licensee, or concessionaire, regardless of whether a
fee is charged for use.
3109.4 Residential Swimming Pools. Residential swimming pools is intended for
use that is accessory to a residential setting and available only to the
household and its guests. Residential swimming pools shall comply with ROH
Chapter 16, Article 6.
3109.5 Swimming Pool Enclosures. Swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by
a fence not less than at least 4 feet (1,290 mm) in height or a screen
enclosure. Openings in the fence shall not permit the passage of a 4-inch-
diameter (102 mm) sphere. The fence or screen enclosure shall be equipped with
self-closing and self-latching gates. All provisions of the building,
electrical, and plumbing codes shall be applicable unless indicated otherwise
and shall comply with ROH Chapter 16, Article 7.
Exceptions:
1.   Swimming, dipping, or wading pools located on the premises of a hotel are
not required to be enclosed.
2.   A swimming pool with a power safety cover or a spa with a safety cover
complying with ASTM F 1346 need not comply with enclosure requirements of this
code.
3109.5.1 Barrier Height and Clearances. Barrier heights and clearances shall be
in accordance with all of the following:
(a)   The top of the barrier shall be not less than 48 inches (1,219 mm) above
grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming
pool. Such height shall exist around the entire perimeter of the vessel and for
a distance of 3 feet (914 mm) where measured horizontally from the required
barrier.
(b)   The vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall
be not greater than 2 inches (51 mm) measured on the side of the barrier that
faces away from the swimming pool.
(c)   The vertical clearance between a surface below the barrier to a solid
surface, such as concrete, and the bottom of the required barrier shall not
exceed 4 inches (102 mm) where measured on the side of the required barrier
that faces away from the vessel.
(d)   Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, the barrier is
authorized to be at ground level or mounted on top of the pool structure, and
the vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of
the barrier shall be not greater than 4 inches (102 mm).
3109.5.1.1 Openings. Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a 4-
inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere.
3109.5.1.2 Solid Barrier Surfaces. Solid barriers which do not have openings
shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction
tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
3109.5.1.3 Closely Spaced Horizontal Members. Where the barrier is composed of
horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the
horizontal members is less than 45 inches (1,143 mm), the horizontal members
shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between
vertical members shall be not greater than 1-3/4 inches (44 mm) in width. Where
there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the
cutouts shall be not greater than 1-3/4 inches (44 mm) in width.
3109.5.1.4 Widely Spaced Horizontal Members. Where the barrier is composed of
horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the
horizontal members is 45 inches (1,143 mm) or more, spacing between vertical
members shall be not greater than 4 inches (102 mm). Where there are decorative
cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall be not
greater than 1-3/4 inches (44 mm) in width.
3109.5.1.5 Chain Link Dimensions. The maximum opening formed by a chain link
shall be not more than 1-3/4 inches (44 mm). Where the fence is provided with
slats fastened at the top which reduces the openings shall be not than 1-3/
4 inches (44 mm).
3109.5.1.6 Diagonal Members. Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members,
the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall be not greater than 1-
3/4 inches (44 mm). The angle of the diagonal members shall not be greater than
45 degrees (0.79 rad) from vertical.
3109.5.1.7 Gates. Access doors or gates shall comply with the requirements of
Sections 3109.5.1.1 through 3109.5.1.6 and shall be equipped to accommodate a
locking device. Pedestrian access doors or gates shall open outward away from
the pool and shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Doors or
gates other than pedestrian access doors or gates shall have a self-latching
device. Release mechanisms shall be readily openable from the egress side
without the use if a key or special knowledge or effort. Where the release
mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than 54 inches (1,372 mm)
from grade, the release mechanism shall be located on vessel side of the gate,
and the gate and barrier shall be without openings greater than ½ inch (12.7
mm) within 18 inches (457 mm) of the release mechanism.
3109.5.1.8 Dwelling wall as a barrier. Where a wall of a dwelling serves as
part of the barrier, one of the following shall apply:
(a)   Doors with direct access to the pool through that wall shall be equipped
with an alarm that produces an audible warning when the door and/or its screen,
if present, are opened. The alarm shall be listed and labeled in accordance
with UL 2017. In dwellings not required to be Accessible units, Type A units or
Type B units, the deactivation switch shall be located 54 inches (1,372 mm) or
more above the threshold of the door. In dwellings required to be Accessible
units, Type A units or Type B units, the deactivation switch shall be located
not higher than 54 inches (1,372 mm) and not less than 48 inches (1,219 mm)
above the threshold of the door.
(b)   The pool shall be equipped with a power safety cover that complies with
ASTM F 1346.
(c)   An approved means of protection, such as self-closing doors with self-
latching devices, which are approved, shall be accepted so long as the degree
of protection afforded is not less than the protection afforded by Section
3109.5.1.8, Item (a) or (b).
3109.5.1.9 Pool structure as barrier. Where an onground residential pool
structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top of the
pool structure, the following shall apply:
(a)   The onground pool wall itself shall be permitted to be the barrier where
the pool structure is on grade and the wall is at least 48 inches (1,219 mm)
above grade for the entire perimeter of the pool and complies with the
requirements of Section 3109.5.1.1.
(b)   When the means of access is a ladder or steps, then the ladder or steps
either shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access,
or the ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier that meets the
requirements of Sections 3109.5.1.1 through 3109.5.1.8.
(c)   Where the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening
created shall not allow the passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere.
3109.5.2 Indoor swimming pools. Walls surrounding indoor swimming pools shall
not be required to comply with Section 3109.5.1.8.
3109.5.3 Prohibited locations. Barriers shall be located so as to prohibit
permanent structures, equipment, or similar objects from being used to climb
the barriers.
3109.6 Suction entrapment avoidance. Suction outlets shall be designed and
installed in accordance with ANSI/APSP-7.
(135)   Amending Section 3202.2. Section 3202.2 is amended to read:
3202.2 Balconies, sun-control devices and appendages. Projections such as roof
eaves, cornices, sun-control devices, belt courses, and appendages such as
water tables, sills, capitals, bases, and architectural projections which
cannot be occupied or used, may project over the public street of the building
site a distance as determined by the clearance of the lowest point of the
projection above the grade immediately below, as follows:
Clearance above grade less than 8 feet (2,438 mm) - no projection is permitted
greater than 4 inches (102 mm).
Clearance above the grade 8 feet (2,438 mm) and over - 1 inch of projection is
permitted for each additional inch of clearance; provided that no such
projection shall exceed a distance of 4 feet (1,219 mm).
Roof eaves shall be sloped to downspouts and/or gutters leading back to the
building which shall conduct any drainage under the sidewalk area through the
curb to the street gutter. A drain connection permit may be required.
(136)   Amending Section 3202.2.3. Section 3202.2.3 is amended to read:
3202.2.3 Awnings. Awnings may extend over public property not more than 7 feet
(2,134 mm) from the face of a supporting building, but no portion shall extend
nearer than 30 inches (762 mm) to the face of the nearest curb line measured
horizontally. In no case shall the awning extend over the public property
greater than two thirds of the distance from the property line to the nearest
curb in front of the building. All portions of any awning must be at least 8
feet (2,438 mm) above any public walkway.
Exception: Any valance attached to an awning shall not project above the roof
of the awning at the point of attachment and shall not extend more than 12
inches (305 mm) below the roof of the awning at the point of attachment, but in
no case shall any portion of a valance be less than 7 feet (2,134 mm) in height
above a public way.
(137)   Amending Section 3202.3.1. Section 3202.3.1 is amended to read:
3202.3.1 Marquees. Marquees shall project not more than three-fourths of the
distance from the property line to the face of the curb but in no case reach
within 30 inches (762 mm) of the face of the curb. There shall be a minimum of
8 feet (2,438 mm) vertical clearance between the lowest point of any marquee to
the sidewalk below.
(138)   Adding Section 3202.3. Section 3202.3 is added to read:
3202.3 Doors. No door, either fully opened or when opening, shall project
beyond the property line.
(139)   Deleting Section 3305. Section 3305 is deleted.
(140)   Adding an exception to Section 3306.1. Section 3306.1 is amended by
adding the following Exception:
Exception: Not applicable to construction in preservation, agricultural and
residential districts except when required by the building official.
(141)   Amending Section 3306.5. Section 3306.5 is amended to read:
3306.5 Barriers. Barriers shall be not less than 6 feet (1,829 mm) in height
and shall be placed on the side of the walkway nearest the construction.
Barriers shall extend the entire length of the construction site. Openings in
such barriers shall be protected by doors which are normally kept closed.
Viewing panels shall be provided in barriers at a rate of one for every 25
linear feet (7.6 m) per frontage, with a minimum of one per frontage. Viewing
panels shall be 12 inches x 12 inches (305 mm x 305 mm) in size and shall be
blocked with Plexiglas or an equivalent non-frangible material. The top of the
viewing panel shall be located no more than 6 feet (1,829 mm) above the level
of the ground, and the bottom of the viewing panel shall be located no less
than 3 feet (914 mm) above the level of the ground.
(142)   Amending Section 3306. Section 3306 is amended by adding Section
3306.10 to read:
3306.10 Watchman. A watchman shall be employed to warn the general public when
intermittent hazardous operations are conducted on or above the sidewalk.
(143)   Amending Section 3307.1. Section 3307.1 is amended by adding a second
and third paragraph to read:
The owner and contractor doing the excavation or fill shall be responsible to
implement safety measures, including but not limited to, safety nets, retaining
walls or fences, and berms or trenches, to prevent falling rocks, boulders,
soil, debris, and other dangerous objects from falling, sliding, or flowing
onto adjoining properties, streets, or natural watercourses, or otherwise
causing injury or damage to persons or property.
If proposed excavation and backfill work does not require a grading permit
under ROH Chapter 18A, the building official, if deemed necessary to protect or
promote public safety, may require the submittal of an engineering slope hazard
report.
(144)   Amending Section 3309.2. Section 3309.2 is amended to read:
3309.2 Fire Hazards. The provisions of this code and the Fire Code shall be
strictly observed to safeguard against all the fire hazards attendant upon
construction operations.
(145)   Amending Chapter 35 (Referenced Standards). Chapter 35 (Referenced
Standards) is amended by adding the Reference Standard ANSI/ASRAHE 62.2 - 2019
to read:
ANSI/ASRAHE
American Society of Heating and Air-Conditioning Engineers
1791 Tullie Circle NE
Atlanta, GA 30329
ANSI/ASRAHE 62.2 -2019: Standard for the Ventilation and Acceptable Air Quality
in Residential Buildings
IBC Section 1202.5.1.1 Adjoining spaces.
(146)   Amending Chapter 35 (Referenced Standards). Chapter 35 (Referenced
Standards) is amended by adding a new Referenced Standard BWS-WWS-2002 and
SDPWC-1984to read:
BWS
Board of Water Supply
630 South Beretania Street
Honolulu, HI 96843
BWS-WWS-2002: Board of Water Supply, Water System Standards 2002
   503.3.2
SDPWC-1984: Standard Details for Public Works Construction, September 1984.
   2807.1, 2807.9, 2807.10, 2807.12
SDS: Rules Relating to Storm Drainage Standards, December 2012
   2808.9
(147)   Amending Chapter 35 (Referenced Standards). Chapter 35 (Referenced
Standards) is amended by adding the Reference Standard NFPA No. 30A-18 to read:
 
Standard reference number Title                     Referenced in code section
                                                    number
                          Code for Motor Fuel
30A-18                    Dispensing Facilities and 406.7
                          Repair Garages
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 1, § 16-1.1) (Added by Ord. 12-34; Am. Ords. 13-3, 17-
49, 20-7, 24-15, 25-11)
§ 16-1.2 Adoption of the Hawaii State Residential Code.
   The Hawaii State Residential Code, as adopted by the State of Hawaii on
November 17, 2020, which adopts, with modifications, the International
Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2018 Edition (IRC),
published by the International Code Council, Inc., 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW,
6th Floor Washington, DC 20001, is adopted by reference and made a part hereof,
subject to the following amendments:
(1)   Amending Section R101. Section R101.1 is amended and Section R101.2 is
added to read:
R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be part of the Building Code of the City
and County of Honolulu, and shall be referred to herein as “the Residential
Code.”
R101.2 Scope. The provisions of the International Residential Code for One- and
Two-Family Dwellings shall be permitted as an alternative to the International
Building Code to apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement,
replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal, and
demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings not more than three
stories in height, multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than
two stories in height with a separate means of egress, and their accessory
structures. A townhouse is a single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group
of three or more attached units in which each unit extends from the foundation
to roof and with open space on at least two sides. For patio covers, the
provisions of Appendix H are made a part of the Residential Code. For R-3 one-
and two-family dwellings used as care homes, the provisions of Appendix M are
made a part of the Residential Code.
(2)   Amending Section R102.4. Sections R102.4.1.through Section 102.4.1.7 are
amended and Section 102.4.1.8 is added to read:
R102.4.1.1 Plumbing Code. Wherever the term International Plumbing Code is used
in this code, it shall mean ROH Chapter 19, Plumbing Code.
R102.4.1.2 Fire Code. Whenever the term International Fire Code is used in this
code, it shall mean ROH Chapter 20, Fire Code.
R102.4.1.3 International Energy Conservation Code. Whenever the term
International Energy Conservation Code is used in this code, it shall mean ROH
Chapter 168, Building Energy Conservation Code.
R102.4.1.4 International Fuel Gas Code.  Whenever the term International Fuel
Gas Code is used in this code, it shall mean ROH Chapter 19, Plumbing Code.
R102.4.1.5 International Building Code. Whenever the term International
Building Code is used in this code, it shall mean ROH Chapter 16, Building
Code.
R102.4.1.6 Electrical Code.  The provisions of ROH Chapter 17, Electrical Code
shall apply.
R102.4.1.7. Other referenced codes not listed in Section 102.4.1 are considered
referenced guidelines and not mandatory.
R102.4.1.8 Housing Code. The provisions of ROH Chapter 16A, Housing Code shall
apply.
(3)   Adding Section R103 and amending Section R103.1. Section R103 of the
International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, is added by reference and made a
part of this code, except Section R103.1, which is amended to read:
R103.1 General. Code enforcement agency shall be in accordance with Section 103
of the International Building Code, specifically ROH Section 16-1.1, Amendment
(5).
(3a)   Adding Section R104. Section R104 of the International Residential Code,
2018 Edition, is added by reference and made a part of this code.
(4)   Adding Section R105. Section R105 of the International Residential Code,
2018 Edition, is added by reference and made a part of this code, except
Section R105.1, which is amended to read:
R105.1 Required. A building permit is required to perform work covered by this
code as provided in ROH Chapter 18.
(5)   Amending Subsection R105.8. Subsection R105.8 of the International
Residential Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read:
R105.8 Responsibility. It shall be the duty of every person who performs work
for the installation, alteration, or repair of building, structure, electrical,
gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, for which this code is applicable, to
comply with this code.
(6)   Adding Section R106. Section R106 of the International Residential Code,
2018 Edition, is added by reference and made a part of this code, except
Section R106.1, which is amended to read:
R106.1 Submittal documents. See ROH Chapter 18. In addition to the requirements
of the plot plan required in ROH Chapter 18, the construction documents
submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan
showing to scale the size and location of new construction and existing
structures on the site plan showing to scale the size of and location of the
new construction and distances from lot lines. In the case of demolition, the
site plans shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size
of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot.
(7)   Adding Section R106.1.4. A new Section R106.1.4 is added to read:
R106.1.4 Information for construction in flood hazard areas. For buildings and
structures in flood hazard areas as established by ROH Chapter 21A,
construction documents will include:
(a)   Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones,
and the design flood elevation, as appropriate;
(b)   The elevation of the proposed lowest floor, including basement; in areas
of shallow flooding (AO zones), the height of the proposed lowest floor,
including basement, above the highest adjacent grade;
(c)   The elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member in
coastal high hazard areas (V Zone); and
(d)   If design flood elevations are not included on the community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), the applicant shall submit to the building official
a flood study, flood data, and other pertinent information prepared by a
licensed design professional, as required by ROH Chapter 21A.
(8)   Adding Section R106.1.5. A new Section R106.1.5 is added to read:
R106.1.5 Topographic survey. For new or additions to structures and buildings,
on properties where the elevation difference on that site is 5 feet (1,524 mm)
or more, there shall be provided a topographic survey of the existing site.
(9)   Adding Sections R106.1.6 through R106.1.6.2. New Sections R106.1.6
through R106.1.6.2 are added to read:
R106.1.6 Stormwater management. Stormwater management systems for residential
uses include, but not limited to, reducing the total runoff generated on the
site by reducing the total impervious surface area of the lot and implementing
source control BMP and good housekeeping practices.
R106.1.6.1 Increased runoff.  Maximum impervious surface. The impervious
surface area for construction of one-family or two-family detached dwelling or
duplex shall be in accordance with ROH Chapter 21, Land Use Ordinance.
R106.1.6.2 Residential Stormwater Management Plan or RSWMP. A RSWMP shall be
prepared for building permit applications for Single-Family Dwelling, Two-
Family Dwelling, and duplex projects resulting in an increase or decrease of
total impervious surface area or replacing existing impervious surface area.
All the existing and proposed impervious and permeable surfaces areas shall be
reflected on the Site or Plot Plan, drawn to scale.
(10)   Deleting Section R108. Section R108 is deleted in its entirety.
(11)   Adding Section R109. Section R109 of the International Residential Code,
2018 Edition, is added by reference and made a part of this code, except that
Sections R109.1, R109.1.1, R109.1.3, R109.1.5, R109.1.5.1 and R109.1.6 are
amended and R109.5 through R109.9 are added to read:
R109.1 Types of Inspections. Inspections and lot survey shall be in accordance
with the International Building Code Section B110.
R109.1.1 Required inspections. The building official, upon notification from
the permit holder or the permit holder’s agent, shall make the following
inspections and shall either approve that portion of the construction as
completed or shall notify the permit holder or the permit holder’s agent if the
same fails to comply with this code.
R109.1.3 Floodplain inspections. For construction in areas prone to flooding as
established by ROH Chapter 21A, upon placement of the lowest floor, including
basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the building official
shall require submission of documentation, prepared and sealed by a land
surveyor, licensed in the State of Hawaii, of the elevation of the lowest
floor, including basement, required in Section R106, for the following two
stages of construction:
(a)   Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to
further vertical construction; and
(b)   Upon completion of the structure.
R109.1.5 Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified in
Sections R109.1.3 through R109.1.6 of this code, the building official is
authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to
ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code and other laws that are
enforced by this code.
R109.1.5.1 Fire-resistance-rated construction inspection. When fire-resistance-
rated construction is required between dwelling units or due to locate on
property, an inspection of such construction, after all lathing and/or
wallboard is in place, but before any plaster is applied, or before wallboard
joints and fasteners are taped and finished.
R109.1.6 Final inspections. Final inspections shall be made after the permitted
work is complete and prior to final occupancy.
R109.5 Special inspections. Where application is made for construction as
described in this section, the owner shall employ one or more special
inspectors independent of the contractors performing the work, to provide
inspections during construction on the types of work listed under Sections
R109.5.1 and R109.5.6 of this code. These inspections are in addition to the
inspections specified in Section R109 of this code. The special inspector shall
be a qualified person who shall demonstrate competence, to the satisfaction of
the building official, for inspection of the particular type of construction or
operation requiring special inspection. The building official may impose
reasonable fees to cover the cost to conduct examination in licensing of
special inspectors and issuance of registration cards.
Exceptions:
1.   The building official may waive the requirements for the employment of a
special inspector if the construction is of a minor nature.
2.   The employment of a special inspector is not required for construction
work for any government agency that provides for its own inspections.
3.   Special inspections are not required for building components unless the
design involves the practice of professional engineering or architecture as
defined by HRS 464.
R109.5.1 Special inspections for wind requirements. Special inspections are
required for buildings and structures constructed where the 3-second-gust
effective ultimate design wind speed is 140 mph or greater.
R109.5.1.1 Structural wood.  Continuous special inspection is required during
field gluing operations of elements of the main windforce-resisting system.
Periodic special inspection is required for nailing, bolting, anchoring, and
other fastening of components within the main windforce-resisting system,
including wood shear walls, wood diaphragms, drag struts, braces, and hold-
downs.
Exception: Special inspection is not required for wood shear walls, shear
panels, and diaphragms, including nailing, bolting, anchoring, and other
fastening to other components, of the main windforce-resisting system, where
the fastener spacing of the sheathing is more than 4 inches (102 mm) on center.
R109.5.1.2 Cold-formed steel light-frame construction.  Periodic special
inspection is required during welding operations of elements of the main
windforce-resisting system. Periodic special inspection is required for screw
attachment, bolting, anchoring and other fastening of components within the
main windforce-resisting system, including shear walls, braces, diaphragms,
collectors (drag struts) and hold-downs.
Exceptions: A special inspection is not required for cold-formed steel light-
frame shear walls, braces, diaphragms, collectors (drag struts) and hold-downs
where either of the following apply:
1.   The sheathing is gypsum board of fiberboard.
2.   The sheathing is wood structural panel or steel sheets on only one side of
the shear wall, shear panel or diaphragm assembly and the fastener spacing of
the sheathing is more than 4 inches (102 mm) on center.
R109.5.1.3 Wind-resisting components.  Periodic special inspection is required
for the following systems and components:
(a)   Roof cladding.
(b)   Wall cladding.
R109.5.2 Termite protection. Special inspections are required for termite
barrier, treated structural lumber, and pipe penetrations for new wood frame
residential buildings.
R109.5.3 Automatic fire protection systems.  Automatic fire sprinkler systems
shall be inspected and evaluated in accordance to the requirements of NFPA 13,
NFPA 13D, and NFPA 13R respectively.
R109.5.4 Concrete construction.  The special inspections and verifications for
concrete construction inspected in accordance with ACI 318.
Exceptions: Special inspections shall not be required for:
1.   Foundation concrete for structures permitted to be designed under the
International Residential Code.
2.   Concrete footings supporting buildings three stories or less in height
that are fully supported on earth or rock where the structural design is based
on a specified compressive strength fc no greater than 2,500 pounds per square
inch (psi) (17.2 MPa), regardless of the compressive strength specified in the
construction documents or used in the footing construction. Periodic inspection
of the reinforcing for all concrete footings shall be required.
3.   Nonstructural concrete slabs supported directly on the ground, including
pre-stressed slabs on grade, where the effective pre-stress in the concrete is
less than 150 psi (1.03 MPa).
4.   Concrete foundation walls constructed in accordance with Tables
B1807.1.6.2, B1807.1.6.3(1), B1807.1.6.3(2), B1807.1.6.3(3), or B1807.1.6.3(4).
5.   Concrete patios, driveways, and sidewalks on grade.
R109.5.5 Floodplain construction. See ROH Chapter 21A.
R109.6 Building permit requirement. Where special inspection or testing is
required by Section R109.5, the construction drawings shall include a complete
list of special inspections required by this section.
R109.7 Statement of special inspections. The applicant shall submit a statement
of special inspections as a condition for permit issuance.
R109.8 Contractor responsibility.  When special inspection is required, a
contractor’s statement shall be submitted containing an acknowledgement of
awareness of the special inspection requirements contained on the drawings and
that the construction requiring special inspections shall be made accessible
for inspections.
R109.9 Report requirement.  The licensed engineer or architect of record shall
submit a final signed report stating that they have received all the special
inspection reports and documenting that there are no known unresolved code
requirements that create significant public safety deficiencies.
(12)   Adding Section R110.1. Section R110 of the International Residential
Code, 2018 Edition, is added by reference and made a part of this code. Section
R110.1 is amended to read:
R110.1 Use and occupancy. No new building or structure shall be used or
occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building
or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has
issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a
certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as approval of a violation of
the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction.
Exceptions:
1.   Certificates of occupancy are not required for work exempt from permits in
ROH Chapter 18.
2.   Accessory buildings or structures.
(13)   Amending Section R110.2. Section R110.2 of the International Residential
Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read:
R110.2 Change in use. Changes in the occupancy classification of an existing
structure shall not be made except as specified by this code.
(14)   Amending Section R110.3. Section R110.3 of the International Residential
Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read:
R110.3 Certificate issued. After the building official inspects the building or
structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this code or other laws
that are enforced by the department, the building official shall issue a
certificate of occupancy which shall contain the following:
(a)   The building permit number.
(b)   The address of the structure.
(c)   The name and address of the owner.
(d)   A description of the structure or portion thereof for which the
certificate is issued.
(e)   A statement that the described structure or portion thereof has been
inspected for compliance with the requirements of this code.
(f)   The name of the building official.
(g)   If an automatic sprinkler system is provided.
(h)   Any special conditions for the building permit.
(15)   Amending Section R110.4. Section R110.4 of the International Residential
Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read:
R110.4 Temporary occupancy. The building official is authorized to issue a
temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work
covered by the permit; provided that the portion or portions that are subject
to the temporary certificate can be occupied safely and is or are in compliance
with the requirements of this code. The building official shall set a time
period during which the temporary certificate of occupancy is valid.
(16)   Amending Section R110.5. Section R110.5 of the International Residential
Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read:
R110.5 Revocation. The building official may suspend or revoke a certificate of
occupancy issued under the provisions of this code whenever the certificate has
been issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information provided, or
where it is determined that the structure or portion thereof violates any
ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code.
(16a)   Adding Section R111. Section R111 of the International Residential
Code, 2018 Edition, is added by reference and made a part of this code.
(17)   Adding Section R112. Section R112 of the International Residential Code,
2018 Edition, is added by reference and made a part of this code, except that
Section R112.1 is amended to read:
R112.1 General. Board of Appeals shall be in accordance with International
Building Code Section 113 as amended in ROH Section 16-1.1, amendment (18).
(18)   Adding Section R113. A new Section R113 is added to read:
SECTION R113 - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
For violation and penalty provisions, see ROH Chapter 16, Article 10.
(19)   Amending Section R202. Section R202 is amended by amending or adding the
following definitions to read:
(a)   By adding immediately after “ACCESSIBLE” the following definition to
read:
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). See ROH Chapter 21, Article 10.
(b)   By amending the definition of “BUILDING, EXISTING” to read:
BUILDING, EXISTING.  Existing building is a building for which a legal building
permit has been issued, or one which complied with the Building Code in effect
at the time the building was erected.
(c)   By adding the following definitions:
BUILDING, ENCLOSED: A building that does not comply with the requirements for
open or partially enclosed building.
BUILDING, OPEN: A building having each wall at least 80 percent open. Ao ≥ 0.8
Ag where:
Ao = total area of openings in a wall that receives positive external pressure,
in ft² (m²)
Ag = the gross area of that wall in which Ao is identified, in ft² (m²)
BUILDING, PARTIALLY ENCLOSED: A building that complies with both of the
following conditions:
1.   The total area of openings in a wall that receives positive external
pressure exceeds that sum of the areas of openings in the balance of the
building envelope (walls and roof) by more than 10 percent.
2.   The total area of openings in a wall that receives positive external
pressure exceeds four ft2 (0.37 m2) or one percent of the area of that wall,
whichever is smaller, and the percentage of openings balance of the building
envelope does not exceed 20 percent.
These conditions are expressed by the following equations:
1.   Ao > 1.1Aoi
2.   Ao > 4 ft² (0.37 m²) or > 0.01 Ag, whichever is smaller, and Aoi/Agi ≤
0.20
Where:
Ao,Aq are defined for open building.
Aoi = the sum of the areas of openings in the building envelope (walls and
roof) not including Ao, in ft² (m²).
Agi = the sum of the gross surface areas of the building envelope (walls and
roof) not including Ag, in ft² (m²).
(d)   By amending the definition of “BUILDING OFFICIAL” to read:
BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Director of Planning and Permitting of the City or the
Director’s authorized representative.
(e)   By adding definitions of “CARPORT” after “CAP PLATE” to read:
CARPORT. A private garage which is at least 100 percent open on one side and
with 50 percent net openings on another side or which is provided with an
equivalent of such openings on two or more sides.
A private garage which is 100 percent open on one side and 25 percent open on
another side with the latter opening so located to provide adequate cross
ventilation may be considered a carport when approved by the building official.
(f)   By adding the following definition immediately before the definition of
“FENESTRATION” to read:
FENCE.  A structure of permanent material such as wrought iron, wire, wood,
vinyl, plastic, etc., with post foundations, erected for purposes of enclosure,
division of property or decoration.
(g)   By amending the definition of “KITCHEN” to read:
KITCHEN. Shall be as defined in the Land Use Ordinance, ROH Chapter 21.
(h)   By adding the definition of “OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION” after “NOSING” to
read:
OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION. The formal designation of the primary purpose of the
building, structure, or portion thereof. Structures shall be classified into
one or more of the occupancy groups listed in this section based on the nature
of the hazards and risks to building occupants generally associated with the
intended building or structure. Different classifications of occupancy and use
represent varying levels of hazard and risk to building occupants and adjacent
properties. Certificates of occupancy permit specific occupancy
classifications, not all uses within a group occupancy.
(i)   By adding the definition of “SPRINKLER EQUIVALENCY” after “SPLINE” to
read:
SPRINKLER EQUIVALENCY. The use of sprinkler equivalency systems, methods, or
devices of equivalent or superior quality, strength, fire resistance,
effectiveness, durability, and safety to those prescribed by the Fire Code,
provided technical documentation is submitted to the Authority Having
Jurisdiction to demonstrate equivalency and the system, method, or device is
approved for the intended purpose.
(j)   By amending the definition of “THIRD-PARTY CERTIFICATION AGENCY” to read:
THIRD-PARTY CERTIFICATION AGENCY. An approved agency operating a product,
material certification system that incorporates an initial product testing,
assessment and surveillances of a manufacturer’s quality control system. An
approved agency may be an individual who has been qualified by the department
of planning and permitting to perform single-family residential plans review
for code compliance, by having the necessary qualifications who has passed an
examination administered by the building official with a qualifying score to
review for single-family residential building permit requirements.
(k)   By amending the definition of “THIRD PARTY CERTIFIED” to read:
THIRD PARTY CERTIFIED. Either a certification obtained by a manufacturer,
indicating that the function and performance characteristics of a product or
material have been determined by testing and ongoing surveillance by an
approved third-party certification agency; or a certification of code
compliance from an approved third-party residential plans reviewer, upon a form
provided by the building official for compliance to the requirements to obtain
a building permit. Manufacturer assertion of certification is in the form of
identification in accordance with the requirements of the third-party
certification agency.
(l)   By adding the definition of “TRANSIENT” after “TOWNHOUSE” to read:
TRANSIENT. Occupancy of a dwelling unit where the occupants are primarily
residing for a period not more than 90 consecutive days.
(m)   By adding the following definition, immediately after “WALL, RETAINING”
to read:
WALL, SITE. A structure of stone, brick, masonry, concrete, or other similar
permanent material, raised to some height and erected for purposes of
enclosure, division of property or decoration.
(20)   Amending Section R301.1.1. Section R301.1.1 is amended by adding Section
R301.1.4 to read:
R301.1.4 Complete load path and uplift ties. Blocking, bridging, straps,
approved framing anchors or mechanical fasteners shall be designed and
installed to provide continuous ties from the roof to the foundation system.
Sheet metal clamps, ties or clips, shall be formed of galvanized steel or other
approved corrosion-resistant material not less than 0.040 inch (1.02 mm)
nominal thickness. Uplift resistance shall be in accordance with International
Residential Code Table R802.11.
(21)   Amending Table R301.2 (1). Table R301.2 (1) is amended to read:
TABLE R301.2(1)
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
 
WIND SPEED (mph) SEISMIC DESIGN SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM            FLOOD HAZARDS
                 CATEGORY       Weathering Termite    Decay
Per Figure
R301.2(8)        C or Do        Negligible Very heavy Moderate to FEMA
State                                                 severe
Residential Code
 
(22)   Amending Section R301.2.1. Section R301.2.1 is amended by adding Table
R301.2.1 to read:
 
TABLE R301.2.1
WIND SPEED BASED ON APPLICABLE WIND DESIGN CRITERIA
Effective Ultimate    Effective Nominal     Wind Provisions c  Windborne Debris
Design Wind Speed a   Design Wind Speed b                      Protection
Veff-ult  < 140       Veff-asd  < 111       Residential Code c Not required
140 ≤ Veff-ult  < 14111 ≤ Veff-asd  < 11Residential Code c Required
149 ≤ Veff-ult      118 ≤ Veff-asd      Alternative        Required
                                            Provisions d
 
a   The Effective Ultimate Design Wind Speed, Veff-ult , shall be obtained from
the basic wind speed definition used for structural design of Buildings in the
2018 IBC, ASCE7-16 and Section 16-1.1.
b   Wind speed conversion to the Effective Nominal Design Wind Speed, Veff-ult
shall be in accordance with section R301.2.1.3.
c   Where the Residential Code requires the Basic Wind Speed, the Effective
Nominal Design Wind Speed, Veff-ult , shall be used.
d   The applicability of the wind design provisions of the Residential Code are
exceeded and shall not be used. R301.1.1 Alternative provisions provides a list
other codes and standards which shall be used in conjunction with applicable
requirements of the Residential Code to complete the design.
(23)   Amending Section R301.2.1. Section R301.2.1 is amended to read:
R301.2.1 Wind design criteria. Buildings and portions thereof may be
constructed in accordance with the wind provisions of this code; provided that
the ultimate design wind speed Vult, determined from Figure R301.2(5)(e), is
less than 140 mph. The structural provisions of this code for wind loads are
not permitted where wind design is required as specified in Section R301.2.1.1.
Where different construction methods and structural materials are used for
various portions of a building, the applicable requirements of this section for
each portion shall apply. Where not otherwise specified, the wind loads listed
in Table R301.2(2) is adjusted for height and exposure using Table R301.2(3),
shall be used to determine design load performance requirements for wall
coverings, curtain walls, roof coverings, exterior windows, skylights, garage
doors, and exterior doors. Asphalt shingles shall be designed for wind speeds
in accordance with Section R905.2.4. A continuous load path shall be provided
to transmit the applicable uplift forces in Section R802.11.1 from the roof
assembly to the foundation.
(24)   Amending Section R301.2.1.2 and Table R301.2.1.2. Section R301.2.1.2 and
Table R301.2.1.2 are amended to read:
R301.2.1.2 Protection of openings. Windows in Buildings located in windborne
debris regions shall have glazed openings protected from windborne debris.
Glazed opening protection for windborne debris shall meet the requirements of
the Large Missile Test of ASTM E 1996 and of ASTM E 1886 referenced therein.
Exceptions:
1.   Wood structural panels with a minimum thickness of 7/16 inch (11 mm) and a
maximum panel span of 8 feet (2,438 mm) shall be permitted for opening
protection in one- and two-story Buildings classified as Group R-3 or R-
4 occupancy. Panels shall be precut so that they shall be attached to the
framing surrounding the opening containing the product with the glazed opening.
Panels shall be predrilled as required for the anchorage method and shall be
secured with the attachment hardware provided and anchors permanently installed
on the Building. Attachment in accordance with Table R301.2.1.2 of this code,
with corrosion-resistant attachment hardware provided and anchors permanently
installed on the Building is permitted for Buildings with a mean roof height of
33 feet (10,058 mm) or less where effective ultimate design wind speeds, Veff-
ult  do not exceed 175 mph (78 m/s).
2.   Glazing in accessory structures to the single-Family dwelling to include
but not limited to greenhouses and minor storage sheds.
3.   Partially enclosed Occupancy R-3 Buildings shall be permitted to be
designed without wind-borne debris protection. Partially enclosed and open
Occupancy R-3 Buildings shall also include a residential safe room in
accordance with ROH Chapter 16, Article 13, Hawaii Residential Safe Room.
TABLE R301.2.1.2
WINDBORNE DEBRIS PROTECTION FASTENING SCHEDULE FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANELS a, b, c, d
FASTENER FASTENER SPACING
TYPE     Panel span ≤ 4 Panel span > 4 foot and ≤ 6 Panel span > 6 foot and ≤ 8
         foot             foot                          foot
TABLE R301.2.1.2
WINDBORNE DEBRIS PROTECTION FASTENING SCHEDULE FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANELS a, b, c, d
                                                     FASTENER SPACING
FASTENER TYPE                                        Panel span ≤ 4 Panel span > 4 foot and ≤ 6 Panel span > 6 foot and ≤ 8
                                                     foot             foot                          foot
No. 8 Wood screw based anchor with 2-inch embedment  16"              10"                           8"
length
No. 10 Wood screw based anchor with 2-inch embedment 16"              12"                           9"
length
¼-inch lag screw based anchor with 2-inch embedment 16"              16"                           16"
length
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm,
1 pound = 0.454 kg, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.
 
a.   This table is based on 175 mph effective ultimate design wind speed and a
mean roof height of 45 feet.
b.   Fasteners shall be installed at opposing ends of the wood structural
panel. Fasteners shall be located a minimum of 1 inch from the edge of the
panel.
c   Anchors shall penetrate through the exterior wall covering with an
embedment length of 2 inches minimum into the Building frame. Fasteners shall
be located a minimum of 2-½ inches from the edge of concrete block or concrete.
d.   Where screws are attached to masonry or masonry/stucco, they shall be
attached utilizing vibration-resistant anchors having a minimum ultimate
withdrawal capacity of 1,500 pounds.
(25)   Amending Section R301.2.1.3 and Table R301.2.1.3. Section R301.2.1.3 and
Table R301.2.1.3 are amended to read:
R301.2.1.3 Wind speed conversion. When referenced documents are based on
fastest mile wind speeds, Vfm, or three second gust effective nominal wind
speeds, Veff-asd, the effective ultimate design wind speed, Veff-ult, obtained
from Figure R301.2(8) must be converted using Table R301.2.1.3.
 
TABLE R301.2.1.3
CONVERSION OF EQUIVALENT BASIC SPEEDS a,b,c
Veff- ult 107 114 120 126 133 139 152 158 164 177 183 190 202 215
Veff- asd 85  90  95  100 105 110 120 125 130 140 145 150 160 170
Vfm       71  76  80  85  90  95  104 109 114 123 128 133 142 152
For SI: 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.
 
a.   Linear interpolation is permitted.
b.   Veff-asd = Effective nominal design wind speed applicable to methods
specified in Exceptions 1 through 5 of Section 1609.1.1 of the International
Building Code. Veff-asd = 0.791 Veff-ult
c.   Veff-ult = Effective ultimate design wind speed from Table R301.2(8)
(26)   Amending Section R302.3. Section R302.3 is amended by adding Exception 3
to read:
3.   An Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) created within an existing dwelling unit
shall be permitted to be separated from the primary dwelling unit with a single
layer of 5/8-inch Type X gypsum board or the equivalent fire resistive
construction on the walls and ceilings on the ADU portion.
(27)   Amending Section R303.1. The first paragraph of Section R303.1 is
amended to read:
R303.1 Natural light and ventilation. All guest rooms and habitable rooms shall
have an aggregate glazing area of not less than 10 percent of the floor area of
such rooms. Natural ventilation shall be in accordance with the Housing Code.
(28)   Amending Section R303.4. Section R303.4 is amended to read:
R303.4 Mechanical ventilation. Mechanical ventilation must be as specified in
the Housing Code.
(29)   Amending Section R306. Section R306 is amended to read:
SECTION R306 - SANITATION
Sanitation must be as specified in ROH Chapter 16A, the Housing Code.
(30)   Amending Section R309.2. Section R309.2 is amended to read:
R309.2 Carports.  Carport floor surfaces must be of approved noncombustible
materials.
The area of floor used for parking of automobiles or other vehicles shall be
sloped to facilitate the movement of liquids to a drain or toward the main
vehicle entry doorway.
Exceptions:
1.   Asphalt surfaces shall be permitted at ground level in carports.
2.   A carport on a hillside lot serving a detached single-family dwelling may
have wood floor planking at least 2 inches (51 mm) in nominal thickness laid
with at least 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) spacing between the planks.
(31)   Amending Section R309.3. Section R309.3 is amended to read:
R309.3 Flood hazard areas. See ROH Chapter 16, Article 11, and ROH Chapter 21A.
(32)   Amending Section R310.1. Section R310.1 is amended by adding Exception 3
to read:
3.   Non-safety glazed glass jalousie bladed windows may be used for emergency
escape or rescue.
(33)   Amending Section R311.7.1. Section R311.7.1 is amended by adding
Exception 2 to read:
2.   Private stairways serving an occupant load of less than five persons shall
not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) in width.
(34)   Adding Section R313.2.2. Section R313.2.2 is added to read:
R313.2.2 Sprinkler Equivalency Requirements for Access Road and Firefighting
Water Supply. The installation of a fire sprinkler system shall only be
required for new homes where a sprinkler equivalency for fire access road or
water supply is needed. Any renovation or addition to an existing one- and two-
family dwelling that is not creating a new stand-alone dwelling unit is still
considered exempt from requiring a fire sprinkler system. The sprinkler
equivalency will be required if the fire department access and/or water supply
does not meet the requirements of ROH Chapter 20. The sprinkler equivalency
requirements include the following conditions:
(a)   Fire hydrants shall be provided for detached one- and two-family
dwellings in accordance with both of the following criteria:
(1)   The maximum distance to a fire hydrant from the closest point on the
building shall not exceeds 600 feet (183 meters), and
(2)   The distance between fire hydrants shall not exceed 800 feet (244
meters).
(b)   When Fire Department Access and Water Supply requirements of NFPA 1 2018
edition Chapter 18, as amended are not met, the applicant may request approval
for an equivalency to install an NFPA 13D automatic sprinkler system.
Exceptions: Where approved by the Fire Official.
(35)   Amending Sections R317.1 and R317.3.1. Sections R317.1 and R317.3.1 are
amended to read:
R317.1 Location required. Protection of wood and wood-based products from decay
shall be provided in the following locations by the use of wood that is
preservative-treated in accordance with AWPA U1.
R317.3.1 Fasteners for preservative-treated wood. Fasteners for non-borate
pressure preservative and fire-retardant-treated wood shall be of hot-dipped
zinc-coated galvanized steel, stainless steel, silicon bronze, or copper. The
coating weights for zinc-coated fasteners shall be in accordance with ASTM A
153.
Exceptions:
1.   One-half-inch (12.7 mm) diameter or greater steel bolts.
2.   Fasteners other than nails and timber rivets shall be permitted to be of
mechanically deposited zinc-coated steel with coating weights in accordance
with ASTM 8695, Class 55 minimum.
(36)   Amending Section R317. Section R317 is amended by adding Section R317.5
to read:
R317.5 Glued laminated, engineered or composite structural members. For the
portions of these structural members that form the structural supports of a
building or other structure, which are structural glued laminated members made
up of dimensional lumber, engineered wood products, or structural composite
lumber, pressure treated in accordance with AWPA U 1 (UC1 through UC48) or by
Light Oil Solvent Preservative (LOSP) treatment standard as approved by the
building official. Water based treatment processes are not allowed to be used
on these products unless specified by a structural engineer for use with
reduced load values.
(37)   Amending Section R317. Section R317 is amended by adding Section R317.6
to read:
R317.6 Under-floor clearance. Minimum clearance between the bottom of floor
joists or bottom of floors without joists and the ground beneath shall be 24
inches (610 mm); the minimum clearance between the bottom of girders and the
ground shall be 18 inches (457 mm).
Exception:  Open slat wood decks shall have ground clearance of at least 6
inches (152 mm) for any wood member. Accessible under-floor areas shall be
provided with a minimum 14 inches x 24 inches (356 mm x 610 mm) access opening.
Accessible under-floor areas shall be provided with a minimum 18-inch (457 mm)
by 24-inch (610 mm) access opening, effectively screened or covered. Pipes,
ducts and other construction shall not interfere with the accessibility to or
within under-floor areas. See Section M1305.1.3 of the International
Residential Code, 2018 Edition, for access requirements where mechanical
equipment is located under floors.
(38)   Amending Section R318.1.1. Section R318.1.1 is amended by adding a
second paragraph to read:
All lumber less than 2 inches (51 mm) in nominal thickness shall be identified
per bundle by means of a label consisting of the above requirements. Labels
measuring no less than 6 inches x 8 inches (152 mm x 203 mm) shall be placed on
the lower left corner of the strapped bundle.
(39)   Amending Section R318.1. Section R318.1 is amended by adding Section
R318.1.3to read:
R318.1.3 Structure protection. Where the plates, sills, and structural lumber
of new wood frame buildings are supported directly on the ground by:
1.   A concrete slab or foundation, the soil beneath the building shall be
either:
1.1   Chemically treated at the maximum label rate for control of Formosan
subterranean termites by a licensed pest control operator, or
1.2   Basaltic Termite Barrier (BTB), stainless steel termite barrier mesh, or
other termite barrier approved by the building official, installed according to
the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
2.   The perimeter of the structure shall be protected by either:
2.1   A continuous chemical barrier applied at the maximum label rates by an
operator licensed to control ground termites to the backfill in 12 inches (305
mm) lifts in a band extending at least 12 inches (305 mm) beyond the concrete;
or
2.2   A continuous barrier of BTB at least 4 inches (102 mm) in thickness
extending at least 6 inches (152 mm) beyond the concrete slab.
3.   A poured-in-place concrete foundation wall, the foundation wall shall be
protected from the adjacent soil by either:
3.1   A continuous chemical barrier applied at the maximum label rates by an
operator licensed to control ground termites to the backfill in 12 inches (305
mm) lifts in a band extending at least 12 inches (305 mm) beyond the concrete;
or
3.2   A continuous barrier of BTB at least 6 inches (152 mm) in thickness
extending the full height of the retained soil; or
3.3   An approved stainless steel termite barrier mesh shall protect all cracks
and joints.
4.   A CMU foundation wall, the foundation wall shall be protected from the
adjacent soil by either:
4.1   A continuous barrier of BTB at least 6 inches (152 mm) in thickness
extending the full height of the retained soil;
4.2   An approved stainless steel termite barrier mesh between the top of the
CMU and all wood framing; or
4.3   A continuous cap or reinforced concrete at least 4 inches (102 mm) in
thickness between the top of the CMU and all wood framing.
Exception: When a CMU foundation wall forms a retaining wall that is part of a
wood frame structure, the CMU shall be protected from the soil by a full
barrier of BTB or stainless steel termite barrier.
(40)   Amending Section R318.2. Section R318.2 is amended to read:
R318.2 Chemical termiticide treatment. Chemical termiticide treatment shall
include soil treatment and/or field applied wood treatment. The concentration,
rate of application, and method of treatment of the chemical termiticide shall
be in strict accordance with the termiticide label. Chemical treatment shall be
applied at the maximum label rate for control of Formosan subterranean termites
by a licensed pest control operator. There shall be a continuous chemical
barrier applied at the maximum label rates, by an operator licensed to control
ground termites, to the finished grade in a band extending at least 12 inches
(305 mm) beyond the concrete.
(41)   Amending Section R318.3. Section R318.3 is amended to read:
R318.3 Barriers. Approved physical barriers, such as metal or plastic sheeting
or collars specifically designed for termite prevention, Basaltic Termite
Barrier (BTB), stainless steel termite barrier mesh, or other termite barrier
approved by the building official, installed according to the manufacturer’s
installation instructions, shall be installed in manner to prevent termites
from entering the structure. Shields placed on top of an exterior foundation
wall are permitted to be used only if in combination with another method of
protection.
(42)   Amending Section R322.2. Section R322.2 is amended to read:
R322.2 Flood hazard areas. All areas that have been determined to be located
within areas of special flood hazard must be in accordance with ROH Chapter
21A.
(43)   Amending Section R323.1. Section R323.1 is amended to read:
R323.1 General. This section applies to the construction of storm shelters when
constructed as separate detached buildings or when constructed as safe rooms
within buildings for the purpose of providing safe refuge from storms that
produce high winds, such as tornados and hurricane. In addition to other
applicable requirements in this code, storm shelters shall be constructed in
accordance with ICC/NSSA-500 or ROH Chapter 16, Article 13.
(44)   Amending Chapter 3. Chapter 3 is amended by adding Sections R328 and
R328.1 through R328.4 to read:
R328 Light-transmission plastic roof structures. Awnings, patio covers,
carports and similar structures. Roofed structures constructed of light-
transmitting plastics shall comply with this section.
R328.1 Specifications. Light-transmitting plastics, including thermoplastic,
thermosetting or reinforced thermosetting plastic material shall have a self-
ignition temperature of 650°F (343°C) or greater where tested in accordance
with ASTM D 1929, a smoke-development index not greater than 450 where tested
in the manner intended for use in accordance with ASTM E 84 or UL 723, or a
maximum average smoke density rating not greater than 75 where tested in the
thickness intended to be used in accordance with ASTM D 2843 and shall conform
to one of the following combustibility classifications.
(a)   Class CC1: Plastic materials that have a burning extent of 1 inch (25 mm)
or less where tested at a nominal thickness of 0.060 inches (1.5 mm), or in the
thickness intended for use, in accordance with ASTM D 635.
(b)   Class CC2: Plastic materials that have a burning rate of 2-1 /2 inches
per minute (1.06 mis) or less where tested at a nominal thickness of 0.060
inches (1.5 mm), or in the thickness intended for use, in accordance with ASTM
D 635.
R328.2 Structural requirements. Light-transmitting plastic materials in their
assembly shall be of adequate strength and durability to withstand the loads
indicated in International Residential Code Section R301.6. Technical data
shall be submitted to establish stresses, maximum unsupported spans and such
other information for the various thickness an forms used as deemed necessary
by the building official.
R328.3 Fastening. Fastening shall be adequate to withstand the loads in Section
R301. Proper allowance shall be made for expansion and contraction of light-
transmitting plastic materials in accordance with accepted data on the
coefficient of expansion of the material and other material in conjunction with
which it is employed.
R328.4 Size limitation.
(a)   Swimming pool structures shall not exceed 5,000 square feet (465 m2) in
area and shall have a minimum fire separation distance of 10 feet (3,048 mm).
(b)   Roof coverings over carports, terraces, and patios shall have a minimum
fire separation distance of 6 feet (1,829 mm).
(45)   Amending Section R403.1.6. Section 403.1.6 is amended by adding Section
R403.1.6.2 to read:
R403.1.6.2 Concrete Strap Type Anchors. Concrete strap-type anchors made out of
cold-formed steel shall not be used along the perimeter edges of a slab on
grade where the steel does not have at least 1-1 /2 inches side cover or other
adequate protection.
(46)   Amending Chapter 6. Chapter 6 is amended by adding Section R611 to read:
SECTION R611
WALLS WITHOUT STUDS
R611.1 General. For Type V-B buildings, single-wall construction without studs
may be used in accordance with this section for repairs to existing buildings
of single-wall construction.
One-story and the uppermost story of wood frame Type V-B buildings may be of
single-wall construction with board thickness specified in this section,
without studs, when requirements of this section are met. Floor to ceiling
height shall not exceed 8 feet (2,438 mm).
Any provision of this code to the contrary notwithstanding, studding of not
less than 2-inch x 3-inch (51 mm x 76 mm) may be used on one-story buildings of
double-wall construction.
When wood-frame dwellings are supported by posts, 2-inch x 4-inch (51 mm x 102
mm) foundation bracing shall be provided.
For one-story conventional residential structures, the local practice of using
foundation blocks with termite shields shall be acceptable in all areas except
in flood hazard areas and developments adjacent to drainage facilities as
specified in ROH Section 16-11.1.
R611.2 Board for Single-Wall Construction.
R611.2.1 One and One-Eighth Inch Boards. Single-wall construction with boards
of 1-1/8 inch (28.6 mm) net thickness are not required to have girts.
R611.2.2 One-Inch Boards. Where single-wall construction is with boards of 1-
inch thickness (25 mm), no girt is required, provided approved stiffeners for
any section of such wall are spaced not more than 10 feet (3,048 mm) along the
wall.
R611.2.3 Three-Fourths-Inch Boards. Single-wall construction with boards of 3/
4-inch (19 mm) net thickness shall have girts and cross partitions at least
every 30 feet (9,144 mm).
R611.2.4 Approved Stiffeners. Approved stiffeners shall be studs at least 2-
inches x 4-inches (51 mm x 102 mm), full height window or door jambs, posts,
walls or partitions at right angles to the section of wall under construction.
R611.2.5 Girts. Girts for single-wall construction shall be not less than 2-
inch x 6-inch (51 mm x 152 mm) belt course or other approved strengthening
about mid height between the floor and ceiling on all exterior walls.
R611.2.6 Complete Load Path. Blocking, bridging, straps, approved framing
anchors or mechanical fasteners shall be designed and installed to provide
continuous ties from the roof to the foundation system. Sheet metal clamps,
ties or clips, shall be formed of ASTM A153 G90 galvanized steel or other
approved corrosion-resistant material not less than 0.040-inch (1 mm) nominal
thickness. Uplift resistance shall be in accordance with International
Residential Code Table R802.11.
(47)   Amending Subsection R903.4.1. Subsection R903.4.1 is amended to read:
R903.4.1 Secondary (emergency overflow) drains or scuppers. Where roof drains
are required, secondary emergency overflow drains or scuppers shall be provided
where the roof perimeter construction extends above the roof in such a manner
that water shall be entrapped if the primary drains allow buildup for any
reason. Overflow drains having the same size as the roof drains shall be
installed with the inlet flow line located 2 inches (51 mm) above the low point
of the roof, or overflow scuppers having three times the size of the roof
drains and having a minimum opening height of 4 inches (102 mm) shall be
installed in the adjacent parapet walls with the inlet flow located 2 inches
(51 mm) above the low point of the roof served. Installation shall be in
accordance with the Plumbing Code.
(48)   Adding Chapter 11. A new Chapter 11 is added to read:
CHAPTER 11 - ENERGY EFFICIENCY
See ROH Chapter 16B.
(49)   Amend Section M1201. Section M1201 is amended to read:
M1201.1 Scope. The provisions of Chapters 12 through 24 should only be
considered a guide and are not mandatory.
(50)   Amend Part VII. Part VII is amended to read:
Part VII-Plumbing
Part VII, which corresponds to Chapter 25 through 33, is deleted in its
entirety. Refer to ROH Chapter 19.
(51)   Amend Chapters 35 through 43. Chapters 35 through 43 have been amended
to read:
Chapters 35 through 43 Electrical. Chapters 35 through 43 are deleted in their
entirety. Refer to ROH Chapter 17.
(52)   Amending Chapter 44. Chapter 44 (Reference Standards-AISI S230) is
amended to read:
 
Standard reference number Title                      Referenced In code section
                                                     number
                          Modify ACI 318 Table
                          19.3.2.1 as follows:
                          Change the Maximum w/cm
                          ratio for Exposure Class
                          C1 to 0.50. Concrete with
                          demonstrated equivalent
                          performance is acceptable
                          in lieu of prescriptive
                          mixture proportions for
                          Exposure Class C1 and C2.
ACI 318, Section 19.3.2.1 Exposure Class C1 and C2.   
                          Exposure Class C1 and C2
                          shall apply to any exposed
                          concrete within 600 feet
                          from a shoreline when
                          light gauge metal frame is
                          used. Exposed concrete is
                          defined as any concrete
                          that is not enclosed
                          within a building
                          envelope.
                          ACI 318, Section 20.7.6
                          Anchor Bolts at the
                          Perimeter Edge of a Slab
                          on Grade. Anchor bolts
                          shall be hot dipped
ACI 318                   galvanized in accordance
Section 20.7.6            with ASTM F2329 and have a  
                          minimum concrete side
                          cover of 1-1/2 inches
                          unless provisions have
                          been made to protect the
                          anchor bolts from
                          corrosion.
                          Standard for Cold-formed   R301.1.1, R301.2.1.1,
                          Steel Framing-Prescriptive R301.2.2.3.1 R301.2.2.7,
AISI S230                 Method                     R301.2.2.8 R603.6,
                          for One- and Two-Family    R603.9.4.1, R603.9.4.2,
                          Dwellings                  R608.9.2, R608.9.3, Figure
                                                     R608.9(11), R608.10
Editor’s note:
   The column headings have been modified to maintain consistent formatting.
(53)   Amending Section T101.1. Section T101.1 is amended by adding an
Exemption to read:
Exemption: A new single-family dwelling that receives a variance from the chief
energy officer of the Hawaii State Energy Office.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 1, § 16-1.2) (Added by Ord. 12-34, Am. Ords. 20-7, 24-
15, 25-11)
ARTICLE 2: RELOCATION OF BUILDINGS
Sections
   
16-2.1   Applicability
   
16-2.2   Application for relocation permit
   
16-2.3   Performance security
   
16-2.4   Issuance of permit
   
16-2.5   Identification
   
16-2.6   Police escorts
   
16-2.7   Effect of permit issuance
   
16-2.8   Permit duration—Extensions
   
16-2.9   Permit—Denial
   
16-2.10   Default in performance
   
16-2.11   Entry upon premises
   
16-2.12   Permit fees
   
16-2.13   Building permit not required
   
16-2.14   Violation—Penalty
§ 16-2.1 Applicability.
   
Chapter 18, as amended, to the contrary notwithstanding, no person may move or
cause to be moved any building or structure into or within the city without
complying with this article and all other applicable provisions of
Chapter 16, as amended;
Chapter 17, as amended; and
Chapter 19, as amended; provided that any movement of a building or structure
that is confined within the boundaries of a single lot will not be subject to
this article, but will be subject to
Chapter 18 and all other applicable provisions of the Building Code, as
amended; Electrical Code,
Chapter 17, as amended; and the Plumbing Code,
Chapter 19, as amended. The transportation of factory-built housing is governed
by
Article 3.
(Sec. 16-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 2, §
16-2.1) (Am. Ord. 90-57)
§ 16-2.2 Application for relocation permit.
(a)   Any person intending to move any building or structure shall apply to the
building official for a relocation permit in writing upon a form furnished by
the building official and shall set forth such information as the building
official may reasonably require to carry out the purposes of this article.
(b)   The application shall be signed by (1) the owner or owners of the site
upon which the building or structure is to be moved, or by the person or
persons having the right of legal possession of such site for at least a period
of five years from the date of the application; (2) the owner or owners of the
building or structure to be relocated; and (3) the person or persons hired to
relocate such building or structure, and shall be accompanied by four sets of
plans and specifications showing all work to be performed on the building or
structure upon relocation to the new site; provided if the building or
structure is to be moved to and stored at locations specifically used as
storage areas for buildings and structures and such storage of buildings or
structures is permitted under the zoning ordinances, the application for a
relocation permit may be signed by the person or persons having legal
possession of such locations and by the person or persons required under (2)
and (3) above, and the provisions for the submission of plans and
specifications shall not be applicable. The plans and specifications shall be
prepared, processed, and inspected in the same manner as provided under
Chapter 18.
(Sec. 16-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 2, §
16-2.2) (Am. Ord. 90-57)
§ 16-2.3 Performance security.
   Upon filing of an application for a relocation permit, the applicant shall
deposit with the city the sum of $1,000, either in cash or in a certified or
cashier’s check, as security for the faithful performance by the applicant in
obtaining the required permits to transport this structure, any police escort,
and to repair or pay for any property owned by the city or by others that has
been damaged in the process of moving such building or structure. Upon the
faithful performance of such obligation by the applicant or by any person on
behalf of the applicant, to the satisfaction of the building office, and if no
such damage has resulted thereby, the sum so deposited shall be returned to the
applicant. Applicant shall forfeit the performance security if building or
structure is moved without the required permits or police escort. If the
applicant fails or refuses to repair or pay for such damage within 30 days
after written notification thereof by the building official, the building
official shall use such sums deposited or any portion thereof to cause the
repair of such property so damaged. Any money remaining after such repair has
been completed and has not been forfeited shall be returned to the applicant.
In lieu of the aforementioned $1,000 security deposit, the applicant may
establish with the city a revolving fund for the amount of $5,000.
(Sec. 16-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 2, §
16-2.3) (Am. Ords. 90-57, 07-22, 12-34)
§ 16-2.4 Issuance of permit.
   If the work described in the application for a permit and in the plans and
specifications submitted therewith conform to the requirements of
Chapter 18 and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and the cash or checks, or
both, as required under §
16-2.3 have been filed or deposited, and the fee specified in §
16-2.12 has been paid, and the permit or permits as required under §
15-21.12 has or have been issued by the State director of transportation or the
city director of transportation services, or both, the building official shall
issue a relocation permit. In issuing the permit, the building official shall
impose therein such terms and conditions as the building official may deem
reasonable and proper, including but not limited to:
(1)   The designation of route to be followed as specified in the permit or
permits issued pursuant to §
15-21.12;
(2)   The presence of a police officer during the entire period that such
building or structure is in the process of being moved from its original site
to the new site designated in the permit;
(3)   Height and width restrictions of the building or structure being
relocated to provide adequate clearance from any and all obstructions that may
be encountered on the route so designated;
(4)   The description of the site upon which the building or structure is to be
moved;
(5)   The condition to which such building or structure must be restored while
in storage; and
(6)   The repair of or payment for any damage done to any property owned by the
city or others in the process of moving a building or structure, such terms and
conditions to be written upon the permit or appended in writing thereto.
The plans and specifications after approval by the building official shall not
be changed, modified, or altered without authorization from the building
official and all work shall be done in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications. The building official shall retain one set of such plans and
specifications.
(Sec. 16-2.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 2, §
16-2.4) (Am. Ords. 90-57, 96-58)
§ 16-2.5 Identification.
   All buildings or structures that are to be relocated shall be identified
with appropriate designations by the building official, after it has been
determined by the building official that such buildings or structures may be
relocated. No building or structure or any portion thereof shall be moved
without such identification.
(Sec. 16-2.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 2, §
16-2.5) (Am. Ord. 90-57)
§ 16-2.6 Police escorts.
(a)   The applicant shall apply to the police department of the city for escort
services of a police officer in conformity with the requirements of §
16-2.4. The applicant shall bear the costs of such services.
(b)   In addition to any other requirement that may be provided by law for the
submission of reports in the event of any damage to property resulting from the
moving of any building or structure, the police officer assigned to provide
escort service shall submit a report to the building official of any such
damage.
(Sec. 16-2.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 2, §
16-2.6) (Am. Ord. 90-57)
§ 16-2.7 Effect of permit issuance.
(a)   The issuance of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall
not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of
Chapter 18, as amended;
Chapter 17, as amended;
Chapter 19, as amended, or of any other law.
(b)   The issuance of a permit shall not prevent the building official from
thereafter requiring the correction of errors in the plans and specifications
or from halting building operations when in violation of the chapters or of any
other law; nor shall it prevent the institution of criminal action and the
imposition of penalty as prescribed under §
16-2.14 for violation of this article.
(Sec. 16-2.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 2, §
16-2.7) (Am. Ord. 90-57)
§ 16-2.8 Permit duration—Extensions.
   All work for which a relocation permit is issued under this article shall be
completed within 120 days of the date of issuance of the permit, unless
extended for good cause by the building official. Any request for extension
shall be made not less than 15 days before the date of expiration of the
permit.
(Sec. 16-2.8, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 2, §
16-2.8) (Am. Ord. 90-57)
§ 16-2.9 Permit—Denial.
   No permit shall be issued to move any building or structure:
(1)   That may result in more than one housing accommodation to be situated on
any lot in areas determined by the board of water supply to lack sufficient
water supply for any one or more of the following: domestic use, fire
protection, or sanitation; or
(2)   That has deteriorated or been damaged to an extent greater than 50
percent of the cost of replacement (new) of such building or structure.
(Sec. 16-2.9, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 2, §
16-2.9) (Am. Ord. 90-57)
§ 16-2.10 Default in performance.
(a)   Whenever the building official finds that a default has occurred in the
performance of any term or condition of a relocation permit, or upon the
failure of the applicant to complete the work required thereby or as described
in the plans and specifications therefor within the time prescribed, the
building official shall give a violation notice to the owner.
(b)   If the owner has not complied with such notice, the building official may
institute any other legal or equitable proceedings, in addition to those
specified herein, to demolish or remove the building and to recover the cost of
such work from the owner or attach a lien to the property.
(Sec. 16-2.10, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 2,
§ 16-2.10) (Am. Ord. 90-57)
§ 16-2.11 Entry upon premises.
(a)   The building official, the surety, and the duly authorized
representatives of either the building official or the surety, shall have
access to the premises described in the relocation permit for the purpose of
inspecting the progress of the work.
(b)   In the event of any default or failure to perform as provided under §
16-2.10, the surety or any person employed or engaged on its behalf, or the
building official or any person employed or engaged on its behalf, shall have
the right to go upon the premises to complete the required work or to demolish
and remove the building or structure.
(c)   It is unlawful for the owner or any person in legal possession of the
premises to interfere with or obstruct the ingress or egress to or from any
such premises of any authorized representative or agent of any surety or of the
city engaged in the work of completing or demolishing and removing any building
or structure for which a relocation permit has been issued, after a default has
occurred as provided under §
16-2.10.
(Sec. 16-2.11, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 2,
§ 16-2.11) (Am. Ord. 90-57)
§ 16-2.12 Permit fees.
   The fees for the issuance of relocation permits shall be computed in
accordance with
Table No. 18-A of
Chapter 18; provided if a permit is issued after the commencement of the
relocation of a building or structure for which a permit is required, the fee
shall be increased by an additional amount of $200.
(Sec. 16-2.12, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 2,
§ 16-2.12) (Am. Ords. 90-57, 93-75)
§ 16-2.13 Building permit not required.
   No building permit as provided under
Chapter 18 shall be required for any work required under the relocation permit
or for any work of completion or demolition undertaken pursuant to §
16-2.10; provided all other provisions in the chapter shall be fully complied
with when not in conflict or inconsistent with this article.
(Sec. 16-2.13, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 2,
§ 16-2.13) (Am. Ord. 90-57)
§ 16-2.14 Violation—Penalty.
   For violation and penalty provisions, see
Article 10 of this chapter.
(Sec. 16-2.14, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 2,
§ 16-2.14) (Am. Ord. 90-57)
ARTICLE 3: FACTORY-BUILT BUILDINGS
Sections
   
16-3.1   Applicability
   
16-3.2   Definitions
   
16-3.3   Building permit required
   
16-3.4   Building permit fee
   
16-3.5   Insignia of approval
   
16-3.6   Performance of plumbing and electrical work
   
16-3.7   Plans and specifications
   
16-3.8   Inspections
   
16-3.9   Manufacturer’s label
   
16-3.10   Transporting factory-built buildings
   
16-3.11   Violations—Penalty
§ 16-3.1 Applicability.
(a)   These provisions are applicable to the design, construction,
installation, and transportation of factory-built building (FBB) within the
city. Unless otherwise specified, this article shall be applicable only to FBB
that is sold or offered for sale to first users as defined in §
16-3.2.
   Exception: Manufactured homes manufactured and certified in accordance with
the Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards as adopted by the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. Foundations,
exterior stairs, additions and accessory structures shall comply with
Article 1, Adoption of the International Building Code and International
Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings.
(b)   All provisions of the building, housing, electrical, and plumbing codes
shall be applicable unless indicated otherwise in this article.
(Sec. 16-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 3, §
16-3.1) (Am. Ord. 90-57, 07-22, 12-34)
§ 16-3.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Factory-Built Building or FBB. Any structure or portion thereof designed
primarily for occupancy by human beings, which is either entirely prefabricated
or assembled at a place other than the building site.
First User. A person, firm, or corporation who initially installs FBB within
this State. A person who subsequently purchases an installed FBB is not a first
user within the meaning of this definition.
Insignia of Approval. A tab, stamp, label, or other device issued by the
building official to indicate compliance with the statutes and these rules.
Installation. The assembly of FBB on site and the process of affixing FBB to
land, a foundation, or an existing building.
Manufacture. The process of making, fabricating, constructing, forming, or
assembling a product from raw, unfinished, or semifinished materials to produce
FBB.
Site. The parcel of land on which FBB is installed.
(Sec. 16-3.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 3, §
16-3.2) (Am. Ords. 90-57, 07-22, 12-34)
§ 16-3.3 Building permit required.
   No person shall install FBB or cause the foregoing to be done without first
obtaining a building permit from the building official for each FBB.
(Sec. 16-3.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 3, §
16-3.3) (Am. Ords. 90-57, 07-22, 12-34)
§ 16-3.4 Building permit fee.
   A fee for each building permit as set forth in
Table 18-A of
Chapter 18 shall be paid to the building official. The fee shall be based on
the valuation of the building in place complete, including the cost of carport,
fences, walls, etc.
(Sec. 16-3.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 3, §
16-3.4) (Am. Ords. 90-57, 07-22, 12-34)
§ 16-3.5 Insignia of approval.
(a)   FBB manufactured in this city that is sold or offered for sale to first
users within this city shall bear the insignia of approval issued by the
building official indicating that the FBB is in compliance with this article.
(b)   FBB manufactured outside the city shall bear the insignia of approval
issued by any governmental or inspectional agency approved by the building
official.
(Sec. 16-3.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 3, §
16-3.5) (Am. Ords. 90-57, 07-22, 12-34)
§ 16-3.6 Performance of plumbing and electrical work.
(a)   All electrical and plumbing work performed within this State shall comply
with State of Hawaii contracting and licensing laws and regulations.
(b)   All electrical and plumbing work to be performed at the factory outside
of this State must be accomplished:
(1)   By licensed electricians or plumbers, respectively, of the jurisdiction
having authority in which the factory is located, if the manufacturer does not
submit a quality control manual that is approved by the building official; or
(2)   Under the supervision of a licensed supervising electrician or master
plumber, respectively, of the jurisdiction having authority in which the
factory is located, if the manufacturer submits a quality control manual that
is approved by the building official.
(Sec. 16-3.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 3, §
16-3.6) (Am. Ords. 90-57, 07-22, 12-34)
§ 16-3.7 Plans and specifications.
(a)   For each model of FBB, three sets of plans and specifications shall be
submitted and approval obtained before fabrication.
(b)   With each application for a building permit, three sets of installation
plans and specifications including the plot plan shall be submitted.
(c)   Preparation of plans and observation of construction shall be by a
professional architect or structural engineer licensed in the State of Hawaii.
(Sec. 16-3.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 3, §
16-3.7) (Am. Ords. 90-57, 07-22)
§ 16-3.8 Inspections.
(a)   FBB manufactured outside of the city shall be inspected by an approved
third party inspectional agency.
(b)   The building official may make periodic in-plant inspections to verify
that the FBB produced comply with the plans as approved by the building
official.
(c)   Special inspectors shall be hired as required by the building code. Once
construction has been completed, the special inspector shall submit a final
signed special inspection report along with a copy of the third party
inspection worksheet showing special inspection done at the manufacturing
plant.
(Sec. 16-3.8, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 3, §
16-3.8) (Am. Ords. 90-57, 07-22, 12-34)
§ 16-3.9 Manufacturer’s label.
   A manufacturer’s label on a metal plate showing the manufacturer’s name,
serial number of the building, manufacture date, design load criteria, and
third party inspection stamp shall be securely fastened on the FBB.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 3, § 16-3.9) (Added by Ord. 07-22)
§ 16-3.10 Transporting factory-built buildings.
(a)   The transportation of FBB shall be governed by the city and State traffic
codes.
(b)   
Article 2, Relocation of Buildings, shall be applicable to FBB once it has been
installed on a zoning lot.
(Sec. 16-3.9, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 3, §
16-3.10) (Am. Ords. 90-57, 07-22, 12-34)
§ 16-3.11 Violations—Penalty.
   For violation and penalty provisions, see
Article 10.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 3, § 16-3.11) (Added by Ord. 90-57; Am. Ord. 07-22)
ARTICLE 4: THATCHED MATERIAL ON EXTERIOR OF BUILDING—PROTECTION
AGAINST EXPOSURE FIRES
Sections
   
16-4.1   Applicability
   
16-4.2   Fire-extinguishing systems
   
16-4.3   Sprinkler requirements
   
16-4.4   Violation—Penalty
§ 16-4.1 Applicability.
(a)   Thatched material on the exterior of buildings shall be permitted only
upon buildings located in areas zoned for resort use which primarily service
the tourist trade when approved by the building official.
(b)   The thatched material permitted in this article shall be used for
decorative purposes on the roof or wall of buildings. The building, independent
of the thatched material, shall comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
(c)   When thatched material is used as permitted in this article, and an
appropriate permit is obtained therefor in accordance with
Article 1, outside sprinklers for protection against exposure fires shall be
required as hereinafter provided.
(Sec. 16-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 4, §
16-4.1) (Am. Ord. 90-57)
§ 16-4.2 Fire-extinguishing systems.
(a)   General. Thatched materials used on the roof of a building shall be
protected by manually operated sprinkler heads, with adequate water supply,
pipe size, and sprinkler head spacing in accordance with sprinkler system
requirements set forth in this article.
(b)   Thatched materials used on the wall of a building shall be protected by
manually operated outside sprinklers. Size and spacing of sprinklers and pipe
size shall be in accordance with Chapter 6 of NFPA 13, Outside Sprinklers for
Protection Against Exposure Fires, of the National Fire Codes of the National
Fire Protection Association. Controls shall be as set forth in this article.
(Sec. 16-4.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 4, §
16-4.2) (Am. Ord. 90-57)
§ 16-4.3 Sprinkler requirements.
(a)   General. Sprinklers shall be located at the high point of the roof.
Upright or pendant sprinklers shall be used for gable roofs. Sidewall
sprinklers shall be used for shed roofs.
(b)   Spacing of sprinklers. The maximum width of roof with one row of
sprinklers shall be as follows:
 
Roof Slope     Orifice Size Width of Roof
1:3 or greater 3/8-inch     15 feet
1:3 or greater 1/2-inch     20 feet
1:3 or greater 17/32-inch   25 feet
Less than 1:3  3/8-inch     10 feet
Less than 1:3  1/2-inch     15 feet
Less than 1:3  17/32-inch   20 feet
 
Maximum spacing of sprinklers on branch lines (along ridge) shall be as
follows: 3/8-inch orifice—6 feet; 1/2-inch orifice—8 feet; 17/32-inch
orifice—10 feet.
Conical roofs may be protected with one sprinkler at the apex if the diameter
of the roof does not exceed the width of roof referred to above.
Where the width of a roof exceeds the width allowed for one row of sprinklers,
as provided in the table above, two or more rows of sprinklers shall be
required. The rows of sprinklers shall be placed such that the entire roof area
is protected.
(c)   Areas protected.
(1)   Each area (zone) of thatched material that is separated from another
thatched area by an open space of 20 feet or more or by noncombustible
construction of 20 feet or more shall be considered a separate area (zone).
(2)   Risers to each separate zone shall not be less than that shown in
subsection (e), except as modified as follows.
(A)   More than one zone may be protected by one valve, if the supply is
adequate.
(B)   If one area (zone) is larger than can be protected with the existing
supply, the zones can be subdivided into subzones if the following criteria are
met: An area of at least 800 square feet is protected by a subzone control
valve; there is at least a 10 percent overlap in coverage of adjoining
subzones; and operation of the manual control valves will automatically
transmit an alarm to the fire department.
(d)   Water supply. The sprinkler system shall have a separate connection to
the water main in the street, to an approved automatic fire-extinguishing
system supply line, to a wet standpipe supply line, or to a domestic supply of
adequate size. The water supply required shall be determined from either of the
following:
(1)   Flow per sprinkler for the largest zone, with residual pressure at the
highest sprinkler at 15 pounds per square inch with all heads operating, shall
be as follows:
 
Orifice Size Gallons Per Minute
3/8-inch     15
1/2-inch     20
17/32-inch   25
 
(2)   The flow shall be hydraulically calculated so as to discharge at least
0.11 gallons per minute per square foot of surface area to be sprinklered.
(e)   Riser and pipe size. Pipe sizes shall be determined from the flow as
calculated above. However, no pipe less than 1 inch in size shall be used. The
following table may be used in conjunction with this flow calculation for the
selection of pipe or riser sizes.
 
         Pipe or Riser Size
Orifice  1 inch 1-1/     1-1/     2 inches 2-1/     3 inches 3-1/     4 inches
Size            4 inches 2 inches          2 inches          2 inches
         No. of Sprinklers
3/8-inch 3      4        7        11       21       37       40       40
1/2-inch 2      3        5        8        15       27       40       40
17/32-   1      2        4        6        11       19       30       38
inch
 
(f)   Number of sprinklers served. The number of sprinklers on a branch line
shall not exceed six. Center feed shall be used for six or more sprinklers. The
number of sprinklers under control of each control valve shall not exceed 40.
At the location of each valve, there shall be a drain connection and a 1/4-inch
valve outlet test connection to accommodate a pressure gauge.
(g)   Material installed above grade.
(1)   Piping shall be galvanized steel schedule 40 with galvanized malleable
iron fittings or hard drawn copper with silver solder fittings. Pipes shall be
securely fastened to the structure.
(2)   Valves shall be the manual type approved and listed by the Underwriters’
Laboratories or by other approved testing agencies. Valves shall be installed
outdoors and so located as to be readily accessible in case of fire. Signs
indicating the use of valves shall be conspicuously posted.
(h)   Local alarm. Any one system with 20 or more sprinklers under control of
one valve shall be complemented with a local fire alarm, either electrically or
mechanically operated.
(Sec. 16-4.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 4, §
16-4.3) (Am. Ords. 90-57, 97-16)
§ 16-4.4 Violation—Penalty.
   For violation and penalty provisions, see
Article 10.
(Sec. 16-4.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 4, §
16-4.4) (Am. Ord. 90-57)
ARTICLE 5: ENERGY CONSERVATION
Editor’s note:
   See
Chapter 16B, Building Energy Conservation Code, which was added by Ord. 12-34.
ARTICLE 6: RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOLS
Sections
   
16-6.1   Public purpose
   
16-6.2   Fences and other protective devices
   
16-6.3   New construction
   
16-6.4   Modifications
   
16-6.5   Exception
   
16-6.6   Violation—Penalty
§ 16-6.1 Public purpose.
   It is found, declared, and determined that the maintenance of swimming pools
and other similar pools without precautionary measures constitutes a serious
public hazard, particularly to children.
(Sec. 13-20.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 6, § 16-6.1)
§ 16-6.2 Fences and other protective devices.
   See Sections 3109.4 and 3109.5 of the International Building Code, as
amended. All provisions of the building, electrical, and plumbing codes shall
be applicable unless otherwise indicated in this section.
(Sec. 13-20.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 6, § 16-6.2) (Am.
Ord. 12-34)
§ 16-6.3 New construction.
   No building permit to construct a swimming, dipping, or wading pool covered
by this article shall be issued, unless provision is made for a fence, wall, or
other enclosure or, in the alternative, a pool cover or similar protective
device, as required by this article.
(Sec. 13-20.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 6, § 16-6.3)
§ 16-6.4 Modifications.
(a)   Upon a showing of good cause, the building official may:
(1)   Make modifications in individual cases with respect to the height,
nature, or location of the fence, wall, or other enclosure, gates, doors, or
latches required by this article; or
(2)   Permit the use of protective devices or structures other than, and in
lieu of, those specified in this article; provided that in any case, the degree
of protection afforded by the modifications or substitute devices, or terrain
or structures is not less than the protection afforded by the fence, wall or
other enclosure, gate, door, latch, pool cover, or protection device, as the
case may be, described in §
16-6.2.
(b)   Upon a showing of good cause, the building official may grant extensions
of time for compliance. Such extensions shall not exceed 30 days at a time.
(Sec. 13-20.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 6, § 16-6.4)
§ 16-6.5 Exception.
   This article shall not apply to any swimming, dipping, or wading pool on the
premises of a hotel as defined in the land use ordinance.
(Sec. 13-20.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 6, § 16-6.5) (Am.
Ord. 90-97)
§ 16-6.6 Violation—Penalty.
   For violation and penalty provisions, see
Article 10.
(Sec. 13-20.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 6, § 16-6.6) (Am.
Ords. 90-97, 12-34)
ARTICLE 7: PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS
Sections
   
16-7.1   Applicability
   
16-7.2   General
   
16-7.3   Construction details
   
16-7.4   Illumination
   
16-7.5   Operation and maintenance
   
16-7.6   Entrapment avoidance
   
16-7.7   Lifesaving equipment
   
16-7.8   Heaters
   
16-7.9   Fences and other protective devices
   
16-7.10   Violation—Penalty
§ 16-7.1 Applicability.
   See Section 3109.1 of the International Building Code, as amended. All
provisions of the building, electrical, and plumbing codes shall be applicable
unless indicated otherwise in this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 7, § 16-7.1) (Added by Ord. 90-57; Am. Ord. 12-34)
§ 16-7.2 General.
(a)   Building permit required. No person shall install any swimming pool or
cause the foregoing to be done without first obtaining a building permit.
(b)   Plans and specifications. Plans, engineering calculations, and other data
shall be submitted with each application for a permit and shall be prepared by
an engineer or architect licensed by the State of Hawaii.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 7, § 16-7.2) (Added by Ord. 90-57)
§ 16-7.3 Construction details.
   Public swimming pools are under the purview of the State department of
health, Hawaii Administrative Rules, Title 11, Chapter 10.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 7, § 16-7.3) (Added by Ord. 90-57; Am. Ord. 12-34)
§ 16-7.4 Illumination.
   Illumination of the pool interior shall be provided for night use with not
less than 0.50 watts per square foot of pool surface area.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 7, § 16-7.4) (Added by Ord. 90-57)
§ 16-7.5 Operation and maintenance.
   Operation and maintenance of public swimming pools shall be in accordance to
the State department of health, Hawaii Administrative Rules, Title 11, Chapter
10, as amended.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 7, § 16-7.5) (Added by Ord. 12-34)
§ 16-7.6 Entrapment avoidance.
   See Section 3109.5 of the International Building Code, as amended.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 7, § 16-7.6) (Added by Ord. 12-34)
§ 16-7.7 Lifesaving equipment.
   One unit of lifesaving equipment shall be provided for each 2,000 square
feet of swimming pool area and shall consist of:
(1)   A ring buoy with a minimum outside diameter of 24 inches to which shall
be attached a length of 0.25-inch rope not less than 1.5 times the maximum
width of the pool;
(2)   A shepherd’s crook with minimum length handle of 12 feet; and
(3)   Where no lifeguard is provided, a warning sign shall be placed in plain
view and shall state “Warning – No Lifeguard on Duty” with letters at least 4
inches high.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 7, § 16-7.7) (Added by Ord. 90-57)
§ 16-7.8 Heaters.
   Heaters shall comply with the electrical, plumbing, and building energy
conservation codes and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions. Water heaters exceeding 200,000 BTUs per hour shall comply with
Chapters 220 through 223, Title 12, Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, State of
Hawaii.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 7, § 16-7.8) (Added by Ord. 90-57; Am. Ord. 12-34)
§ 16-7.9 Fences and other protective devices.
   See Section 3109.3 of the International Building Code, as amended.
   Exception: This section shall not apply to any swimming, dipping, or wading
pool on the premises of a hotel as defined in the land use ordinance.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 7, § 16-7.9) (Added by Ord. 90-57; Am. Ord. 12-34)
§ 16-7.10 Violation—Penalty.
   For violation and penalty provisions, see
Article 10.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 7, § 16-7.10) (Added by Ord. 90-57)
ARTICLE 8: TERMITE-INFESTED LUMBER
Sections
   
16-8.1   Definitions
   
16-8.2   Infested lumber—Prohibited
   
16-8.3   Infested lumber—Destruction after removal
   
16-8.4   Infested lumber—Construction prohibited
   
16-8.5   Violation—Penalty
§ 16-8.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Borer-Infested Lumber. Any plank, board, stave, or piece of wood of whatever
size that has been or is infested by borers.
Structure. Any edifice, building, or piece of work artificially built up or
composed of parts and joined together in some definite manner, whether the same
be movable or immovable.
Termite-Infested Lumber. Any plank, board, stave, or piece of wood of whatever
size, which has been or is infested by termites.
(Sec. 13-17.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 8, § 16-8.1)
§ 16-8.2 Infested lumber—Prohibited.
   It is unlawful for any person to possess any termite-infested or borer-
infested lumber except that which is part of a structure.
(Sec. 13-17.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 8, § 16-8.2)
§ 16-8.3 Infested lumber—Destruction after removal.
   It is unlawful for any person to keep any termite-infested or borer-infested
lumber upon such person’s place or property after the same has been removed
from a structure, unless such person destroys the same within five days after
such removal. The keeping of such infested lumber is a nuisance.
(Sec. 13-17.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 8, § 16-8.3)
§ 16-8.4 Infested lumber—Construction prohibited.
   It is unlawful for any person to use any termite-infested lumber in the
erection of any structure or as a part of any structure.
(Sec. 13-17.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 8, § 16-8.4)
§ 16-8.5 Violation—Penalty.
   For violation and penalty provisions, see
Article 10.
(Sec. 13-17.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 8, § 16-8.5) (Am.
Ord. 07-22)
ARTICLE 9: ADOPTION OF THE HAWAII STATE EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Sections
   
16-9.1   Adoption of the Hawaii State Existing Building Code
§ 16-9.1 Adoption of the Hawaii State Existing Building Code.
   The Hawaii State Existing Building Code adopted by the State of Hawaii on
November 17, 2020, which adopts with modifications the 2018 edition of the
International Existing Building Code as published by the International Code
Council, Inc., 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001, is
adopted by reference and made a part hereof, subject to the following
amendments.
(1)   Amending Section 101.2. Section 101.2 is amended by deleting the
Exception.
(2)   Amending Section 101.4.2. Section 101.4.2 is amended to read:
[A] 101.4.2 Buildings previously occupied.
The legal occupancy of an existing building currently in existence on the date
of the adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change,
except as covered in this code, the Fire Code, or as deemed necessary by the
code official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the
public.
(3)   Amending Section 101.7. Section 101.7 is amended to read:
[A] 101. 7 Correction of violations of other codes.
Repairs or alterations mandated by the Building, Housing, or Fire Codes or
mandated by any ordinance adopted pursuant to law shall conform only to the
requirements of that code, or ordinance and shall not be required to conform to
this code unless the code requiring such repair or alteration so provides.
(4)   Deleting Sections 103 through 115. Sections 103 through 115 are deleted.
(5)   Adding Section 116. A new Section 116 is added to read:
Section 116 EMERGENCY MEASURES.
See ROH Section 16-1.1, Amendment (21) - UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT.
(6)   Amending Section 117.2. Section 117.2 is amended to read:
Section 117.2 DEMOLITION.
Section 117.2. See ROH Chapter 16A, Article 10.
(7)   Amending Section 202. Section 202 is amended to read:
(A)   Adding the following definition to read:
“CITY.” The City and County of Honolulu.
(B)   Amending the definition of “CODE OFFICIAL” to read:
“CODE OFFICIAL.” The director of planning and permitting of the City or the
director’s authorized representative.
(C)   Amending the definition of “SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT” to read:
“SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.” Has the same meaning as defined in ROH Chapter 21A.
(8)   Amending Section 301.3.1. Section 301.3.1 is amended to read:
301.3.1 Prescriptive compliance method.  Repairs, alterations, additions and
changes of occupancy complying with International Existing Building Code
Chapter 5 and the International Fire Code shall be considered in compliance
with the provisions of this code.
(9)   Amending Section 302.3. Section 302.3 is amended to read:
302.3 Additional codes.  Alterations, repairs, additions and changes of
occupancy to, or relocation of, existing buildings and structures shall comply
with the provisions for alterations, repairs, additions and changes of
occupancy or relocation, respectively, in this code and ROH Chapter 16B
Building Energy Conservation Code, ROH Chapter 20, Fire Code of the City and
County of Honolulu, ROH Chapter 19, Plumbing Code, and ROH Chapter 17,
Electrical Code. Where provisions of the other codes conflict with provisions
of this code, the provisions of this code shall take precedence.
(10)   Amending Section 502.6. Section 502.6 is amended to read:
502.6 Smoke alarms in existing portions of a building. Where an addition is
made to a building or structure of a Group R or 1-1 occupancy, the existing
building shall be provided with smoke alarms in accordance with Section 502.6.1
through 502.6.3 of this code.
(11)   Amending Section 502.6. Section 502.6 is amended by adding Sections
502.6.1 through 502.6.3 to read:
502.6.1 Single- and multi-station smoke alarms. Existing Group 1-1 and R
occupancies shall be provided with single-station smoke alarms.
Exceptions:
1.   Where the code that was in effect at the time of construction required
smoke alarms and smoke alarms complying with those requirements are already
provided.
2.   Where smoke alarms have been installed in occupancies and dwellings that
were not required to have them at the time of construction, additional smoke
alarms shall not be required; provided that the existing smoke alarms comply
with requirements that were in effect at the time of installation.
3.   Where smoke detectors connected to a fire alarm system have been installed
as a substitute for smoke alarms.
502.6.2 Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be
installed within an individual dwelling or sleeping unit, the smoke alarms
shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm shall
activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. Physical interconnection of
smoke alarms shall not be required where listed wireless alarms are installed
and all alarms sound upon activation of one alarm. The alarm shall be clearly
audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors
closed.
Exceptions:
1.   Interconnection is not required in buildings that are not undergoing
alterations, repairs or construction of any kind.
2.   Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where
alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling
finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or
basement available which could provide access for interconnection without the
removal of interior finishes.
502.6.3 Power source. Single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary
power from the building wiring; provided that such wiring is served from a
commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms
with integral strobes that are not equipped with battery backup shall be
connected to an emergency electrical system. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal
when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a
disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent protection.
Exceptions:
1.   Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in existing
buildings where no construction is taking place.
2.   Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in buildings that
are not served from a commercial power source.
3.   Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in existing areas
of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the
removal of interior walls or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless
there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access
for building wiring without the removal of interior finishes.
(12)   Deleted Chapters 12 through 23. Chapters 12 through 23 are deleted in
their entirety.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 9, § 16-9.1) (Added by Ord. 12-34, Am. Ords. 20-7, 24-
15, 25-11)
ARTICLE 10: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Sections
   
16-10.1   Generally
   
16-10.2   Notice of violation
   
16-10.3   Criminal prosecution
   
16-10.4   Administrative enforcement
§ 16-10.1 Generally.
(a)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish, equip,
use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure, or cause the same to be
done, contrary to or in violation of this code.
(b)   It is unlawful for any person without the necessary State licenses to
erect, construct, enlarge, alter, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish
any building or structure; provided that an owner-builder may do so for
residential or farm buildings or structures in strict compliance with the
provisions of HRS Chapter 444 applicable to owner-builders, including but not
limited to HRS §§ 444-2.5 and 444-9.1.
(c)   The department shall provide owner-builders with instructions on their
obligations to follow all employment, occupational safety, environmental, and
tax regulations in addition to their obligations under HRS Chapter 444 and this
code, and may impose reasonable conditions in addition to those already
provided for by law, relating to hours of work, noise, dust, runoff, parking
for workers, operation of heavy equipment, safety of workers and
subcontractors, and requirements for the demolition and remediation of
structures containing lead based paint, asbestos, or other potentially
hazardous materials. Failure by an owner-builder to comply with reasonable
conditions imposed will be deemed a violation of this code and subject to
criminal and administrative enforcement to the same extent as any other
violation of this code.
(d)   Service of enforcement notices issued by the building official.
(1)   The building official may serve an enforcement notice issued pursuant to
this chapter by registered or certified mail, with return receipt requested,
addressed to the last known address of each violator identified in the
enforcement notice, or by delivering a copy of the enforcement notice to the
violator in person.
(2)   The building official also may serve an enforcement notice issued
pursuant to this chapter by leaving a copy of the enforcement notice at the
violator’s residence, place of employment, or usual place of business, or by
physically posting a copy of the enforcement notice in a prominent location on
the property that is the subject of the enforcement notice, in a conspicuous
manner that is likely to be discovered.
(3)   If the building official is not able to serve the enforcement notice by
any of the methods described in subdivisions (1) and (2), the building official
may serve the enforcement notice on one or more violators by publishing a copy
of the enforcement notice once each week for two consecutive weeks in a daily
or weekly publication that is in general circulation within the city.
(4)   Where one or more violators identified in an enforcement notice have the
same mailing address, place of residence, place of employment, or usual place
of business, the delivery of one copy of the enforcement notice to that place
will be effective service upon all violators named in the enforcement notice
that may be served at the place the enforcement notice has been delivered. The
physical posting of a copy of the enforcement notice pursuant to subdivision
(2) will be effective service upon all violators named in the enforcement
notice.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 10, § 16-10.1) (Added by Ord. 90-57; Am. Ords. 18-33,
24-17)
§ 16-10.2 Notice of violation.
(a)   Whenever any person violates this code, the building official shall
serve, pursuant to §
16-10.1(d), a notice of violation to the persons responsible for the violation
to require that the building or structure or portion thereof comply with the
requirements of this code.
(b)   At a minimum, the notice of violation must include the following
information:
(1)   The date of the notice of violation;
(2)   The name of the person noticed;
(3)   The address or location of the violation;
(4)   The specific ordinance, code, or rule that has been violated;
(5)   A concise description of the violation;
(6)   A requirement that the violator correct the violation by a specified
date;
(7)   A statement of the penalties that will be imposed if the violation is not
corrected by the deadline for correction established pursuant to subdivision
(6); and
(8)   A requirement that the violator send a written notice to the building
official reporting the correction of the violation when the violator believes
the violation has been corrected.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 10, § 16-10.2) (Added by Ord. 90-57; Am. Ords. 15-16,
24-17)
§ 16-10.3 Criminal prosecution.
(a)   General. Any person, firm, or corporation violating this code is guilty
of a misdemeanor, and each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each
and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of this code is
committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation
such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000, or by
imprisonment for not more than one year, or by both fine and imprisonment.
(b)   Any officer, or inspector designated by the building official, who has
been deputized by the chief of police as a special officer for the purpose of
enforcing the building, plumbing, electrical, or housing codes (hereinafter
referred to as “authorized personnel”), may arrest without warrant alleged
violators by issuing a summons or citation in accordance with the procedure
specified in this section. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
barring such authorized personnel from initiating prosecution by warrant or
such other judicial process as is permitted by statute or rule of court.
(c)   Any authorized personnel designated by the building official, upon making
an arrest for a violation of the building, plumbing, electrical, or housing
codes, may take the name and address of the alleged violator and shall issue to
the violator in writing a summons or citation hereinafter described, notifying
the violator to answer the complaint to be entered against the violator at a
place and at a time provided in the summons or citation.
(d)   There shall be provided for use by authorized personnel, a form of
summons or citation for use in citing violators of the building, plumbing,
electrical, or housing codes that does not mandate the physical arrest of such
violators. The form and content of such summons or citation shall be as adopted
or prescribed by the administrative judge of the district court and shall be
printed on a form commensurate with the form of other summonses or citations
used in modern methods of arrest, so designed to include all necessary
information to make the same valid within the laws and regulations of the State
of Hawaii and the City and County of Honolulu.
(e)   In every case when a citation is issued, the original of the same shall
be given to the violator; provided that the administrative judge of the
district court may prescribe by giving to the violator a carbon copy of the
citation and provide for the disposition of the original and any other copies.
(f)   Every citation shall be consecutively numbered and each carbon copy shall
bear the number of its respective original.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 10, § 16-10.3) (Added by Ord. 90-57; Am. Ord. 12-34)
§ 16-10.4 Administrative enforcement.
   In lieu of or in addition to enforcement pursuant to §
16-10.3, if the building official determines that any person is not complying
with a notice of violation, the building official shall serve, pursuant to §
16-10.1(d), a notice of order to the persons responsible for the violation.
(a)   Contents of the notice of order.
(1)   In addition to any other information or requirements deemed appropriate
by the building official, the notice of order must include a copy of the
applicable notice of violation issued by the building official for the
violation.
(2)   The notice of order may require the persons responsible for the violation
to do any or all of the following:
(A)   Correct the violation at the person’s own expense before a date specified
in the order;
(B)   Except as provided in paragraph (C), pay a civil fine not to exceed:
(i)   $2,000 in the manner, at the place, and before the date specified in the
order; and
(ii)   $2,000 per day for each day in which the violation persists beyond the
date specified in subparagraph (i), in the manner and at the time and place
specified in the order;
(C)   If a building or structure, or portion thereof, is erected, constructed,
enlarged, altered, improved, or converted without the required permit; and a
notice of violation contains a directive that the persons responsible for the
violation suspend work on the building or structure, or portion thereof, and
work on the building or structure, or portion thereof, has nevertheless
continued:
(i)   Pay a civil fine equal to 10 times the building permit fee amount that
would have been incurred pursuant to §
18-6.2 if the building permit had been properly obtained, or $10,000, whichever
is greater, in the manner, at the place, and before the date specified in the
order; and
(ii)   Pay a civil fine equal to 10 times the building permit fee amount that
would have been incurred pursuant to §
18-6.2 if the building permit had been properly obtained, or $10,000, whichever
is greater, per day for each day in which the violation persists beyond the
date specified in subparagraph (i), in the manner and at the time and place
specified in the order; or
(iii)   Demolish the building or structure, or portion thereof;
The civil fines issued pursuant to this paragraph may not be reduced nor may
any portion thereof be waived by the building official.
(3)   The order must advise the persons responsible for the violation that the
notice of order will become final 30 calendar days after the date the notice of
order was served on the persons responsible for the violation pursuant to §
16-10.1(d). The notice of order must also advise that the building official’s
action may be appealed to the building board of appeals.
(b)   Effect of the notice of order–right to appeal. The provisions of the
notice of order issued by the building official under this section will become
final 30 calendar days after the date the notice of order is served to the
persons responsible for the violation pursuant to §
16-10.1 (d). The persons responsible for the violation may appeal the notice of
order to the building board of appeals as provided in this chapter; provided
that an appeal to the building board of appeals will not stay any provision of
the notice of order requiring correction of the violation and payment of civil
fines. The appeal must be received in writing on or before the date the order
becomes final. A notice of order directing the persons responsible for the
violation to demolish a building or structure, or portion thereof, pursuant to
subsection (a)(2)(C)(iii), will be stayed until the conclusion of the appeal,
including any judicial review thereof pursuant to HRS Chapter 91.
(c)   Judicial enforcement of the notice of order. The building official may
institute a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction for the
enforcement of any notice of order served to the persons responsible for the
violation pursuant to §
16-10.1 (d). Where a civil action has been instituted to enforce the civil fine
imposed by the notice of order, the building official need only show that the
notice of violation and the notice of order were served, that a civil fine was
imposed, the amount of the civil fine imposed, and that the fine imposed has
not been paid.
(d)   Report.  The building official shall, upon issuance of a notice of order
pursuant to subsection (a)(2)(C), submit a report to the State department of
commerce and consumer affairs. The report must at a minimum contain the
following information:
(1)   The date of the notice of order;
(2)   The name, address, and license number of any contractor, as that term is
defined in HRS § 444-1, or the name and address of any owner-builder, who has
supervised or performed any work on the building or structure, or portion
thereof, contrary to a directive of the building official in a notice of order
under subsection (a)(2)(C) for the responsible persons to suspend work due to
lack of a required permit;
(3)   A concise description of the violation; and
(4)   The penalty imposed.
(e)   Nothing in this section will preclude the building official from seeking
any other remedy available by law.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 10, § 16-10.4) (Added by Ord. 90-57; Am. Ords. 96-58,
12-34, 15-16, 18-33, 24-17)
ARTICLE 11: REGULATIONS WITHIN FLOOD HAZARD DISTRICTS AND
DEVELOPMENT ADJACENT TO DRAINAGE FACILITIES
Sections
   
16-11.1   Applicability
   
16-11.2   Definitions
   
16-11.3   Floodproofing requirements in certain areas
   
16-11.4   Floodproofing methods
   
16-11.5   Structural requirements
   
16-11.6   Violations—Penalty
§ 16-11.1 Applicability.
(a)   General. The provisions contained herein are applicable to the
construction of all new buildings and structures, relocation and major
alterations, additions, or reconstruction of existing buildings within the
special flood hazard areas as delineated on the flood boundary and floodway
maps and flood insurance rate maps, and any amendments by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, on file with the department of planning and permitting, City
and County of Honolulu.
These provisions shall also apply to developments adjacent to drainage
facilities outside the special flood hazard area that are determined to be
within a floodway area or a flood fringe area in accordance with
Chapter 21A.
(b)   Nonconforming buildings. Any building or structure that was previously
lawful before October 1, 1990*, but that is not in conformity with this article
may be continued subject to
Chapter 21A.
(c)   Exemptions. The provisions contained herein shall not apply:
(1)   To buildings and structures exempted from the special flood hazard area
provisions under
Chapter 21A; and
(2)   To buildings and structures that have been granted a flood hazard
variance under provisions of
Chapter 21A.
(Sec. 16-7.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.); Sec. 16-5.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983
Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 11, § 16-11.1) (Am. Ord. 90-57)
Editor’s note:
   * “October 1, 1990” is substituted for “the effective date of this article.”
§ 16-11.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following terms are defined in §
21A-1.4:
(1)   Coastal high hazard area;
(2)   Base flood elevation;
(3)   Flood fringe area;
(4)   Special flood hazard area;
(5)   Floodproofing;
(6)   Floodway; and
(7)   Base flood.
(Sec. 16-7.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.); Sec. 16-5.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983
Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 11, § 16-11.2) (Am. Ord. 90-57)
§ 16-11.3 Floodproofing requirements in certain areas.
(a)   General. Building permit applications for structures that require
floodproofing under
Chapter 21A and this article shall be accompanied by a statement of a
registered professional engineer or architect that to the best of such person’s
knowledge, information, and belief, the floodproofing methods are adequate to
resist the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact, and uplift forces, and
other factors associated with the flood, including flood waters due to tsunamis
in coastal high hazard areas.
(b)   Floodproofing of buildings above base flood elevation. All buildings and
structures that are required to be elevated above the base flood elevation
shall be floodproofed by building on natural terrain above the base flood
elevation on natural undisturbed ground or by building on stilts or by building
on fill (unless fill is specifically prohibited by
Chapter 21A, in the particular flood hazard area) or by other approved methods.
(c)   Waterproofing of buildings below base flood elevation. Any building or
portion thereof, not used for human habitation, and that is permitted to be
below the base flood elevation shall either have the space below the base flood
elevation free of obstructions or shall be designed and constructed so that
below the base flood elevation, the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy due to the base flood. Compliance with the
requirements of ASCE 24 shall be in compliance with this section. Within
coastal high hazard areas, however, any usable enclosed space below the base
flood elevation shall be constructed with breakaway walls intended to collapse
under stress without jeopardizing the structural support of the building. Areas
enclosed by such breakaway walls shall not be used for human habitation.
(Sec. 16-7.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.); Sec. 16-5.3 R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983
Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 11, § 16-11.3) (Am. Ords. 90-57, 12-34)
§ 16-11.4 Floodproofing methods.
(a)   Natural terrain. The following shall be applicable to buildings on
natural terrain:
(1)   Foundation design shall take into consideration the effects of soil
saturation on the performance of the foundation;
(2)   The effects of floodwaters on slope stability and erosion shall be
investigated; and
(3)   All utility service lines shall be designed and constructed as provided
in the plumbing and electrical codes.
(b)   Building on stilts. Where a building is to be constructed so that the
lowest floor is to be elevated above the base flood elevation, the building may
be supported on columnar type members, such as columns, piers, and in certain
cases, walls. Clear spacing of support members, measured perpendicular to the
general direction of flood flow shall not be less than 8 feet apart at the
closest point. The stilts shall, as far as practicable, be compact and free
from unnecessary appendages that would tend to trap or restrict free passage of
debris during a flood. Solid walls or walled-in columns are permissible if
oriented with the longest dimension of the member parallel to the flow. Stilts
shall be capable of resisting all applied loads as required by this code and
all applicable flood-related loads as required herein. Bracing, where used to
provide lateral stability, shall be of a type that causes the least obstruction
to the flow and the least potential for trapping floating debris. Foundation
supports for the stilts may be of any approved type capable of resisting all
applied loads, such as spread footings, mats, piles, and similar types. In all
cases, the effect of submergence of the soil and additional floodwater-related
loads shall be recognized. The potential of surface scour around the stilts
shall be recognized and protective measures provided, as required.
(c)   Building on fill.
(1)   Except in districts where fill is specifically prohibited as structural
support for buildings by
Chapter 21A, buildings may be constructed on fill material.
(2)   The fill shall not adversely affect the capacity of the floodway or any
tributary or any other drainage facility or system, and shall be performed in
accordance with
Chapter 14.
(Sec. 16-7.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.); Sec. 16-5.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983
Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 11, § 16-11.4) (Am. Ord. 90-57)
§ 16-11.5 Structural requirements.
(a)   General. All buildings and structures to be constructed under this
article shall be in accordance with ASCE 24 or this section.
(b)   Stability.
(1)   Overturning or sliding. All buildings and structures to be constructed
under this article shall be designed and constructed to provide a minimum
factor of safety of 1.50 against failure by sliding or overturning when
subjected to combined loads as specified in subsection (d).
(2)   Flotation. All buildings and structures to be constructed under this
article shall be designed and constructed to resist flotation from floodwater
at the base flood elevation with a safety factor of 1.33.
(c)   Loads. The following loads shall be considered in the design and
construction of buildings and structures subject to this article:
(1)   Hydrostatic loads;
(2)   Hydrodynamic loads;
(3)   Impact loads. Assume concentrated load acting horizontally at the base
flood elevation or at any point below it, equal to the impact force produced by
a 1,000-pound mass traveling at the velocity of the flood water and acting on a
1-square-foot surface of the structure;
(4)   Soil loads. Consideration shall be given to loads or pressures resulting
from soils against or over the structure. Computation shall be in accordance
with accepted engineering practice with proper consideration for effect of
water on the soil. Special consideration shall be given in the design of
structures when expansive soils are present; and
(5)   Tsunami. Structural design of buildings and structures subject to
tsunamis shall be in accordance with subsection (f).
(d)   Combined loads. All loads stipulated in this chapter and all flood-
related loads specified under subsection (c) shall be applied on the structure
and on structural components, alone and in combination, in such manner that the
combined effect will result in maximum loads and stresses on the structure and
members. Application of these loads shall be as follows:
(1)   Dead loads. Use at full intensity;
(2)   Live loads. Use at reduced intensity as provided in this chapter for
design of columns, piers, walls, foundation, trusses, beams, and flat slabs.
Live loads on floors at or below the base flood elevation and particularly in
basement slabs, shall not be used if their omission results in greater loading
or stresses on such floors. Similarly, for storage tanks, pools, and other
similar structures designed to contain and store materials, which may be full
or empty when a flood occurs, both conditions shall be investigated in
combination with flood-related loads of the containing structure being full or
empty;
(3)   Wind load. Use at full intensity as required in this chapter on areas of
the building and structure above the base flood elevation; and
(4)   Earthquake load. Combined earthquake and flood-related loads need not be
considered.
(e)   Allowable soil pressures. Under flood conditions, the bearing capacity of
submerged soils is affected and reduced by the buoyancy effect of the water on
the soil. For foundations of buildings and structures covered by this article,
the bearing capacity of soils shall be evaluated by a recognized acceptable
method. Expansive soils should be investigated with special care. Soils that
lose all bearing capacity when saturated, or become “liquefied” shall not be
used for supporting foundations.
(f)   Coastal flood water design.*
(1)   Buildings or structures shall be designed to resist the effects of
coastal floodwaters due to tsunamis. The base flood elevation due to tsunamis
is considered to result from a nonbore condition, except where a bore condition
is shown on the flood insurance maps or in the flood study adopted for the
county.
(2)   Habitable space in building structures must be elevated above the base
flood elevation by such means as posts, piles, piers, or shear walls parallel
to the expected direction of flow of the tsunami wave. The forces and effects
of floodwaters on the structure shall be fully considered in the design.
(3)   Allowable stresses (or load factors in the case of ultimate strength or
limit design) for the building materials used shall be the same as the building
code provides for wind or earthquake loads combined with gravity loads, i.e.,
treat loads and stresses due to tsunamis in the same fashion as for earthquake
loadings.
(4)   The main building structure shall be adequately anchored and connected to
the elevating substructure system to resist all lateral, uplift, and downward
forces. In wood construction, toenailing is not allowed.
(5)   Scour of soil from around individual piles and piers shall be provided
for in the design in the coastal flood hazard area. Shallow foundation types
are not permitted, unless the natural supporting soils are protected on all
sides against scour by a shore protection structure, preferably a bulkhead.
Shallow foundations may be permitted beyond 300 feet from the shoreline;
provided that they are founded on natural soil and at least 2 feet below the
anticipated depth of scour, and provided that not more than 3 feet of scour is
expected at the structure. The table below gives estimated minimum depths of
soil scour below existing grade as a percentage of the depth (h) of water at
the location.
Estimated Minimum Scour
 Distance from Shoreline
 Up to 300 Feet1 Greater than 300 Feet2
Estimated Minimum Scour
           Distance from Shoreline
           Up to 300 Feet1 Greater than 300 Feet2
Loose sand 80% h           60% h
Dense sand 50% h           35% h
Soft silt  50% h           25% h
Stiff silt 25% h           15% h
Soft clay  25% h           15% h
Stiff clay 10% h           5% h
1    Values may be reduced by 40% if a substantial dune or berm higher than the
base flood elevation protects the building site.
2    Values may be reduced 50% if the entire region is essentially flat.
 
(6)   Forces that must be considered in the design of structures elevated to
resist floodwaters include:
(A)   Buoyant forces—uplift caused by partial or total submergence of a
structure;
(B)   Surge forces—caused by the leading edge of a surge of water impinging on
a structure;
(C)   Drag forces—caused by velocity of flow around an object;
(D)   Impact forces—caused by debris such as driftwood, small boats, portions
of houses, etc., carried in the flood currents and colliding with a structure;
and
(E)   Hydrostatic forces—caused by an imbalance of pressure due to a
differential water depth on opposite sides of a structure or structural member.
(7)   Buoyant force. The buoyant force on a structure or structural member
subject to partial or total submergence will act vertically through the center
of mass of the displaced volume and is calculated from the following equation:
                  FB = pgV
      where       FB = buoyant force acting vertically
               p = density of water (2.0 lb-s2/ft4 for salt water)
               g = gravitational acceleration (32.2 ft/s2)
               V = displaced volume of water (ft3)
(8)   Surge force. The total force per unit width on a vertical wall subjected
to a surge from the leading edge of a tsunami that approaches the structure as
a bore or bore-like wave is calculated from the equation below. The resultant
force acts at a distance approximately h above the base of the wall. (Note:
This equation applies for walls with heights equal to or greater than 3h. Walls
whose heights are less than 3h require surge forces to be calculated using the
appropriate combination of hydrostatic and drag force equations for the given
situation.)
                  FS = 4.5 pgh2
      where       FS = total force per unit width of wall
               p = density of water (2.0 lb-s2 /ft4  for salt water)
               g = gravitational acceleration (32.2 ft/s2 )
               h = surge height (ft)
(9)   Drag force.
 
FD = pCD Au2
     2
 
      where       FD  = total drag force (lbs) acting in the direction of flow
               p = density of water (2.0 lb-s2 /ft4  for salt water)
               CD  = drag coefficient (nondimensional) (1.0 for circular piles,
2.0 for square piles, 1.5 for wall sections)
               A = projected area of the body normal to the direction of flow
(ft2 )
               u = velocity of flow relative to body (ft/s) (estimated as equal
in magnitude to depth in feet of water at the structure)
The flow is assumed to be uniform, so the resultant force will act at the
centroid of the projected area immersed in the flow.
(10)   Impact force.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8829.png]
      where      FI  = impact force (lb)
               m = mass of the water displaced by the body impacting the
structure (slugs)
               Ub  = velocity of the body (ft/s) (estimated as equal in
magnitude to depth in feet of water at the structure)
               t = time (s)
               dUb  = acceleration (deceleration) of the body at (ft/s2 )
               dt
This single concentrated load acts horizontally at the base flood elevation or
at any point below it and is equal to the impact force produced by a 1000-pound
weight of debris traveling at the velocity of the flood water and acting on a 1
square-foot surface of the structural material where impact is postulated to
occur. The impact force is to be applied to the structural material at a most
critical or vulnerable location determined by the designer. It is assumed that
the velocity of the body goes from Ub to zero over some small finite time
interval (Δt) so the following approximation can be made:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8827.png]
For structural material of wood construction, assume t, the time interval over
which impact occurs, is 1 second. For structural material of reinforced
concrete construction, use Δt of 0.1 second and for structural material of
steel construction, use t = 0.5 second.
(11)   Hydrostatic force.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8823.png]
      where      FH  = hydrostatic force (lb/ft) on a wall, per unit width of
wall
            p = density of water (2.0 lb-s2 /ft4  for salt water)
            g = gravitational acceleration (32.2 ft/s2 )
            h = water depth (ft)
            up  = component of velocity of flood flow perpendicular to the wall
(ft/s) (total velocity, u, estimated as equal in magnitude to depth in feet of
water at the structure)
The resultant force will act horizontally at a distance of
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8825.png]
above the base of the wall.
(Sec. 16-7.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.); Sec. 16-5.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983
Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 11, § 16-11.5) (Am. Ord. 90-57, 12-34)
Editor’s note:
   * Reference is made to the January 31, 1980 report by Dames & Moore entitled
“Design and Construction Standards for Residential Construction in Tsunami-
Prone areas in Hawaii” prepared for the Federal Emergency Management Agency for
a more detailed study and analysis of tsunami wave forces.
§ 16-11.6 Violations—Penalty.
   For violation and penalty provisions of this article, see Article 10.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 11, § 16-11.6) (Added by Ord. 90-57)
ARTICLE 12: INDIGENOUS HAWAIIAN ARCHITECTURE
Sections
   
16-12.1   Policy
   
16-12.2   Scope
   
16-12.3   Publications incorporated by reference
   
16-12.4   Definitions
   
16-12.5   Material requirements
   
16-12.6   Size and location
   
16-12.7   Allowable and prohibited uses
   
16-12.8   Fire protection
   
16-12.9   Design standards
§ 16-12.1 Policy.
   This code shall be administered with due consideration given to the policy
of the city that indigenous Hawaiian architecture furthers the city’s
compelling interest in cultural, environmental, and historic preservation;
energy efficiency; economic development; aesthetic beauty; and public safety.
For purposes of this article, indigenous Hawaiian architecture includes any of
the predominant architectural practices, customs, styles, and techniques
historically employed by the native residents of the Hawaiian Islands,
including structures comprised of either rock walls or wood frames for the
bottom portion of structures and thatch of different native grasses and leaves
for the roof.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 12, § 16-12.1) (Added by Ord. 12-34)
§ 16-12.2 Scope.
   This article shall apply exclusively to indigenous Hawaiian architecture
structures.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 12, § 16-12.2) (Added by Ord. 12-34)
§ 16-12.3 Publications incorporated by reference.
   The following publications are incorporated by reference and made a part of
these provisions. Where there is a conflict between the references and these
provisions, these provisions shall prevail.
(a)   “Hawaiian Thatched House” (1971), by Russell A. Apple, published by the
United States Department of the Interior;
(b)   “Hale Construction Standards” (2000), by Francis Sinenci and Bill Sides;
(c)   “The Hawaiian Grass House in Bishop Museum” (1988), by Catherine C.
Summers; and
(d)   “Arts and Crafts of Hawaii, Section II, Houses” (1957) by Te Rangi Hiroa
(Peter H. Buck).
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 12, § 16-12.3) (Added by Ord. 12-34)
§ 16-12.4 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Certified Hale Builder. A person who has obtained a certificate of completion
for satisfactorily completing a course in Hawaiian hale construction from the
University of Hawaii, or any of its community colleges, or as approved by the
Building Official.
Group of Structures. A group of indigenous Hawaiian architecture structures
that are in close proximity to each other and have an aggregate floor area of
1,800 square feet or less.
Indigenous Hawaiian Architecture Structure or Hale. A structure, that is
consistent with the design, construction methods, and uses of structures built
by Hawaiians in the 1800’s, which uses natural materials found in the Hawaiian
islands, and complies with this article and references.
Separation. The clear distance between two structures.
Setback. The clear distance between a structure and a property line.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 12, § 16-12.4) (Added by Ord. 12-34)
§ 16-12.5 Material requirements.
(a)   Hale shall be constructed using only materials grown and harvested in the
State.
(b)   Wood framing material. The wood members for the hale, such as posts and
rafters, shall be but not limited to hardwoods of unmilled, straight sections
of trunks or branches of the following species:
(1)   Casaurina equisitafolia (ironwood);
(2)   Prosopis pallida (kiawe);
(3)   Eucalyptus robusta (eucalyptus);
(4)   Psidium cattleianum (strawberry guava);
(5)   Metrosideros polymorpha (ohia); and
(6)   Rizophora mangle (mangrove).
Exception: Ardisia elliptica (inkberry) may be used only for roof purlins as an
alternative to specified woods listed in subdivisions (1) through (6).
(c)   Roofing and siding. Thatched roofing and siding materials for the hale
may be any grass or leaf material grown and harvested in the State, to include
but not be limited to, pili, kualohia, pueo, kawelu, sugarcane leaves, and ti
leaves.
(d)   Cord. Natural or synthetic cord used for lashing structural members of
the hale shall be 400 pound test. Cord used for tying floating purlins and
thatched materials shall be 100 pound test. All cord used on the hale shall be
shades of green, tan, brown, or black.
(e)   Metal prohibited. Metal shall not be used for the construction of the
hale.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 12, § 16-12.5) (Added by Ord. 12-34)
§ 16-12.6 Size and location.
(a)   Height and size limitation. Hale shall be one-story, detached structures
not to exceed 1,800 square feet. The maximum allowable size for each type of
hale shall be as follows:
 
Maximum Allowable Sizes (In Feet) for Each Hale Type
hale halawai      hale kuai         hale noa          hale waa
30 feet x 60 feet 14 feet x 20 feet 14 feet x 24 feet 30 feet x 60 feet
 
(b)   Zoning requirements. Hale shall comply with minimum yard requirements in
the land use ordinance,
Chapter 21.
(c)   Minimum separation. The minimum separation between a hale and another
structure shall be at least 10 feet for a one-story structure; 15 feet for a
two-story structure; or a distance equal to the height of the hale, whichever
is more. The minimum separation between two hale shall be at least 10 feet or a
distance equal to the height of the taller hale.
(d)   Hale noa. Hale noa structures for sleeping may be constructed only on
property where a separate residence exists on the property.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 12, § 16-12.6) (Added by Ord. 12-34)
§ 16-12.7 Allowable and prohibited uses.
(a)   Allowable uses. To the extent permitted by other applicable law, the
various types of hale shall be used as follows:
 
Allowable Uses for Each Hale Type
Hale Halawai         Hale Kuai            Hale Noa       Hale Waa
eating (ai)          eating (ai)                         eating (ai)
assembling (halawai) assembling (halawai)                assembling (halawai)
                                          sleeping (moe)
retailing (e.g.,     retailing (e.g.,                    retailing (e.g.,
fruits) (ku`ai)      fruits) (ku`ai)                     fruits) (ku`ai)
                     storage (papa`a)                    storage (e.g., canoe)
                                                         (papa`a)
 
(b)   Prohibited uses and activities. The following uses and activities shall
be prohibited from occurring within or near the hale:
(1)   Cooking;
(2)   Open flames;
(3)   Generators;
(4)   Extension cords;
(5)   Electrical switches, fixtures, or outlets;
(6)   Plumbing faucets, fixtures, or drains;
(7)   Power tools;
(8)   No screen, mesh, plastic, or any other similar material shall be attached
to the hale; and
(9)   Hale shall not be used as a food establishment as defined in the
administrative rules adopted by the State department of health.
(c)   Maintenance. The hale shall be periodically maintained by the owner to
ensure structural integrity. Repairs for maintenance of the hale shall not
require additional building permits.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 12, § 16-12.7) (Added by Ord. 12-34)
§ 16-12.8 Fire protection.
(a)   Fire protection classifications. Indigenous Hawaiian architecture
structures shall be categorized into the following two classes for fire
protection requirements:
Class Setback Requirements Fire Protection Requirements
Class Setback Requirements                                                             Fire Protection
                                                                                       Requirements
      The structure (or a group of structures) is:
      1.    Located at least 100 feet from any existing structure on the same or
      neighboring properties; and
      2.    Located at least 100 feet from any property line, except as follows:
         a.    if the property line abuts a public way, the 100 feet minimum setbackfire protection is
Class for that property line shall be reduced by the width of the public way;             uired for the
A        b.    if the property line abuts the shoreline, the minimum setback for thatcture.
      property line shall be the shoreline setback; or
         c.    for any hale ku`ai in the agricultural district that is less than 200
      square feet, that is completely open on three sides, and that is used as an
      agricultural products stand and if the property line abuts a public way, the
      minimum setback for that property line shall be 15 feet.
                                                                                       Automatic fire
                                                                                       sprinkler system shall
                                                                                       be installed in
Class The structure (or a group of structures) that conforms to applicable zoning      accordance with design
B     setback requirements but does not satisfy Class A setback requirements.          standards in §
                                                                                       16-12.8.2. An
                                                                                       electrical permit is
                                                                                       required for fire
                                                                                       sprinklers systems.
 
(b)   Automatic fire sprinklers. The design standards for automatic fire
sprinklers for Class B indigenous Hawaiian architecture structures shall be in
accordance with NFPA 13.
Exception: The design standards for automatic fire sprinklers for Class B
indigenous Hawaiian architecture structures shall be permitted as follows:
(1)   Eighteen gallons per minute for a single head at 140 square feet maximum
coverage of roof area;
(2)   Thirteen gallons per minute for each subsequent head at 140 square feet
maximum coverage of roof area per head;
(3)   The minimum supply pressure at the base of the riser shall not be less
than 40 pounds per square inch;
(4)   The minimum residual pressure at the highest sprinkler shall be not less
than 12 pounds per square inch;
(5)   Sprinkler heads spacing shall not exceed 14 feet;
(6)   Sprinkler heads shall be open type upright, pendent, or sidewall with 1/
2-inch or 17/32-inch orifice and have a wax corrosion resistant coating;
(7)   The total number of sprinklers on a branch shall not exceed six heads;
(8)   The total number of sprinklers shall not exceed the following schedule:
 
1-inch diameter     2 sprinklers
1-1/4 inch diameter 3 sprinklers
1-1/2 inch diameter 5 sprinklers
2-inch diameter     10 sprinklers
2-1/2 inch diameter 30 sprinklers
3-inch diameter     60 sprinklers
 
(9)   The above pipe schedule shall not apply to hydraulically designed
systems;
(10)   The water density for hydraulically designed systems shall not be less
than 0.10 gpm per square foot;
(11)   The source of water may be by domestic water meters, detector check
meter, underground well, storage tank, swimming pool, ponds, etc., but must
meet the design requirements for adequate pressure and duration;
(12)   Water supply shall be sufficient to provide 30 minutes duration;
(13)   If domestic water meters are used as the source of water for the fire
sprinklers, without a storage tank and booster pump, the maximum number of
heads shall not exceed the following table:
 
5/8-inch water meter   1 sprinkler
3/4-inch water meter   2 sprinklers
1-inch water meter     3 sprinklers
1-1/2 inch water meter 7 sprinklers
2-inch water meter     11 sprinklers
3-inch water meter     27 sprinklers
 
(14)   The piping material shall be hard drawn copper with silver solder or
brazed fittings, or carbon steel with corrosion-resistant coatings. Plastic
pipes shall not be allowed, except for below grade supply pipes;
(15)   Fire sprinkler system shall be actuated by smoke detectors located at
the highest points of the roof and spaced as recommended by the manufacturer;
(16)   Flow control valves shall be either hydraulically or electrically
operated with a manual override switch;
(17)   Where the width of a roof exceeds the width allowed for one row of
sprinklers, two or more rows of sprinklers shall be placed such that the entire
roof area is protected;
(18)   Prevailing wind direction shall be considered in the placement of
sprinklers;
(19)   Deflectors for sprinklers shall be parallel with the roof surface or
tilted slightly towards the peak of the roof; and
(20)   Fire sprinkler systems shall have a local alarm activated by a smoke
detector.
(c)   For any hale that requires fire protection pursuant to subsection (b),
the applicant shall provide a certification from a licensed engineer or a
licensed C-20 contractor that the water supply for the fire sprinkler system
has been tested and is capable of delivering the required fire flow for a
duration of 30 minutes.
(d)   Smoke detector. Any hale used for sleeping shall have an approved battery
operated smoke detector installed in the hale.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 12, § 16-12.8) (Added by Ord. 12-34)
§ 16-12.9 Design standards.
(a)   General design standards. All types of hale shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the standards set out in this section.
(1)   The minimum diameter size of all structural members shall be measured at
the member’s midpoint, except that the minimum diameter size of posts shall be
measured at the smaller end. For structure sizes not specifically shown in the
tables, the requirements in the next larger width size shall be applicable.
(2)   The specifications for structural members were estimated based on no wind
loads. Hale shall be constructed to allow all thatching materials to separate
from the structure before adding significant loads.
(3)   The mix formula for mortar specified in these rules shall be one part
portland cement, four parts clean sand, and sufficient fresh water to make the
mixture workable.
(4)   Every hale, except hale noa, shall have at least two sides completely
open.
(5)   Lashing and thatching methods shall comply with illustrations found in
“Arts and Crafts of Hawaii” or “The Hawaiian Grass House in Bishop Museum.”
(b)   Allowable designs. Hale shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the schematic designs and illustrations that follow:
(1)   Hale Halawai. Each end of the Hale Halawai may be open or thatched. The
ends may also be constructed with a thatched roof hip as an alternate design.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-157.png]
HALE HALAWAI
Open End Style
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-159.png]
HALE HALAWAI
Thatched End Style
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-161.png]
FRAMING SCHEMATIC
 
HALE HALAWAI
             Pou                                 Kuaiole                    Post    Rafter
W x Pou Kihi Kukuna & Pou Hana Pouomanu O`a      & Holo   Kauhuhu  Lohelau  Spacing Spacing
L x minimum  Pou Kaha minimum  minimum  minimum  minimum  minimum  minimum  maximum maximum
H   diameter minimum  diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter spacing spacing
             diameter
12
ft.
x
20  4 in.    3 in.    4 in.    4 in.    3 in.    2 in.    3 in.    3 in.    5 ft.   3 ft.
ft.
x 7
ft.
14
ft.
x
24  4 in.    4 in.    4 in.    4 in.    3 in.    2 in.    3 in.    3 in.    5 ft.   3 ft.
ft.
x 7
ft.
24
ft.
x
30  5 in.    4 in.    4 in.    4 in.    4 in.    2 in.    3 in.    3 in.    5 ft.   3 ft.
ft.
x 7
ft.
25
ft.
x
50  5 in.    5 in.    5 in.    5 in.    4 in.    2 in.    3 in.    32 in.   5 ft.   3 ft.
ft.
x 7
ft.
30
ft.
x
60  6 in.    5 in.    6 in.    6 in.    4 in.    2 in.    3 in.    4 in.    5 ft.   3 ft.
ft.
x 7
ft.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-163.png]      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/IMAGES/0-0-0-165.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-167.png]
 
                    FOUNDATION TYPE
SIZE OF HALE        Kahua               Pa Pohaku           Pou Kanu
HALAWAI W x L x H   Diameter x Height   Width x Height x    Diameter x Depth
                                        Length
12 ft. x 20 ft. x 7 3 ft.6 in. x 24 in. 2 ft.6 in. W x 2    30 in. x 2 ft.8 in.
ft.                 H                   ft. 8 in. H x 4 ft. D
                                        0 in. L
14 ft. x 24 ft. x 7 3 ft.8 in. x 24 in. 2 ft. 6 in. W x 2   30 in. x 2 ft.9 in.
ft.                 H                   ft. 8 in. H x 4 ft. D
                                        0 in. L
24 ft. x 30 ft. x 7 4 ft.0 in. x 30 in. 3 ft. 0 in. W x 3   36 in. x 3 ft.0 in.
ft.                 H                   ft. 0 in. H x 4 ft. D
                                        0 in. L
25 ft. x 50 ft. x 7 4 ft.0 in. x 30 in. 3 ft. 0 in. W x 3   36 in. x 3 ft.0 in.
ft.                 H                   ft. 0 in. H x 4 ft. D
                                        0 in. L
30 ft. x 60 ft. x 7 4 ft.0 in. x 30 in. 3 ft.0 in. W x 3    36 in. x 3 ft. 3
ft.                 H                   ft. 3 in. H x 4     in. D
                                        ft.0 in. L
 
(2)   Hale Ku`ai.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-169.png]
HALE KU`AI
SHED STYLE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-171.png]
HALE KU`AI
GABLE STYLE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-173.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-175.png]
FRAMING SCHEMATIC
 
HALE KU`AI
W x Pou Kihi Pou Kaha Pou Hana Pouomanu O`a      Kuaiole  Kauhuhu  Lohelau  Rafter
L x minimum  minimum  minimum  minimum  minimum  & Holo   minimum  minimum  Spacing
H   diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter minimum  diameter diameter maximum
                                                 diameter                   spacing
5
ft.
x
10  4 in.    3 in.    3 in.    4 in.    3 in.    2 in.    3 in.    2 in.    4 ft.
ft.
x 5
ft.
9
ft.
x
12  4 in.    3 in.    3 in.    4 in.    3 in.    2 in.    3 in.    2 in.    4 ft.
ft.
x 5
ft.
12
ft.
x
16  4 in.    3 in.    4 in.    4 in.    3 in.    2 in.    4 in.    2 in.    4 ft.
ft.
x 5
ft.
14
ft.
x
20  4 in.    3 in.    4 in.    4 in.    3 in.    2 in.    4 in.    2 in.    4 ft.
ft.
x 5
ft.
NOTE:   The maximum post spacing for Pou Kihi and Pou Kaha is 5 feet. The maximum
post spacing for Pou Hana and Pouomanu is 12 feet.
 
(3)   Hale Noa. Hale Noa shall have at least two openings. One opening shall be
at least 3 feet wide and 5 feet high, and the other opening shall be at least 2
feet wide and 3 feet high.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-177.png]
HALE NOA
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-179.png]
SECTION VIEW
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-181.png]
FRAMING SCHEMATIC
 
HALE NOA
             Pou                                 Kuaiole                    Post    Rafter
W x Pou Kihi Kukuna & Pou Hana Pouomanu O`a      & Holo   Kauhuhu  Lohelau  Spacing Spacing
L x minimum  Pou Kaha minimum  minimum  minimum  minimum  minimum  minimum  maximum maximum
H   diameter minimum  diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter spacing spacing
             diameter
9
ft.
x
12  3 in.    3 in.    4 in.    3 in.    3 in.    2 in.    3 in.    2 in.    6 ft.   4 ft.
ft.
x 7
ft.
12
ft.
x
20  4 in.    4 in.    4 in.    3 in.    3 in.    2 in.    3 in.    2 in.    6 ft.   4 ft.
ft.
x 7
ft.
4
ft.
x
24  5 in.    4 in.    4 in.    3 in.    3 in.    2 in.    3 in.    3 in.    6 ft.   4 ft.
ft.
x 7
ft.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-183.png]
(4)   Hale Wa`a.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-185.png]
HALE WA`A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-187.png]
FRAMING SCHEMATIC
 
HALE WA`A
            O`a minimum Kuaiole & Holo Kauhuhu  Rafter Spacing  Ridge Height
W x L       diameter    minimum        minimum  maximum spacing minimum height,
                        diameter       diameter                 H
20 ft. x 60 4 in.       3 in.          4 in.    4 ft. to 5 ft.  22 ft.
ft.
25 ft. x 60 5 in.       3 in.          4 in.    4 ft. to 5 ft.  27 ft.
ft.
30 ft. x 60 5 in.       3 in.          4 in.    4 ft. to 5 ft.  27 ft.
ft.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-189.png]
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 12, § 16-12.9) (Added by Ord. 12-34)
ARTICLE 13: HAWAII RESIDENTIAL SAFE ROOM
Sections
   
16-13.1   Performance-based design criteria
   
16-13.2   Intent and scope
   
16-13.3   Alternative standards
   
16-13.4   Site criteria
   
16-13.5   Size of safe room
   
16-13.6   Provisions for exiting
   
16-13.7   Design for dead, live, wind, rain, and impact loads
   
16-13.8   Ventilation
   
16-13.9   Construction documents
   
16-13.10   Special inspection
§ 16-13.1 Performance-based design criteria.
   The residential safe room must meet the performance-based design criteria’s
minimum performance specifications of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 13, § 16-13.1) (Added by Ord. 12-34; Am. Ord. 24-15)
§ 16-13.2 Intent and scope.
   The intent of the residential safe room is to temporarily provide an
enhanced protection area, fully enclosed within a dwelling or within an
accessory structure to a residence, which is designed and constructed to
withstand the wind pressures, windborne debris impacts, and other requirements
of this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 13, § 16-13.2) (Added by Ord. 12-34; Am. Ord. 24-15)
§ 16-13.3 Alternative standards.
(a)   Manufactured safe room designs subject to approval. A manufactured safe
room or safe room kit may be substituted if documentation is submitted and
approved by the building official. The safe room must be engineered, tested,
and manufactured to meet or exceed the criteria of this section.
(b)   FEMA in-residence shelter designs permitted. It is permissible to build
FEMA In Residence Shelters of up to 64 square feet of floor area with walls up
to 8 feet long that are built in accordance with construction details of FEMA
320.
(c)   In addition to other applicable requirements in this code, storm shelters
must be constructed in accordance with ICC-500 and this article and Article 14.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 13, § 16-13.3) (Added by Ord. 12-34; Am. Ord. 24-15)
§ 16-13.4 Site criteria.
   Residential safe rooms must not be constructed within areas subject to
stream flooding, coastal flooding, or dam failure inundation within any of the
following areas:
(a)   FEMA Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) subject to rainfall runoff or
stream or flash flooding;
(b)   Coastal zones “V” or “A” identified in the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) issued by FEMA for floodplain management purposes, in which the flood
hazard are tides, storm surge, waves, tsunamis, or a combination of these
hazards; and
(c)   Areas subject to dam failure inundation as determined by the State
department of land and natural resources.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 13, § 16-13.4) (Added by Ord. 12-34; Am. Ord. 24-15)
§ 16-13.5 Size of safe room.
   The safe room must be designed to provide a minimum of 7 square feet per
person for one- and two-family dwellings and 10 square feet per person for
other types of dwellings, based on usable floor area. Usable floor area is
defined as the protected occupant area between the safe room walls at the level
of fixed seating, where fixed seating exists, minus the area of sanitary
facilities or other items that impede usage of the safe room area. Occupant
load for a dwelling must not be less than the number of bedrooms plus one. The
room does not need to exceed 120 square feet.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 13, § 16-13.5) (Added by Ord. 12-34; Am. Ord. 24-15)
§ 16-13.6 Provisions for exiting.
   The safe room must be equipped with an impact protected, inward-swinging
interior door or exterior door suitable for a means of exiting in an emergency.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 13, § 16-13.6) (Added by Ord. 12-34; Am. Ord. 24-15)
§ 16-13.7 Design for dead, live, wind, rain, and impact loads.
(a)   Structural integrity criteria.
(1)   The residential safe room must be built with a complete structural system
and a complete load path for vertical and lateral loads caused by gravity and
wind.
(2)   The ceiling structure and wall must be capable of supporting a
superimposed debris dead load of the full weight of any building floors and
roof above, but not less than 60 psf.
(3)   The residential safe room enclosure must be capable of simultaneously
resisting lateral and uplift with pressures corresponding to a 145 mph 3-second
peak gust ultimate design wind speed, determined in accordance with ASCE-7,
Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures. The site exposure
factor must be based on exposure C or the exposure zone shown in State Building
Code Appendix W Figure 1609.4, whichever is greater. The values for the gust
factor and the directionality factor must be taken as 0.85. Topographic wind
amplification caused by mountainous terrain must be considered in accordance
with the building code. Internal pressure must be determined in accordance with
ASCE-7.
(b)   Windborne debris impact protection of building enclosure elements. The
exterior walls, vents, openings, fixed or operable windows, and entry doors
into the safe room, must meet or exceed Level D requirements of ASTM E 1996
(Table 422.5-1), or be an approved assembly listed in this article. The
interior walls, doors, openings, and ceilings into the safe room must meet or
exceed Level C requirements of ASTM E 1996 (Table 422.5-1), or be an approved
assembly listed in State Building Code Appendix U Section 429.5.2. Any exterior
wall penetrations greater than 36 square inches must be considered an opening.
(c)   Debris impact and cyclic pressure loading of glazing and protective
systems. Impact protective systems must meet the ASTM E 1996 cyclic pressure
requirement for the loading given in
Table 16.13.1.
 
Table 16.13-1: Windborne Debris Protection and Cyclic Pressure Criteria for Residential Safe
Rooms
ASTM E
1996    Debris   Debris Enclosure Wall Ceiling, and Floor Cyclic Air Pressure Testing— maximum
Missile Missile  Impact inward and maximum outward pressures, Veff-asd
Level   Size     Speed
Rating
        2 x 4
        weighing
        4.5 lb.  40
        +/- 0.25 ft./
C       lb., and sec.   35 psf inward and outward
        with     or at
        min.     least
        length 4 27 mph
        ft. +/
        - 4-inch
        2 x 4
        weighing
        9.0 lb.  50
        +/- 0.25 ft./
D       lb., and sec.   35 psf inward
        with     or at  45 psf outward
        min.     least
        length 8 34 mph
        ft. +/
        - 4-inch
 
(d)   Approved Debris Impact Resistant Exterior Wall Assemblies. Wall
assemblies constructed in accordance with
Table 16-13.7(d) are deemed to comply with §
16-13.7(b).
Table 16-13.7(d) WaIl Assemblies Complying with § 16-13.7(b)
Table 16-13.7(d) WaIl Assemblies Complying with § 16-13.7(b)
Wall Assemblage
3/4-inch plywood on 2 x 4-inch or larger wood studs spaced at 16 inches, on-
center with #8 x 3-inch wood screws at 6 inches on-center.
3/4-inch plywood on 350S162-33 or greater studs spaced at 16 inches on-center
with #8 sheet metal screws at 6 inches on-center.
8-1/4-inch cementitious lap siding over 22-gage sheet metal attached to
350S162-33 or greater studs spaced at 24 inches on-center.
8-1/4-inch cementitious lap siding attached to 350S162-33 or greater studs
spaced at 24 inches on-center studs with interior 3/4-inch interior plywood
sheathing.
8-1/4-inch cementitious lap siding attached to 350S162-33 or greater studs
spaced at 24 inches on-center with 1/2-inch interior 22-gage sheet metal
composite gypsum wallboard.
8-1/4-inch cementitious lap siding attached to 2 x 4-inch or larger wood studs
spaced at 16 inches on-center with 1/2-inch interior 22-gage sheet metal
composite gypsum wallboard.
8-1/4-inch cementitious lap siding attached to 2 x 4-inch or larger wood studs
spaced at 16 inches on-center with 22-gage sheet metal and 1/2-inch interior
gypsum wallboard.
Cementitious lap siding attached to 5/8-inch structural plywood on 2 x 4-inch
or larger wood studs spaces at 16 inches on-center.
Cementitious lap siding attached to 5/8-inch structural plywood on 2 x 4-inch
or larger or 363S137-43 or greater steel studs spaced at 16 inches on-center.
EFS with 1/2-inch dens-glass gold exterior sheathing on 362S137-43 steel studs
spaced at 16 inches on-center and 1/2-inch interior gypsum wallboard
24-gage steel sheet (50 ksi) on girts.
Concrete with a thickness of 4 inches with reinforcing.
Concrete masonry units with a thickness of 6 inches with partial grouting and
reinforcing spaced at 24 inches on-center.
Concrete masonry units with a thickness of 8 inches with partial grouting and
reinforcing spaced at 24 inches on-center.
Interior or exterior wall with laterally braced 2 x 4-inch or larger wood studs
with sheathing on either side 22-gage sheet metal.
 
   Sheathing must be attached to studs with fasteners at 6 inches (152 mm) on
center for edge and field fastening. Door frames and windows must be fastened
to structural members on all sides with a maximum fastener spacing of 6 inches,
not to exceed 4 inches from the corners, designed in accordance with the
pressures of
Table 16-13.1.
(e)   Approved Debris Impact Resistant Interior Wall Assemblies. Wall assembly
construction methods in accordance with
Table 16-13.7(e) are deemed to comply with State Building Code Appendix U
Section 429.5.2 when sheathing is installed on the debris impacted side of the
safe room wall:
Table 16-13.7(e) Wall Assembly Methods Complying with State Building Code
Appendix U Section 429.5.2
Table 16-13.7(e) Wall Assembly Methods Complying with State Building Code
Appendix U Section 429.5.2
Wall Assemblage
1/2-inch plywood on 2 x 4 or larger wood studs spaced at 16 inches on-center
with #8 x 3-inch wood screws at 6 inches on-center.
1/2-inch plywood on 350S162-33 or greater metal studs spaced at 16 inches on-
center with #8 sheet metal screws at 6 inches on-center.
5/8-inch plywood on 350S162-33 or greater metals studs spaced at 24 inches on-
center with #8 sheet metal screws at 6 inches on-center.
1/2-inch interior 22-gage sheet metal composite gypsum wallboard on 2 x 4 or
larger wood studs spaced at 16 inches on-center with #8 x 3-inch wood screws at
6 inches on-center.
1/2-inch interior 22-gage sheet metal composite gypsum wallboard on 350S162-33
or larger metal studs spaced at 16 inches on-center with #8 sheet metal screws
at 6 inches on-center.
Interior doors with 5/8-inch plywood or solid wood panels with three hinges and
double latching mechanism.
 
   Sheathing must be attached to studs with fasteners at 6 inches (152 mm) on
center for edge and field fastening. Door frames and windows must be fastened
to structural members on all sides with a maximum fastener spacing of 6 inches
and not to exceed 4 inches from the corners, designed in accordance with the
pressures of
Table 16-13.1.
(f)   Approved Debris Impact Resistant Interior Ceiling Assemblies. Wall
assembly construction methods in accordance with Table 16-13.7(f) shall be
deemed to comply with State Building Code Appendix U Section 429.5.2.
 
Table 16-13.7(f) Wall Assembly Methods Complying with State Building Code
Appendix U Section 429.5.2
Wall Assemblage
1/2-inch plywood on either side of ceiling joists spaced at 24 inches on-center
with #8 x 3-inch wood screws at 6 inches on-center.
1/2-inch interior 22-gage sheet metal composite gypsum wallboard on either side
of ceiling joists spaced at 24 inches on-center with #8 x 3-inch wood screws at
6 inches on-center.
 
   Sheathing must be attached to ceiling joists with fasteners at 6 inches (152
mm) on center for edge and field fastening. Door frames and windows must be
fastened to structural members on all sides with a maximum fastener spacing of
6 inches and not to exceed 4 inches from the corners, designed in accordance
with the pressures of
Table 16-13.1.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 13, § 16-13.7) (Added by Ord. 12-34; Am. Ord. 24-15)
§ 16-13.8 Ventilation.
   The residential safe room must be naturally ventilated to allow the
enclosure to have approximately one air change every two hours. This
requirement may be satisfied by a total of 12 square inches of venting per
occupant. There must be at least two ventilation sources. The requirements for
natural and mechanical must be in accordance with
Chapter 16A.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 13, § 16-13.8) (Added by Ord. 12-34; Am. Ord. 24-15)
§ 16-13.9 Construction documents.
   Construction documents for the residential safe room must be directly
prepared by a Hawaii-licensed structural engineer.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 13, § 16-13.10) (Added by Ord. 12-34; Am. Ord. 24-15)
§ 16-13.10 Special inspection.
   The construction or installation of the residential safe room must be
verified for conformance to the drawings in accordance with the appropriate
requirements of International Building Code Chapter 17.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 13, § 16-13.12) (Added by Ord. 12-34; Am. Ord. 24-15)
ARTICLE 14: ADOPTION OF THE STATE- AND CITY-OWNED HIGH OCCUPANCY BUILDINGS—
DESIGN CRITERIA FOR ENHANCED HURRICANE PROTECTION AREAS
Sections
   
16-14.1   Intent
   
16-14.2   Scope
   
16-14.3   Site criteria
   
16-14.4   Enhanced hurricane protection area program requirements
   
16-14.5   Design wind, rain, and impact loads
   
16-14.6   Ventilation
   
16-14.7   Standby electrical system capability
   
16-14.8   Quality assurance
   
16-14.9   Compliance re-certification if altered, deteriorated, or damaged
§ 16-14.1 Intent.
   The purpose of this article is to establish minimum life safety design
criteria for enhanced hurricane protection areas within high occupancy State-
or county-owned buildings permitted to be occupied during hurricanes of up to
Saffir Simpson Category 3.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 14, § 16-14.1) (Added by Ord. 12-34, Am. Ords. 20-7,
24-15)
§ 16-14.2 Scope.
   This article applies to Risk Category Ill and IV buildings defined by
International Building Code Table 1604.5, for the following specific
occupancies:
(1)   Enclosed and partially enclosed (covered) structures whose primary
occupancy is public assembly with an occupant load greater than 300;
(2)   Health care facilities with an occupant load of 50 or more resident
patients, but not having surgery or emergency treatment facilities;
(3)   Any other State- or county-owned building with an occupant load greater
than 5,000 people; and
(4)   Hospitals and other health care facilities having surgery or emergency
treatment facilities.
Exception: Facilities located within Flood Zone V and Flood Zone A that are
designated by the owner to be evacuated during hurricane warnings declared by
the National Weather Service, are not subject to these requirements.
(Added by Ord. 24-15)
§ 16-14.3 Site criteria.
(a)   Comply with ASCE 24-14, Flood Resistant Design and Construction, based on
provisions for Risk Category III.
(1)   Floor slab on grade must be 1.5 feet above the base flood elevation of
the county’s flood hazard map, or a higher elevation as determined by a
modeling methodology that predicts the maximum envelope and depth of inundation
including the combined effects of storm surge and wave actions with respect to
a Category 3 hurricane, nor less than the flood elevation associated with a
500-year mean recurrence interval.
(2)   Locate outside of V and Coastal A flood zones unless justified by site-
specific analysis or designed for vertical evacuation in accordance with a
method approved by the building official. When a building within a V or Coastal
A flood zone is approved, the bottom of the lowest structural framing member of
any elevated first floor space must be 2 feet above the base flood elevation of
the county’s flood hazard map, or at higher elevation as determined by a
modeling methodology that predicts the maximum envelope and depth of inundation
including the combined effects of storm surge and wave actions with respect to
a Category 3 hurricane, nor less than the flood elevation associated with a
500-year mean recurrence interval.
(b)   Emergency vehicle access. Provide at least one route for emergency
vehicle access. The portion of the emergency route within the site must be
above the 100-year flood elevation.
(c)   Landscaping and utility laydown impact hazards. Landscaping around the
building must be designed to provide standoff separation sufficient to maintain
emergency vehicle access in the event of mature tree blowdown. Trees must not
interfere with the functioning of overhead or underground utility lines, nor
cause laydown or falling impact hazard to the building envelope or utility
lines.
(d)   Adjacent buildings. The building must not be located within 1,000 feet of
any hazardous material facilities defined by International Building Code Table
1604.5. Unanchored light-framed portable structures must not be permitted
within 300 feet of the building, unless the windborne debris hazard of the
portable structure uplift is mitigated.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 14, § 16-14.2) (Added by Ord. 12-34; Am. Ord. 24-15)
§ 16-14.4 Enhanced hurricane protection area program requirements.
(a)   Applicable net area. At least 50 percent of the net square feet of a
facility must be constructed to qualify as an enhanced hurricane protection
area. The net floor area is determined by subtracting from the gross square
feet the floor area of excluded spaces, exterior walls, columns, fixed or
movable objects, equipment, or other features that under probable conditions
cannot be removed or stored during use as a storm shelter.
(b)   Excluded spaces. Spaces such as mechanical rooms, electrical rooms,
storage rooms, attic and crawl spaces, must not be considered as net floor area
permitted to be occupied during a hurricane.
(c)   Occupancy capacity. The occupancy capacity is determined by dividing the
net area of the enhanced hurricane protection area by 15 square feet net floor
area per person.
(d)   Toilets and hand washing facilities. Toilet and hand washing facilities
must be located and accessible from within the perimeter of the enhanced
hurricane protection area.
(e)   Accessibility. Where the refuge occupancy accommodates more than 50
persons, provide an ADA-accessible route to a shelter area at each facility
with a minimum of one wheelchair space for every 200 enhanced hurricane
protection area occupants determined in accordance with §
16-14.4(c).
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 14, § 16-14.3) (Added by Ord. 12-34; Am. Ord. 24-15)
§ 16-14.5 Design wind, rain, and impact loads.
(a)   Structural design criteria. The building main wind force resisting system
and structural components must be designed per ASCE 7 for a 145 mph minimum
peak 3-second gust ultimate design wind speed.
Topographic and directionality factors must be the site-specific values
determined per State Building Code Appendix W. Design for interior pressure
must be based on the largest opening in any exterior facade or roof surface.
(b)   Windborne debris missile impact for building enclosure elements. Exterior
glazing and glazed openings, louvers, roof openings and doors must be provided
with windborne debris impact resistance or protection systems conforming to
ASTM E1996-14 Level D, i.e., 9 lb. 2 X 4@ 50 fps (34 mph).
(c)   Cyclic pressure loading of impact resistive glazing or windborne impact
protective systems. Resistance to the calculated maximum inward and outward
pressure must be designed to conform to ASTM E1996-14.
(d)   Windows. All unprotected window assemblies and their anchoring systems
must be designed and installed to meet the wind load and missile impact
criteria of this section.
(e)   Window protective systems. Windows may be provided with permanent or
deployable protective systems; provided that the protective system is designed
and installed to meet the wind load and missile impact criteria and completely
covers the window assembly and anchoring system.
(f)   All exterior and interior doors subject to possible wind exposure or
missile impact must have doors, frames, anchoring devices, and vision panels
designed and installed to resist the wind load and missile impact criteria or
such doors, frames, anchoring devices, and vision panels must be provided with
impact protective systems designed and installed to resist the wind load and
missile impact criteria of this section.
(g)   Exterior envelope. The building enclosure, including walls, roofs, glazed
openings, louvers, and doors, must not be perforated or penetrated by windborne
debris, as determined by compliance with ASTM E1996-14 Level D.
(h)   Parapets. Parapets must satisfy the wind load and missile impact criteria
of the exterior envelope.
(i)   Roofs.
(1)   Roof openings. Roof openings (e.g., HVAC fans, ducts, skylights) must be
provided with protection for the wind load and missile impact criteria of §§
16-14.5(b) and
16-14.5(c).
(2)   High wind roof coverings. Roof coverings must be specified and designed
according to the latest ASTM Standards for high wind uplift forces or
International Building Code Section 1507, whichever is greater.
(3)   Roof drainage. Roofs must have adequate slope, drains, and overflow
drains or scuppers sized to accommodate 100-year hourly rainfall rates in
accordance with International Building Code Section 1611.1 and Figure 1611.1
but not less than 2 inches per hour for 6 continuous hours.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 14, § 16-14.4) (Added by Ord. 12-34; Am. Ord. 24-15)
§ 16-14.6 Ventilation.
(a)   Mechanical ventilation. Mechanical ventilation as required in accordance
with the International Mechanical Code. Air intakes and exhausts must be
designed and installed to meet the wind load and missile impact criteria of
this article.
(b)   HVAC equipment anchorage. HVAC equipment mounted on roofs and anchoring
systems must be designed and installed to meet the wind load criteria. Roof
openings for roof-mounted HVAC equipment must have a 12-inch-high curb designed
to prevent the entry of rain water.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 14, § 16-14.5) (Added by Ord. 12-34; Am. Ord. 24-15,
25-11)
§ 16-14.7 Standby electrical system capability.
(a)   Provide a standby emergency electrical power system per International
Building Code Chapter 27 and NFPA 70 Article 700 Emergency Systems and Article
701 Legally Required Standby Systems that has the capability of being connected
to an emergency generator or other temporary power source. The emergency system
capabilities must include:
(1)   An emergency lighting system;
(2)   Illuminated exit signs;
(3)   Fire protection systems, fire alarm systems, and fire sprinkler systems;
and
(4)   Minimum mechanical ventilation for health/safety purposes.
(b)   Emergency generator. When emergency generators are pre-installed, the
facility housing the generator, permanent or portable, must be an enclosed area
designed to protect the generators from wind and missile impact.
Generators hardened by the manufacturer to withstand the area’s design wind and
missile impact criteria must be exempt from the enclosed area criteria
requirement.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 14, § 16-14.6) (Added by Ord. 12-34; Am. Ord. 24-15)
§ 16-14.8 Quality assurance.
(a)   Information on construction documents.  Construction documents must
include design criteria, the occupancy capacity of the enhanced hurricane
protective area, and Project Specifications must include opening protection
devices. Floor plans must indicate all enhanced hurricane protection area
portions of the facility and exiting routes therefrom. The latitude and
longitude coordinates of the building must be recorded on the construction
documents.
(b)   Special inspection. In addition to the requirements of International
Building Code Chapter 17, special inspections must include at least the
following systems and components:
(1)   Roof cladding and roof framing connections;
(2)   Wall connections to roof and floor diaphragms and framing;
(3)   Roof and floor diaphragm systems, including collectors, drag struts, and
boundary elements;
(4)   Vertical windforce-resisting systems, including braced frames, moment
frames, and shear walls;
(5)   Windforce-resisting system connections to the foundation; and
(6)   Fabrication and installation of systems or components required to meet
the impact-resistance requirements of the Hawaii State Building Code Section
1609.1.2.
Exception: Fabrication of manufactured systems or components that have a label
indicating compliance with the wind-load and impact-resistance requirements of
this code.
(c)   Quality assurance plan.  A construction quality assurance program must be
included in the construction documents and must include:
(1)   The materials, systems, components, and work required to have special
inspection or testing by the building official or by the registered design
professional responsible for each portion of the work;
(2)   The type and extent of each special inspection;
(3)   The type and extent of each test;
(4)   Additional requirements for special inspection or testing for seismic or
wind resistance; and
(5)   For each type of special inspection, identification as to whether it is
continuous special inspection or periodic special inspection.
(d)   Peer review. Construction documents must be independently reviewed by a
Hawaii-licensed structural engineer. A written opinion report of compliance
must be submitted to the Hawaii Emergency Management Agency, the building
official, and the owner.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 14, § 16-14.7) (Added by Ord. 12-34; Am. Ord. 24-15)
§ 16-14.9 Compliance re-certification if altered, deteriorated, or damaged.
   Alterations must be reviewed by a Hawaii-licensed structural engineer to
determine whether any alterations would cause a violation of this section.
Deterioration or damage to any component of the building requires an evaluation
by a Hawaii-licensed structural engineer to determine repairs necessary to
maintain compliance with this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 14, § 16-14.9) (Added by Ord. 12-34; Am. Ord. 24-15)
ARTICLE 15: BABY DIAPER-CHANGING ACCOMMODATIONS
Sections
   
16-15.1   Definitions
   
16-15.2   Requirement to provide accommodations
   
16-15.3   Construction documents
   
16-15.4   Hardship exemption
   
16-15.5   Violations–Penalty
Editor’s note:
   * Article 15, Chapter 16 is not applicable to new construction or renovation
projects for which building permit applications were filed with the city before
August 19, 2015.
§ 16-15.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Baby Diaper-Changing Accommodation. A safe, sanitary and convenient baby
diaper-changing station, deck, table, or similar amenity that is installed or
placed in a separate, designated location in an establishment or use subject to
this article. Such accommodations may include but are not limited to stations,
decks, and tables in women’s and men’s restrooms or unisex/family restrooms.
New Establishment or Use. The following establishments or uses that are
instituted or substantially modified after August 19, 2015*:
(1)   Airports as defined in §
21-10.1;
(2)   Art galleries and museums;
(3)   Vehicle sales and rentals as defined in §
21-10.1;
(4)   Vehicle service stations as defined in §
21-10.1;
(5)   Child daycare and adult daycare as defined in §
21-10.1;
(6)   General eating and drinking establishments as defined in §
21-10.1;
(7)   Hospitals as defined in §
21-10.1;
(8)   Hotels as defined in §
21-10.1;
(9)   General indoor recreation as defined in §
21-10.1;
(10)   General medical services as defined in §
21-10.1;
(11)   Meeting facilities as defined in §
21-10.1;
(12)   Neighborhood grocery stores;
(13)   General offices as defined in §
21-10.1;
(14)   Photography studios;
(15)   Public facilities as defined in §
21-10.1;
(16)   General retail as defined in §
21-10.1; and
(17)   Theaters as defined in §
21-10.1.
A new establishment or use will be deemed to be instituted on the date a
certificate of occupancy is issued, or if the establishment or use has
unlawfully failed to obtain such certification before occupancy, upon the first
date of occupancy for its present use.
An establishment or use will be deemed to be substantially modified so as to
require compliance with this article upon any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of the existing building or facility occupied by
the establishment or use, if:
(1)   Such reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement
requires more than 50 percent of the gross floor area occupied by the
establishment or use to be rebuilt;
(2)   The estimated cost of the reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement as set forth in the applicable building permit is at least
$50,000; or
(3)   The estimated cost of the new construction or renovation of any restroom
or restrooms as set forth in the applicable building permit is at least
$10,000;
provided that no establishment or use will be deemed to be substantially
modified if no structural changes are made to any existing restroom in the
building or facility occupied by the establishment or use.
It is provided that no establishment or use shall be substantially modified if
no structural changes are made to any existing restroom in the building or
facility occupied by the establishment or use.
Restroom for Public Use. A restroom that is accessible to persons other than
employees of the establishment in which the restroom is located.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 15, § 16-15.1) (Added by Ord. 15-38) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
Editor’s note:
   *“August 19, 2015” is substituted for “the effective date of this article.”
§ 16-15.2 Requirement to provide accommodations.
   Every new establishment or use as defined herein shall be required to
provide baby diaper-changing accommodations in accordance with the requirements
of this article. Each such establishment or use shall be required to provide,
at each floor level containing restrooms for public use, at least one
accommodation that is accessible to women and one that is accessible to men, or
a single accommodation accessible to both. Each such establishment shall
provide signage indicating the location of the baby diaper-changing
accommodations.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 15, § 16-15.2) (Added by Ord. 15-38)
§ 16-15.3 Construction documents.
   Construction documents for new establishments or uses shall show whether a
restroom is a restroom for public use as defined in §
16-15.1 and the location of each baby diaper-changing accommodation within such
restroom. If a restroom is not shown as a restroom for public use on the
construction documents and, after the issuance of the building permit
authorizing the construction or renovation of the restroom, there is a change
in the designation of the restroom to a restroom for public use, then a baby
diaper-changing accommodation shall be provided in such restroom.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 15, § 16-15.3) (Added by Ord. 15-38)
§ 16-15.4 Hardship exemption.
   A new establishment or use shall not be subject to this article if
compliance would create a hardship. Under this article, a “hardship” means
that:
(1)   No reasonable physical alternative exists for providing baby diaper-
changing accommodations; or
(2)   The cost of providing such accommodations exceeds 10 percent of the cost
of constructing, purchasing, or substantially modifying the building or
facility occupied by the establishment or use.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 15, § 16-15.4) (Added by Ord. 15-38)
§ 16-15.5 Violations–Penalty.
   For violation and penalty provisions of this article, see
Article 10.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 15, § 16-15.5) (Added by Ord. 15-38)
ARTICLE 16: AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATORS*
Sections
   
16-16.1   Definitions
   
16-16.2   Requirement to provide automated external defibrillators
   
16-16.3   Administering agency
   
16-16.4   Notification
   
16-16.5   Liability
   
16-16.6   Maintenance
Editor’s note:
   * Article 16, Chapter 16, added by Ord. 17-5, is effective January 1, 2018.
§ 16-16.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Automated External Defibrillator. A portable electronic device, approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration, that is capable of diagnosing
cardiac arrhythmias and that uses defibrillation to reestablish an effective
cardiac rhythm.
City Building. Any building or portion thereof that is owned or leased by the
city and is occupied by city employees.
Newly Constructed Building. Any building constructed on or after January 1,
2018 and that has an occupant load of 50 or more. For purposes of this
definition, a building will have been constructed on the earlier of:
(1)   The date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building; or
(2)   The date of its first occupancy.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 16, § 16-16.1) (Added by Ord. 17-5)
§ 16-16.2 Requirement to provide automated external defibrillators.
   Every city building and newly constructed building, as defined in this
article, must have installed and maintained therein automated external
defibrillators in accordance with the requirements of this article. At least
one automated external defibrillator that is accessible to residents,
employees, and the public, as applicable, must be placed on each floor level.
Appropriate signage must be posted to indicate the location of the automated
external defibrillators.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 16, § 16-16.2) (Added by Ord. 17-5)
§ 16-16.3 Administering agency.
   The mayor shall designate a city agency to administer this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 16, § 16-16.3) (Added by Ord. 17-5)
§ 16-16.4 Notification.
   The mayor’s designated agency shall notify the Honolulu emergency services
department, emergency medical services division, of the existence, location,
and type of automated external defibrillator installed in each city building or
newly constructed building.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 16, § 16-16.4) (Added by Ord. 17-5)
§ 16-16.5 Liability.
   Any person, including a building owner, who uses or provides for an
automated external defibrillator pursuant to this article is subject to HRS §
663-1.5(e).
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 16, § 16-16.5) (Added by Ord. 17-5)
§ 16-16.6 Maintenance.
   The mayor’s designated agency and building owners shall conduct periodic
inspections of all automated external defibrillators in their respective
buildings to ensure that they are maintained in an operative condition, and are
replaced or repaired where defective, all according to the operation and
maintenance guidelines set forth by the manufacturer.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 16, § 16-16.6) (Added by Ord. 17-5)
ARTICLE 17: SHOWER FACILITIES
Sections
   
16-17.1   Definitions
   
16-17.2   Shower facilities required for converted and new office building
   
16-17.3   Minimum requirements for shower facilities
   
16-17.4   Violations–Penalty
§ 16-17.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Converted Office Building. An office building:
(1)   That was not an office building on May 26, 2017*; but
(2)   That becomes an office building after May 26, 2017* because of an
increase in Group B occupancy floor area of 40,000 square feet due to
additions, alterations, or change to its use or character of occupancy.
New Office Building. An office building that did not exist on May 26, 2017.*
Office Building. A building classified as “Business Group B” by the Building
Code and having a floor area of at least 40,000 square feet. The term also
includes a building or a development of buildings that contains Business Group
B occupancies among a mix of uses, if that portion of the building or
development of buildings that is classified as “Business Group B” has a floor
area of at least 40,000 square feet.
Owner. The fee simple owner, lessee of record, property management agent, or
any other individual who has control or possession of the property.
Shower Facility. A facility with a shower compartment and locker at which
persons may shower and change clothing after commuting by other than motor
vehicle to a converted or new office building.
TOD Zone. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-9.100.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 17, § 16-17.1) (Added by Ord. 17-19)
Editor’s note:
   * “May 26, 2017” is substituted for “the effective date of this ordinance.”
§ 16-17.2 Shower facilities required for converted and new office building.
   The owner of each new or converted office building in a TOD zone shall
provide and maintain shower facilities as required under this article. The
shower facilities must be made available to persons who are employed in the new
or converted office building and who commute by other than motor vehicle to the
building. Nothing in this article is to be construed as preventing the owner
from allowing other persons to use the shower facilities.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 17, § 16-17.2) (Added by Ord. 17-19)
§ 16-17.3 Minimum requirements for shower facilities.
(a)   Each new or converted office building must have two separate shower
facilities, of similar size, one for the exclusive use of females and the other
for the exclusive use of males.
(b)   Each required shower facility must comply with the following
requirements:
(1)   At least two shower compartments and lockers must be provided in each
shower facility. Two additional shower compartments and lockers must be
provided in each shower facility for each additional 30,000 square feet of
floor area of office space greater than 40,000 square feet; provided that the
maximum number of shower compartments and lockers required per shower facility
is 10; and
(2)   Lockers for the temporary storage of possessions for persons showering
must be provided in each shower facility.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 17, § 16-17.3) (Added by Ord. 17-19)
§ 16-17.4 Violations–Penalty.
   For violation and penalty provisions, see
Article 10.
(1990 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 17, § 16-17.4) (Added by Ord. 17-19)
CHAPTER 16A: HOUSING CODE
Articles
   
1.   General Provisions
   
2.   Definitions
   
3.   Inspections
   
4.   Space and Occupancy Standards
   
5.   Structural Requirements
   
6.   Mechanical Requirements
   
7.   Exits
   
8.   Fire Protection
   
9.   Violations
   
10.   Enforcement
   
11.   Severability
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections
   
16A-1.1   Findings—Intent
   
16A-1.2   Short title
   
16A-1.3   Application—Compliance required
§ 16A-1.1 Findings—Intent.
(a)   Findings. The council finds that there are buildings, structures,
properties, and portions thereof within the city that are used or designed or
intended to be used for human habitation that are unfit for such habitation due
to dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects; defects increasing the hazards
of fire, accidents, or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light or
sanitary facilities; uncleanliness; overcrowding; inadequate ingress and
egress; inadequate drainage; violations of the health and fire regulations; and
violations of other laws, regulations, and ordinances relating to the use of
land and the use and occupancy of buildings and improvements. The council
further finds that such unsafe and unsanitary conditions affect their
surrounding areas and threaten the health, safety, and welfare of the public by
creating unsafe living conditions; fire hazards; breeding grounds for insects,
rodents, and vermin; and public nuisances.
(b)   Declaration of intent. In view of the foregoing findings, the council
declares that:
(1)   The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards regarding the
use, occupancy, location, and maintenance of all buildings and properties that
are used or intended to be used for human habitation, and properties and
structures that may affect the use of buildings or properties for human
habitation within the city; and
(2)   All property owners and persons in possession of real property shall keep
their property free from unsafe or unsanitary conditions that harm or threaten
to harm the lawful use of property for human habitation or that may prevent,
impair, or otherwise unreasonably interfere with the quiet enjoyment of
residential property within the city.
(Sec. 25-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 1, § 27-1.1) (Am.
Ords. 97-50, 14-36)
§ 16A-1.2 Short title.
   This chapter shall be known as the “housing code,” may be cited as such, and
will be referred to in this chapter as “this code.”
(Sec. 25-1.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 1, § 27-1.2) (Am.
Ord. 97-50)
§ 16A-1.3 Application—Compliance required.
(a)   Application.
(1)   This code applies in the City and County of Honolulu to any building, as
defined in this code, and to any parcel of real property located within 30 feet
of any building governed by this code.
(2)   Where any building is used or intended to be used as a combination
apartment house-hotel, the provisions of this code relative to each part of
such combination applies to such part as if it were a separate building.
(3)   Every rooming house, congregate residence, or lodging house must comply
with all the requirements of this code for dwellings.
(b)   Alteration. When alterations, additions, or repairs are made to an
existing building, such alterations, additions, or repairs must conform to this
code.
(c)   Relocation. Buildings or structures moved into or within the city must
comply with the requirements in the building code for new buildings and
structures.
(Sec. 25-1.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 1, § 27-1.3) (Am.
Ords. 97-50, 14-36)
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
16A-2.1   Definitions
§ 16A-2.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. For the purpose of
this code, all terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this article. Terms that are not defined in
this article have the meanings ascribed to them in the building code or
Chapter 21, as appropriate under the context in which such terms are used.
Where terms are not defined by this article, the building code, or
Chapter 21, they have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with
which they are used. Words in the singular include the plural and the plural
the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the
feminine the masculine.
Building. Any structure, or portion thereof, which is used, or designed or
intended to be used for lawful human habitation and includes any appurtenances
belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith. The term includes, without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, any structure mounted on wheels or
otherwise, such as a trailer, wagon or powered vehicle that is parked and
stationary and used for living purposes. The term does not include any jail,
hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention home, or other
institution in which human beings are housed and detained under legal
restraint.
Building Code. The building code of the City and County of Honolulu, as
amended.
Building Official. The director of planning and permitting or the director’s
duly authorized representative or agent.
Ceiling Height. The clear vertical distance from the finished floor to the
finished ceiling.
Chapter 21. The land use ordinance of the city.
Family. Has the same meaning as defined in
Chapter 21 .
Hot Water. Water at a temperature of not less than 110°F.
Human Habitation. The use or occupancy of a property or structure as a
dwelling, place of residence, abode, hotel, or place of overnight
accommodation. The presence of a kitchen, bathroom, personal hygienic products,
toiletries, shower, personal mail, bed, couch, or other domestic furnishings in
a structure creates a rebuttable presumption that it is used for human
habitation. However, the term does not apply to tents or temporary structures
that are used for permitted camping activities.
International Building Code. The edition of the International Building Code, as
published by the International Code Council, adopted most recently by the city
pursuant to HRS Chapter 107, Part II.
Kitchen. Has the same meaning as defined in
Chapter 21 .
Nuisance. Any public or private nuisance as defined by this code located on
property governed by this code.
Nuisance in Fact. An otherwise lawful use or condition on property that
unreasonably interferes with the quiet enjoyment of private property or the use
of public property for its intended purposes.
Person. Any natural person, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, registered business entity, trust, firm,
joint venture, association, club, organization, or other entity, and may
include any officer, agent, servant, or employee thereof that is responsible
for the use or condition of any property governed by this code.
Private Nuisance. A nuisance in fact that does not affect the health, safety,
or welfare of the general public.
Property. Real property that is used or intended to be used for human
habitation or residential purposes. The term also includes real property that
is located within 30 feet of real property that is used or intended to be used
for human habitation or residential purposes, and includes all improvements on
and appurtenances to real property governed by this code. Where appropriate,
“property” also refers to personal property that is located on real property
that is governed by this code.
Public Nuisance. Any unsafe or unsanitary use or condition on real property
that harms or threatens to harm the health, safety, or welfare of the general
public and includes, without limitation, the following uses and conditions:
(1)   Any use or condition of real property that creates a fire hazard, as
determined by the fire chief or the fire chief’s duly authorized representative
or agent pursuant to an enforcement order or declaratory ruling;
(2)   Any use or condition of real property that is determined to be
detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare by the State director of
the department of health, or the director’s duly authorized representative or
agent pursuant to an enforcement order or declaratory ruling;
(3)   Any structure that is determined to be a substandard building by the
building official pursuant to an enforcement order or a declaratory ruling;
(4)   Uncultivated, flammable weeds in excess of 18 inches in height located
within 30 feet of any building:
(A)   In the apartment, apartment mixed use, or residential zoning districts;
or
(B)   In a housing project developed in another zoning district pursuant to
exemptions authorized by State law;
(5)   Items or materials that may impede, interfere with, or obstruct entry or
exit points to a building or driveway;
(6)   Accumulations of leaves, needles, vines, or other dead vegetation on the
roof of any building;
(7)   Dead trees or deadwood overhanging the roof of any building;
(8)   Any substance, item, material, building, place or structure that emits or
causes offensive, disagreeable, or nauseous odor detectable from a public
place;
(9)   Stagnant ponds or pools of water;
(10)   An infestation of insects, vermin, or rodents found in the country,
residential, apartment, or apartment mixed use zoning district, or in a housing
project developed in another zoning district pursuant to exemptions authorized
by State law;
(11)   The human habitation of structures or vehicles that are not designed or
intended for living, sleeping, cooking, or dining;
(12)   The occupancy or habitation of a building in excess of permitted
occupancy limits;
(13)   The storage of accumulated personal property covering 30 percent or more
of any required yard unless fully enclosed in a lawful structure;
(14)   Abandoned, inoperable, or unused iceboxes or refrigerators, unless the
door, opening or lid thereof is closed and secured by a lock or restraint;
(15)   One or more junked vehicles, defined as an inoperable vehicle that is at
least three years old and subject to extensive damages, including but not
limited to: a broken or missing window, broken or missing wheels or tires, or
broken or missing motor or transmission; and
(16)   Any building or structure that presents a reasonable risk of harm to its
occupants or the public by reason of hazardous, dilapidated, or improper
wiring, weather protection, plumbing, or mechanical equipment, as defined by
this code.
Public Place. A place, structure, or area open and accessible to the general
public and includes all city roads, courts, malls, and paved areas, unless
otherwise indicated by signage.
Responsible Person or Responsible Persons. Any property owner, tenant, or
person with an interest in real property governed by this code and also
includes all persons with an interest in or right to use or possess personal
property governed by this code.
Rooming House. A lodging house.
Service Room. Any room used for storage, bath, or utility purposes, and not
included in the definition of habitable rooms.
Structure. Anything above existing grade constructed or erected with a fixed
location on the ground, or requiring a fixed location on the ground, or
attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. The term structure
includes the term “building” as defined in this code.
Substandard Building. Any building or portion thereof that is determined to be
an unsafe building in accordance with the building code or that endangers the
life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public or its occupants
due to one or more violations of this code.
Superficial Floor Area. The net floor area within the enclosing walls of a room
in which the ceiling height is not less than 5 feet, excluding built-in
equipment such as wardrobes, cabinets, kitchen units, or fixtures.
Used. Used or designed or intended to be used.
Vent Shaft. A court used only to ventilate or light a water closet, bath,
toilet, utility room, or other service room.
Window. A fixed or operable glazed opening or a shuttered opening using
transparent or translucent materials.
Yard. Has the same meaning as defined in
Chapter 21 .
(Sec. 25-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 2, § 27-2.1) (Am.
Ords. 97-50, 14-36, 17-22, 25-3)
ARTICLE 3: INSPECTIONS
Section
   
16A-3.1   Inspections
§ 16A-3.1 Inspections.
   All property, buildings, and structures within the scope of this code shall
be subject to inspection by the building official as provided in § 16A-10.1(b).
(Sec. 25-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 3, § 27-3.1) (Am.
Ords. 97-50, 14-36)
ARTICLE 4: SPACE AND OCCUPANCY STANDARDS
Sections
   
16A-4.1   Location on property
   
16A-4.2   Yards and courts
   
16A-4.3   Room dimensions
   
16A-4.4   Light—Ventilation
   
16A-4.5   Sanitation
§ 16A-4.1 Location on property.
   Access to public property: all buildings shall be located with respect to
property lines and to other buildings on the same property as required by this
code, the building code, and all statutes, regulations, and ordinances
applicable to buildings. Each dwelling unit and each guest room in a dwelling
or a lodging house or a congregate residence shall have access to a passageway,
not less than 3 feet in width, leading to a public street or alley. Each
apartment house or hotel shall have access to a public street by means of a
passageway not less than 44 inches in width and 7 feet in height.
(Sec. 25-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 4, § 27-4.1) (Am.
Ord. 97-50)
§ 16A-4.2 Yards and courts.
(a)   Scope. This section shall apply to all spacing between buildings or
structures and lot boundaries, between buildings or structures on the same lot
and between the walls of a court.
(b)   Spacing. Minimum horizontal spacing shall be provided as follows:
(1)   Between a wall of a building or structure with required windows and a
vertical plane through a lot boundary, the spacing shall be as follows:
(A)   For buildings or structures not more than 15 feet in height, not less
than 5 feet;
(B)   For buildings or structures not more than 25 feet in height, 5 feet plus
1 foot for each 2 feet in height for that portion in excess of 15 feet in
height; and
(C)   For buildings or structures more than 25 feet in height, 10 feet plus 1
foot for each 10 feet in height for that portion in excess of 25 feet in
height, up to a maximum of 20 feet.
(2)   Between the walls of a building or structure and between exterior walls
of same structure on the same lot, minimum horizontal spacing shall be provided
in accordance with subdivision (1) from a vertical plane through an assumed lot
boundary located between, but not necessarily equidistant from the walls if
there is a required window in one or both of the walls; and
(3)   If the spacing required by subdivision (1) or (2), or by any other
provision of law is reduced through a change or establishment of a boundary
line, the building or structure shall be moved or altered, or both, to meet all
the appropriate provisions stated above.
(c)   Courts.
(1)   Courts having windows opening on any side shall be not less than 10 feet
in width. Courts shall be not less than 10 feet in length, unless bounded on
one end by a street or yard. At least 50 percent of the required width or
length shall be clear of any projections and unobstructed to the sky. Spacing
shall also be provided in accordance with subsection (b).
(2)   Adequate access shall be provided to the bottom of all courts for
cleaning purposes. Every court more than two stories in height shall be
provided with horizontal air intake at the bottom not less than 10 square feet
in area and leading to the exterior of the building, unless abutting a yard or
public way. The construction of the air intake shall be as required for the
court walls of the building, but in no case shall it be less than one hour
fire-resistive.
(d)   Projection into spacing. Allowable projections into horizontal spacing
between the walls of buildings or structures and between exterior walls of same
building or structure of the same lot shall be as follows:
(1)   Projections may extend to the assumed lot boundary from walls without
required windows; and
(2)   Projections may extend no more than one-half the distance to the assumed
lot boundary from walls with required windows.
(Sec. 25-4.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 4, § 27-4.2) (Am.
Ord. 97-50)
§ 16A-4.3 Room dimensions.
(a)   Ceiling heights.
(1)   Habitable space shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet 6
inches except as otherwise permitted in this section. Kitchens, halls,
bathrooms, and toilet compartments may have a ceiling height of not less than 7
feet measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling. Where exposed beam
ceiling members are spaced at less than 48 inches on center, ceiling height
shall be measured to the bottom of these members. Where exposed beam ceiling
members are spaced at 48 inches or more on center, ceiling height shall be
measured to the bottom of the deck supported by these members, provided that
the bottom of the members is not less than 7 feet above the floor.
(2)   If any room in a building has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed ceiling
height for the room is required in only one-half the area thereof. No portion
of the room measuring less than 5 feet from the finished floor to the finished
ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum area thereof.
(3)   If any room has a furred ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height is
required in two-thirds the area thereof, but in no case shall the height of the
furred ceiling be less than 7 feet.
(4)   Projections may be permitted to project below the ceiling provided the
clearance is not less than 6 feet 6 inches.
(b)   Floor area. Every dwelling unit and congregate residence shall have at
least one room for living purposes that shall have not less than 120 square
feet of floor area. Other habitable rooms except kitchens shall have a floor
area of not less than 70 square feet. Where more than two persons occupy a room
used for sleeping purposes, the required floor area shall be increased at the
rate of 50 square feet for each occupant in excess of two.
Exception: nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of an efficiency
dwelling unit meeting the following requirements.
(1)   The unit shall have a living room of not less than 220 square feet of
floor area. An additional 100 square feet of floor area shall be provided for
each occupant of such unit in excess of two.
(2)   The unit shall be provided with a separate closet.
(3)   The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance, and
refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than 30
inches in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this code shall be
provided.
(4)   The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water
closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower.
(c)   Width. Habitable rooms, other than kitchens, shall not be less than 7
feet in any dimension. No water closet space shall be less than 30 inches in
width. There shall be not less than 24 inches of clear space in front of each
water closet stool and when sliding doors are not used, a door swing of not
less than 90 degrees shall be provided for in front of each water closet stool.
(Sec. 25-4.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 4, § 27-4.3) (Am.
Ord. 97-50)
§ 16A-4.4 Light—Ventilation.
(a)   Natural light and ventilation.
(1)   All guest rooms and habitable rooms within a dwelling unit or congregate
residence must be provided with natural light by means of windows or skylights
with an area of not less than one-tenth of the floor area of the rooms with a
minimum of 10 square feet. Not less than one-half of the required window or
skylight area must be openable to provide natural ventilation.
(2)   All bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundry rooms, and similar
rooms must be provided with natural ventilation by means of windows with an
openable area not less than one-twentieth of the floor area of the rooms with a
minimum of 1.5 square feet.
(b)   Origin.
(1)   Required windows must open directly onto the public way or a yard or
court located on the same lot as the building.
Exception: required windows may open into a roofed porch or lanai where the
porch or lanai:
(A)   Abuts a public way, yard, or court;
(B)   Has a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet; and
(C)   Has the longer side at least 50 percent open and unobstructed. The area
of fixed openings in open guardrails of minimum height may be credited for this
requirement.
(2)   A required window in a service room may open into a vent shaft that is
open and unobstructed to the sky and not less than 4 feet in least dimension.
No vent shaft may extend through more than two stories.
(3)   For the purpose of determining light and ventilation requirements, any
room may be considered as a portion of an adjoining room when at least one-half
of the area of the common wall is open and unobstructed and provides an opening
of not less than one-tenth of the floor area of the interior room or 25 square
feet, whichever is greater.
(c)   Mechanical ventilation.
(1)   In lieu of required openable windows for natural ventilation, a
mechanical ventilation system may be provided for all spaces except bedrooms.
(2)   Mechanical ventilation systems for bathrooms containing a bathtub or
shower or combination thereof, laundry rooms, and similar rooms, must provide
not less than five air changes per hour and must be connected directly to the
outside. The point of discharge of exhaust air must be at least 3 feet from any
opening that allows air entry into occupied portions of the building.
(3)   Mechanical ventilation systems for all habitable rooms, except bedrooms,
and public corridors must be capable of providing not less than two air changes
per hour. At least one-fifth of the air supply must be taken from the outside.
(4)   All bathrooms, lavatories, and toilet compartments that are ventilated by
mechanical ventilation must have fixed openings, from adjacent rooms or
corridors or from other approved sources, that are sufficient to provide an
inflow of air necessary to make exhaust ventilation effective. The exhaust air
from bathrooms, lavatories, and toilet compartments may not be recirculated.
Exhaust duct systems for toilet compartments and bathrooms must be separate
from the exhaust duct systems for other portions of a building.
(5)   Toilet compartments, bathrooms, and kitchens ventilated in accordance
with this subsection may be provided with artificial light. When a water closet
in a bathroom or toilet compartment is completely enclosed by partitions, the
enclosure must be separately lighted and ventilated.
(6)   Systems of mechanical ventilation installed to comply with this code must
be kept in good working order and in continuous operation at all times during
occupancy of the room served by the system. All openings to ventilators must be
rat-proofed.
(d)   Hallways. All public hallways, stairs, and other exitways must be
adequately lighted at all times in accordance with the building code.
(e)   Applicability. Except as provided in this subsection, this section does
not apply to the retrofitting and repurposing of nonresidential buildings or
structures for multi-family dwelling purposes; provided that:
(1)   “Multi-family dwelling” has the same meaning as defined in § 21-10.1;
(2)   The retrofitting or repurposing does not include the rehabilitation of
any existing dwelling units other than those allowed by way of this section;
(3)   Every space intended for human habitation must comply with the natural
light or artificial lighting standards and requirements of the International
Building Code;
(4)   Each dwelling unit must be provided with natural ventilation or
mechanical ventilation in accordance with the standards and requirements of the
International Building Code;
(5)   In the event of a power outage, for dwelling units exclusively reliant on
mechanical ventilation, the fresh air supply system must maintain the delivery
of outdoor air to the dwelling units pursuant to the ventilation requirements
of the International Building Code. Dwelling units meeting the openable window
ventilation requirements of Chapter 16A or the natural ventilation requirements
of the International Building Code are not required to be equipped with or
utilize a backup emergency power and fresh air supply system;
(6)   The multi-family dwelling owner or manager, as applicable, shall develop
and maintain an evacuation plan;
(7)   Any purchase or rental agreement for a dwelling unit reliant on
mechanical ventilation must include notice that the unit is mechanically
ventilated with non-openable windows; and
(8)   The retrofitting or repurposing is exempt from park dedication or
additional off-street parking requirements; provided that:
(A)   The number of the building’s existing off-street parking spaces satisfies
at least 50 percent of the city’s off-street parking requirement; and
(B)   The building’s floor area, height, and setbacks do not change as a result
of adaptive reuse, except for the purpose of providing outdoor amenities for
the residential use or activating the street frontage of a ground floor
commercial area.
(Sec. 25-4.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 4, § 27-4.4) (Am.
Ords. 97-50, 25-3)
Editor’s note:
   In accordance with Ord. 25-3, the amendments made to § 16A-4.4 do not affect
any building permits issued prior to January 1, 2025. All building permit
applications received prior to January 1, 2025 and deemed complete for
processing by the Department of Planning and Permitting must be processed in
accordance with § 16A-4.4 as it read prior to January 1, 2025.
§ 16A-4.5 Sanitation.
(a)   Dwelling units, lodging houses, and congregate residences. Every dwelling
unit, lodging house and congregate residence shall be provided with a bathroom
equipped with facilities consisting of a water closet, lavatory, and either a
bathtub or shower.
(b)   Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories, and baths are not
provided, there shall be provided on each floor for each sex at least one water
closet and lavatory and one bath accessible from a public hallway. Additional
water closets shall be provided on each floor for each sex at the rate of one
for every additional 10 guests, or fractional number thereof, in excess of 10.
Such facilities shall be clearly marked to designate the sex.
(c)   Kitchen. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a kitchen. Every
kitchen shall be provided with a kitchen sink. No wooden sink or sink of
similarly absorbent material shall be permitted.
(d)   Fixtures.
(1)   All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to a sanitary sewer or to an
approved private sewage disposal system. All plumbing fixtures shall be
connected to an approved system of water supply and provided with hot and cold
running water necessary for its normal operation.
(2)   All plumbing fixtures shall be of an approved glazed earthenware type or
of a similarly nonabsorbent material.
(e)   Water closet compartments. Walls and floors of water closet compartments,
except in dwellings, shall be finished in accordance with the building code.
(f)   Room separations. Every water closet, bathtub, or shower required by this
code shall be installed in a room that will afford privacy to the occupant.
(g)   Installation and maintenance. All sanitary facilities shall be installed
and maintained in a safe and sanitary condition and in accordance with all
applicable requirements of the plumbing code.
(Sec. 25-4.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 4, § 27-4.5) (Am.
Ord. 97-50)
ARTICLE 5: STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
16A-5.1   Structural requirements
§ 16A-5.1 Structural requirements.
(a)   Generally. Buildings or structures may be of any type of construction
permitted by the building code. Roofs, floors, walls, foundations, and all
other structural components of buildings shall be capable of resisting the
forces and loads required by the building code. All structural elements shall
be proportioned and joined in accordance with the stress limitations and design
criteria as specified in the appropriate sections of the building code.
Buildings of every permitted type of construction shall comply with the
applicable requirements of the building code.
(b)   Shelter. Every building shall be weather protected so as to provide
shelter for the occupants against the elements and to exclude dampness.
(Sec. 25-5.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 5, § 27-5.1) (Ree.
Ord. 97-50)
ARTICLE 6: MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
16A-6.1   Mechanical requirements
§ 16A-6.1 Mechanical requirements.
(a)   Heating facilities. When provided, heating facilities in dwelling units,
guest rooms, and congregate residences shall be installed and maintained in a
safe condition and in accordance with all applicable laws. No unvented fuel-
burning heaters shall be permitted. All heating devices or appliances shall be
of an approved type.
(b)   Electrical equipment. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances
shall be installed and maintained in a safe condition and in accordance with
all applicable laws. All electrical equipment shall be of an approved type.
Where there is electrical power available within 300 feet of any building, such
building shall be connected to such electrical power. Every habitable room
shall contain at least two electrical convenience outlets or one convenience
outlet and one electric light fixture. Every water closet compartment,
bathroom, laundry room, furnace room, and public hallway shall contain at least
one electric light fixture.
(c)   Ventilation. Ventilation for rooms and areas and for fuel-burning
appliances shall be provided as required in accordance with all applicable laws
and in this code. Ventilating equipment shall be of approved types, installed
and maintained in a safe condition and in accordance with all applicable laws.
Where mechanical ventilation is provided in lieu of the natural ventilation
required by § 16A-4.4, such mechanical ventilation system shall be maintained
in operation during the occupancy of any building or portion thereof.
(d)   Domestic clothes dryers.
(1)   Where clothes dryer ducts are installed, moisture exhaust ducts shall
have a minimum 4-inch diameter. The duct shall be of metal and shall have
smooth interior surfaces.
Exception: approved flexible duct connectors not more than 6 feet in length may
be used in connection with domestic dryer exhausts. Flexible duct connectors
shall not be concealed within construction.
(2)   Moisture exhaust ducts and plenums shall terminate on the outside of the
building and shall be equipped with a back-draft damper. In no case shall the
moisture exhaust duct or plenum terminate beneath the building or in the attic.
Screens shall not be installed at the duct termination. Ducts for exhausting
clothes dryers shall not be connected or installed with sheet metal screws or
other fasteners that will obstruct the flow. Moisture exhaust ducts shall not
be connected to a gas vent connector, gas vent, or chimney and shall not extend
into or through ducts or plenums serving other appliances or fixtures.
(3)   Unless otherwise permitted or required by the dryer manufacturer’s
installation instructions and approved by the building official, moisture
exhaust ducts shall not exceed a total combined horizontal and vertical length
of 14 feet, including two 90-degree elbows. Two feet shall be deducted for each
90-degree elbow in excess of two elbows. Plenums receiving discharge from two
or more moisture exhaust ducts shall not be installed, unless designed by a
registered professional engineer or architect and approved by the building
official.
(4)   When a closet is designed for the installation of a clothes dryer, a
minimum opening of 100 square inches for makeup air shall be provided in the
door or by other approved means.
(Sec. 25-6.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 6, § 27-6.1) (Am.
Ord. 97-50)
ARTICLE 7: EXITS
Section
   
16A-7.1   Exits
§ 16A-7.1 Exits.
   Every dwelling unit or guest room shall have access directly to the outside
or to a public corridor. All buildings or portions thereof shall be provided
with exits, exitways, and appurtenances as required by the building code.
(Sec. 25-7.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 7, § 27-7.1) (Ree.
Ord. 97-50)
ARTICLE 8: FIRE PROTECTION
Section
   
16A-8.1   Fire protection
§ 16A-8.1 Fire protection.
   All buildings, or portions thereof, shall be provided with the degree of
fire-resistive construction as required by the building code, for the
appropriate occupancy, type of construction, and location on property, and
shall be provided with the appropriate fire-extinguishing systems or equipment
required by the building code.
(Sec. 25-8.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 8, § 27-8.1) (Am.
Ord. 97-50)
ARTICLE 9: VIOLATIONS
Section
   
16A-9.1   Violations
§ 16A-9.1 Violations.
(a)   It is unlawful for any person to permit or maintain any use or condition
on property that does not meet the requirements of this code or to maintain or
permit any public nuisance on property governed by this code.
(b)   Responsibilities defined. The owner of a building, structure, or real
property governed by this code shall be liable for violations of this code. The
duty to comply with this code also extends to the occupants of any building and
persons in possession of real property governed by this code. However, the
imposition of liability for violations of this code against the occupants of a
building or structure or persons in possession of real property does not
relieve the owner of a building, structure, or real property from the
responsibility to comply with this code or any penalties imposed by this code.
(c)   This code is not intended to create a procedure for the elimination of
private nuisances by the city. All members of the public shall be responsible
for resolving disputes arising from private nuisances through the appropriate
legal process.
(1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 9, § 27-9.1) (Added by Ord. 14-36)
ARTICLE 10: ENFORCEMENT
Sections
   
16A-10.1   Authority—Responsibilities
   
16A-10.2   Substandard buildings declared public nuisance
   
16A-10.3   Complaints inquiry and inspection
   
16A-10.4   Building board of appeals
   
16A-10.5   Enforcement—Penalty
   
16A-10.6   Placement of “housing code violator” sign
§ 16A-10.1 Authority—Responsibilities.
(a)   Authority. The building official is authorized and directed to administer
and enforce all of this code.
(b)   Right of entry. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the building
official may enter at reasonable times any building, structure or property in
the city to perform any duty imposed upon such person by this code.
(c)   Administrative warrant. If the building official is unable to obtain the
consent of a property owner or person in possession of real property to carry
out any duty required of this code, or if such consent is denied, the building
official may obtain an administrative warrant issued by any circuit or district
court judge within the jurisdiction upon:
(1)   Proper oath or affirmation showing probable cause that a violation of
this code exists on the property; or
(2)   An order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction that authorizes the
building official to enter private property to abate a public nuisance by
seizing, removing, repairing, altering, demolishing, or otherwise destroying
private property pursuant to this code.
(Sec. 25-11.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 10, § 27-10.1)
(Am. Ords. 97-50, 14-36)
§ 16A-10.2 Substandard buildings declared public nuisance.
   Buildings that are substandard, as defined by this code, are declared to be
public nuisances.
(Sec. 25-11.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 10, § 27-10.2)
(Am. Ord. 97-50)
§ 16A-10.3 Complaints inquiry and inspection.
(a)   Any person may submit a written complaint to the building official
reporting a violation of this code. The complainant shall sign the complaint
and describe the suspected violation, the property on which it is occurring,
its location on the property, and any reports, documents, or citations that
support a finding of violation.
(b)   If the building official receives a complaint that contains sufficient
facts or allegations to support a determination that a violation of this code
exists, the building official shall make inquiry or take up an investigation of
the complaint.
(c)   Nothing in this code precludes the building official from initiating an
investigation into potential violations of this code that are not reported by a
written complaint.
(Sec. 25-11.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 10, § 27-10.3)
(Am. Ords. 97-50, 14-36)
§ 16A-10.4 Building board of appeals.
(a)   Definition. For the purpose of this code “building board of appeals” or
“board” means the board of appeals as specified in the building code.
(b)   Powers and duties. In addition to those powers and duties specified in
the building code, the building board of appeals:
(1)   Shall conduct hearings in conformity with HRS Chapter 91 and the rules of
the building board of appeals; and
(2)   May recommend amendments to or revisions of this code consistent with the
purpose of this code.
(Sec. 25-11.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 10, § 27-10.4)
(Am. Ord. 97-50)
§ 16A-10.5 Enforcement—Penalty.
(a)   Notice of violation. Whenever any person violates this code, the building
official shall serve a notice of violation upon the responsible person or
persons. The notice of violation must require that the responsible person or
persons bring the property, building, or structure or any noncompliant portion
of the same into compliance with the requirements of this code. Notices of
violation must be served upon responsible persons either personally or by
certified mail. However, if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the
same cannot be ascertained by the building official in the exercise of
reasonable diligence and the building official provides an affidavit to that
effect, then a notice of violation may be issued by publishing the same in
accordance with HRS § 1-28.5, or if that provision no longer applies, by
publication once each week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city.
Notices of violation must include at least the following information:
(1)   Date of the notice;
(2)   The name and address of the person noticed and the location of the
violation;
(3)   The section number of the ordinance, code, or rule that has been
violated;
(4)   The nature of the violation or a description of the same; and
(5)   The deadline for compliance with the notice.
(b)    Criminal prosecution.
(1)   General. Any person violating this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or
portion thereof during which such violation is committed, continued, or
permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment for not more
than one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(2)   Any officer or inspector designated by the building official, who has
been deputized by the chief of police as a special officer for the purpose of
enforcing the building, plumbing, electrical, or housing code (hereinafter
referred to as “authorized personnel”), may arrest without warrant alleged
violators by issuing a summons or citation in accordance with the procedure
specified in this section. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
barring such authorized personnel from initiating prosecution by warrant or
such other judicial process as is permitted by statute or rule of court.
(3)   Any authorized personnel designated by the building official, upon making
an arrest for a violation of the building, plumbing, electrical, or housing
code, may take the name and address of the alleged violator and shall issue to
the violator in writing a summons or citation hereinafter described, notifying
the violator to answer the complaint to be entered against the violator at a
place and at a time provided in the summons or citation.
(4)   Where the circumstances do not mandate the physical arrest of violators
of the building, plumbing, electrical, or housing code, authorized personnel
shall use a form of summons or citation to cite such violators. The
administrative judge of the district court shall adopt or prescribe the form
and content of the summons or citation. The summons or citation must be printed
on a form commensurate with the form of other summonses or citations used in
modern methods of arrest, so designed to include all necessary information to
make the same valid under the laws and regulations of the State and the city.
(5)   In every case when a citation is issued, the original of the same must be
given to the violator; provided that the administrative judge of the district
court may prescribe that the violator be given a carbon copy of the citation
and provide for the disposition of the original and any other copies.
(6)   Every citation must be consecutively numbered and each carbon copy must
bear the number of its respective original.
(c)   Administrative enforcement. In lieu of or in addition to enforcement
pursuant to subsection (b), if the building official determines that any person
is not complying with a notice of violation, the building official may have the
responsible person or persons served with a notice of order.
(1)   Contents of order.
(A)   The order may require the responsible person or persons to do any or all
of the following:
(i)   Correct the violation within the time specified in the order;
(ii)   Pay a civil fine not to exceed $1,000 in the manner, at the place, and
before the date specified in the order; or
(iii)   Pay a civil fine not to exceed $1,000 per day for each day in which the
violation persists, in the manner and at the time and place specified in the
order.
(B)   The order must advise the responsible person or persons that the fines,
if unpaid within the prescribed time period, can be added to specified fees,
taxes, or charges collected by the city, and can be recorded as an
administrative lien on all real property owned by the responsible person or
persons.
(C)   The order must advise the responsible person or persons that the order
becomes final 30 calendar days after the date of its delivery. The order must
also advise that the building official’s action may be appealed to the building
board of appeals.
(2)   Service of notices of order. A notice of order issued pursuant to this
section must be served upon the responsible person or persons either personally
or by certified mail. However, if the whereabouts of one or more responsible
persons is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the building official
in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the building official provides an
affidavit to that effect, a notice of order may be served by publishing the
same in accordance with HRS § 1-28.5, or if that provision no longer applies,
by publication once each week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city. A copy of the notice of order must also be
posted in a conspicuous place on the property affected by the complaint or
order and may be recorded in the State bureau of conveyances or the land court.
If so recorded, a notice of order shall have the same force and effect as other
lis pendens or other legal notices provided by law.
(3)   Effect of order; right to appeal. The order issued by the building
official under this section becomes final 30 calendar days after the date of
the delivery of the order. The responsible person or persons may appeal the
order to the building board of appeals as provided by the building code. The
appeal must be received in writing on or before the date the order becomes
final. However, an appeal to the building board of appeals does not stay any
provision of the order.
(4)   Addition of unpaid civil fines to fees or charges collected by the city;
administrative liens.
(A)   When civil fines imposed pursuant to this subsection remain unpaid after
all rights to administrative appeal or judicial review have been exhausted, and
the fines either:
(i)   Exceed $150,000; or
(ii)   Have been outstanding for more than five years;
the building official shall, pursuant to
Chapter 6, Article 1, and rules adopted by the building official, add the civil
fines to the fees and charges specified in paragraph (B), and record the unpaid
civil fines as a lien in favor of the city on all real property owned by the
responsible person or persons.
(B)   The building official shall, at a minimum, add the civil fines to the
following fees and charges collected by the city, if applicable to the
responsible person or persons:
(i)   All fees collected by the department of planning and permitting, unless
the fees are for permits, applications, or approvals for work necessary to
correct the violation that is the subject of the notice of order;
(ii)   Motor vehicle registration fee and vehicle weight tax;
(iii)   Motor vehicle transfer of ownership fee;
(iv)   Driver's license renewal fee;
(v)   Business license renewal fee;
(vi)   Liquor license and renewal fees;
(vii)   Refuse collection fee; and
(viii)   Refuse disposal fee.
(d)   Judicial enforcement.
(1)   Injunctive relief. The corporation counsel is authorized to bring an
action to enjoin any public nuisance, as defined by this code, at the request
of the building official. An injunction sought by the corporation counsel may
request any appropriate relief, including but not limited to an order requiring
a responsible person to remove, demolish, destroy, or otherwise abate a public
nuisance or city authorization to enter private property and seize, remove,
demolish, destroy, or otherwise abate a public nuisance.
(2)   The corporation counsel may seek an injunction from a court under
subdivision (1) if it appears that:
(A)   The public nuisance complained of was cited by the building official
pursuant to a notice of violation and notice of order and remains unabated
after all rights to appeal the notice of order have been exhausted or expired;
or
(B)   A building, use of real property, or conditions on real property governed
by this code present an unreasonable risk of harm to the public health, safety,
or welfare, and the public interests favor the removal of such unsafe or
unsanitary condition over the property owner’s interest in maintaining the
current use or condition of the property.
(3)   Where the city enters private property to abate a public nuisance, all
costs of correction, including legal costs and attorney's fees, may be reduced
to a judgment or recorded as a lien against the property on which such
abatement occurs. A lien recorded against the property that is registered in
the bureau of conveyances or land court is enforceable in the same manner as
any mortgage or other lien on real property. The interest secured by the city
lien is senior to any lien recorded or registered after the city lien is
recorded and subordinate to any lien recorded before the city lien.
(4)   The corporation counsel may seek enforcement of a lien under subsection
(c)(4) and subdivision (3) in the circuit court of the first circuit, and the
proceedings before the circuit court shall be conducted in the same manner and
form as ordinary foreclosure proceedings as provided for in HRS Chapter 667. If
the owners or claimants of the property against which a lien is sought to be
foreclosed, are at the time out of the city or cannot be served within the
city, or if the owners are unknown, and the fact shall be made to appear by
affidavit to the satisfaction of the court, and it shall in like manner appear
prima facie that a cause of action exists against such owners or claimants or
against the property described in the complaint, or that such owners or
claimants are necessary or proper parties to the action, the corporation
counsel may request the court to permit service to be made in the manner
provided by HRS §§ 634-23 through 634-29.
(5)   Any person aggrieved by a private nuisance may bring a civil action for
damages, for injunctive relief to enjoin such private nuisance, or for both
damages and injunctive relief.
(6)   Nothing in this section shall preclude the corporation counsel from
seeking any other remedy or enforcement action available by law.
(Sec. 25-11.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 10, § 27-10.5)
(Am. Ords. 97-50, 14-36, 21-29)
§ 16A-10.6 Placement of “housing code violator” sign.
(a)   The building official may place a “housing code violator” sign on the
city right-of-way fronting a building, structure, or premises with multiple
violations of this code. The building official shall establish criteria and
standards for determining the circumstances warranting the placement of a sign.
The building official shall establish the criteria and standards by rule
adopted in accordance with HRS Chapter 91.
(b)   A sign placed pursuant to this section shall set forth the words “housing
code violator” in capital letters and the name, address, and telephone number
of the party responsible for the violations at the subject building, structure,
or premises.
(1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 10, § 27-10.6) (Added by Ord. 97-50)
ARTICLE 11: SEVERABILITY
Section
   
16A-11.1   Severability
§ 16A-11.1 Severability.
   If any part of this code is for any reason declared unconstitutional or
invalid, the other separable parts thereof shall not be affected thereby.
(Sec. 25-12.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 27, Art. 11, § 27-11.1)
(Am. Ord. 97-50)
CHAPTER 16B: BUILDING ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
Article
   
1.   Building Energy Conservation Code
ARTICLE 1: BUILDING ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
Section
   
16B-1.1   Adoption of the State Energy Conservation Code
§ 16B-1.1 Adoption of the State Energy Conservation Code.
The Hawai‘i State Energy Code (SEC), as adopted by the State of Hawai‘i on
December 15, 2020, which adopts, with modifications, the International Energy
Conservation Code, 2018 edition (IECC), as copyrighted by the International
Code Council, is adopted by reference and made a part hereof, subject to the
following amendments, which, unless stated otherwise, are in the form of
amendments to the IECC 2018 edition:
(1)   Amending Section C101.1. Section C101.1 is amended to read:
C101.1 Title.
This code shall be known as the Building Energy Conservation Code (BECC) of the
City and County of Honolulu (CCH) or the CCH BECC. It is referred to herein as
“this code.”
(2)   Amending Section C101.3. Section C101.3 is amended to read:
C101.3 Intent. This chapter sets forth minimum requirements for the design and
construction of buildings for the effective use of energy and is intended to
provide flexibility to allow the use of innovative approaches and techniques to
achieve a reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from buildings. This code is
not intended to abridge safety, health or environmental requirements contained
in other applicable codes or ordinances.
These measures are intended to help buildings have lower energy costs, improved
grid stability, reduced greenhouse gas emissions, and increased resilience from
current and future climate impacts.
(3)   Amending Section C101.5. Section C101.5 is amended to read:
C101.5 Compliance. Commercial buildings shall meet the provisions of IECC.
Compliance and enforcement procedures are in accordance with ROH Chapter 16,
Article 10.
(4)   Adding Section C103.1. Section C103.1 is added to read:
C103.1 General. When the requirements in this code apply to a building as
specified in Section C101.4, plans, specifications, or other construction
documents submitted for a building, electrical, or plumbing permit required by
the jurisdiction must comply with this code and will be prepared, designed,
approved, and observed by a design professional. The responsible design
professional shall provide on the plans a signed statement certifying that the
project is in compliance with this code.
Exception: Any building, electrical, or plumbing work that is not required to
be prepared, designed, approved, or observed by a licensed professional
architect or engineer pursuant to HRS Chapter 464.
(5)   Adding Section C103.2. Section C103.2 is added to read:
C103.2 Information on construction documents. Construction documents must be
drawn to scale upon acceptable material or submitted in an electronic form
acceptable to the code official. Construction documents must be of sufficient
clarity to indicate the location, nature, and extent of work proposed and show,
in sufficient detail, pertinent data, and features of the building, systems,
and equipment as herein governed. Details must include, but are not limited to
the following, as applicable:
(a)   Insulation materials and their thermal resistance (R-values);
(b)   Fenestration U-Factors and solar heat gain coefficients (SHGCs);
(c)   Area-weighted U-factor and SHGC calculations;
(d)   Mechanical system design criteria and power requirements;
(e)   Mechanical and service water heating system and equipment types, sizes
and efficiencies;
(f)   Economizer description;
(g)   Equipment and system controls;
(h)   Fan motor horsepower (hp) and controls;
(i)   Duct sealing, duct and pipe insulation and location;
(j)   Lighting fixtures schedule with wattage and control narrative;
(k)   Location of daylight zones on floor plans;
(l)   Air sealing details;
(m)   Electric vehicle ready infrastructure; and
(n)   Solar ready infrastructure.
All plans, reports, and documents must be certified by the project design
professional or engineer, using the appropriate form shown below and submitted
to the code official certifying that the plans and documents conform to the
requirements of this code.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9654.jpg]
(6)   Adding Section C104.1. Section C104.1 is added to read:
C104.1 Fees. Prescribed fees must comply with ROH Chapter 18.
(7)   Adding Section C105.2. Section C105.2 is added to read:
C105.2 Required inspections. Inspections must comply with ROH Chapter 16.
(8)   Adding Section C105.2.6. Section C105.2.6 is added to read:
C105.2.6 Final inspection. The building must have a final inspection and cannot
be occupied until approved. The final inspection must include verification of
the installation of and proper operation of all required building controls, and
documentation verifying activities associated with required building
commissioning have been conducted and any findings of noncompliance corrected.
(9)   Adding Section C105.6. Section C105.6 is added to read:
C105.6 Re-inspection and testing. Where any work or installation does not pass
an initial test or inspection, the necessary corrections must be made to
achieve compliance with this code. The work or installation must then be
resubmitted to the responsible code official for inspection and testing as
required by this code.
(10)   Adding Section C105.7. Section C105.7 is added to read:
C105.7 Approval. After a building passes all tests and inspections required by
this code, the responsible design professional must submit a confirmation
letter to the code official certifying that the building has passed all of the
tests and inspections required and stating that the building owner has received
the Preliminary Commissioning Report, as required by IECC Section C408.2.4.
(11)   Adding Section C108.1. Section C108.1 is added to read:
C108.1 Authority. Stop work order must comply with ROH Chapter 18.
(12)   Adding Section C109.1. Section C109.1 is added to read:
C109.1 General. Appeals from the actions of the Code Official under this code
will be heard by the building board of appeals, subject to and in accordance
with the requirements of ROH Chapter 16.
(13)   Amending Section C202. Section C202 (“GENERAL DEFINITIONS”) is amended
by:
(a)   Amending the definition of “CODE OFFICIAL” to read:
CODE OFFICIAL means the director of planning and permitting or the director’s
authorized representative.
(b)   Amending the definition of “DWELLING UNIT” to read:
DWELLING UNIT means a building or portion thereof that contains living
facilities, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating,
cooking and sanitation, as required by this code, for not more than one family,
or a congregate residence for 16 or fewer persons.
(c)   Adding the definition of “ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV)” to read:
ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV) means an automotive-type vehicle for on-road use, such as
passenger automobiles, buses, trucks, vans, neighborhood electric vehicles, and
electric motorcycles, primarily powered by an electric motor that draws current
from a building electrical service, EVSE, a rechargeable storage battery, a
fuel cell, a photovoltaic array, or another source of electric current.
(d)   Adding the definition of “ELECTRIC VEHICLE SUPPLY EQUIPMENT (EVSE)” to
read:
ELECTRIC VEHICLE SUPPLY EQUIPMENT (EVSE) means equipment for plug-in power
transfer including the ungrounded, grounded and equipment grounding conductors,
and the electric vehicle connectors, attachment plugs, personal protection
system and all other fittings, devices, power outlets or apparatus installed
specifically for the purpose of transferring energy between the premises wiring
and the electric vehicle.
(e)   Adding the definition of “ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGER READY” to read:
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGER READY means a designated parking stall that is
provided with a dedicated circuit for future Level 2 EVSE. The circuit shall
terminate in a suitable termination point such as a receptacle, pullbox,
handhole, or junction box located in close proximity to the proposed location
of the electric vehicle charger ready stall. The service panel shall include an
over-current protection device.
(f)   Adding the definition of “HIGH EFFICACY LIGHTING” to read:
HIGH-EFFICACY LIGHTING means an efficacy of not less than 70 lumens per watt
for lamps and 55 lumens per watt for fixtures.
(g)   Adding the definition of “LIGHT REFLECTANCE VALUE” to read:
LIGHT REFLECTANCE VALUE means the amount of visible light that reflects from a
surface expressed as a percentage, where zero means a surface absorbs all light
and 100 means a surface reflects all light.
(h)   Adding the definition of “OCCUPIABLE SPACE” to read:
OCCUPIABLE SPACE means enclosed space intended for human activities, excluding
those spaces intended primarily for other purposes, such as storage rooms and
equipment rooms, that are only occupied occasionally and for short periods of
time.
(i)   Adding the definition of “RENEWABLE ENERGY” to read:
RENEWABLE ENERGY by reference to HRS § 269-91, renewable energy means energy
generated or produced using the following sources:
(1)   Wind;
(2)   Sun;
(3)   Falling water;
(4)   Biogas, including landfill and sewage-based digester gas;
(5)   Geothermal;
(6)   Ocean water, currents and waves, including ocean thermal energy
conversion;
(7)   Biomass, including biomass crops, agricultural, and animal residues and
waste and municipal solid waste and other solid waste;
(8)   Biofuels; and
(9)   Hydrogen produced from renewable energy sources.
(j)   Adding the definition of “SOLAR REFLECTANCE (SR)” to read:
SOLAR REFLECTANCE (SR) is the surface capability to reflect solar radiation
back to the hemisphere. It is a measure of the solar reflectance and emissivity
of materials that can be used as an indicator of how hot they are likely to
become when solar radiation is incident on their surface.
(k)   Adding the definition of “SOLAR REFLECTANCE INDEX (SRI)” to read:
SOLAR REFLECTANCE INDEX (SRI) is a measure of the constructed surface’s ability
to reflect solar heat, as shown by a small temperature rise. SRI Incorporates
both solar reflectance and thermal emissivity in a single value. SRI measures
the roof’s ability to reject solar heat, defined such that a standard black
(reflectance 0.05, emittance 0.90) is 0 and a standard white (reflectance 0.80,
emittance 0.90) is 100.
(14)   Amending Section C401.2. Section C401.2 is amended to read:
C401.2 Application. Commercial buildings shall comply with Section C409 and at
least one of the following:
(a)   The requirements of ANSHRAE/IESNA 90.1.
(b)   The requirements of Section C402 through C405, and C408. In addition, new
commercial buildings shall comply with Section C406.
(c)   The requirements of Section C402.5, C403.2, C403.3 through C403.3.2,
C403.4 through C403.4.2.3, C403.5, C403.7, C403.8.1 through C403.8.4, C403.10.1
through C403.10.3, C403.11, C403.12, C404, C405, C407 and C408. The building
energy cost shall be equal to or less than 85 percent of the standard reference
design building.
(15)   Amending Section C402.1.1. Section C402.1.1 is amended to read:
C402.1.1 Low-energy use buildings. The following low energy buildings, or
portions thereof separated from occupiable spaces by building thermal envelope
assemblies complying with this section, shall be exempt from the building
thermal envelope provision of Section C402:
(a)   Those with a peak design rate of energy usage less than 3.4 Btu/h-ft2
(10.7 W/m2) or 1.0 watt per square foot (10.7 W/m2) of floor area for space
conditioning purposes.
(b)   Unconditioned space that does not contain occupiable space.
(c)   Greenhouses.
(16)   Amending Section C402.2.2. Section C402.2.2 is amended to read:
C402.2.2 Above-grade wall. The minimum thermal resistance (R-value) of
materials installed in the wall cavity between framing members and continuously
on the wall shall be as specified in Table C402.1.3, based on framing type and
construction materials used in the wall assembly.
Exception: Continuous insulation for above grade walls, and mass walls are not
required when at least one of the following conditions is met:
1.   Walls have a covering with a light reflectance value of equal to or
greater than 0.64.
2.   Walls have overhangs with a projection factor equal to or greater than
0.3. The projection factor is the horizontal distance from the surface of the
wall to the farthest most point of the overhang divided by the vertical
distance from the first floor level to the bottom-most point of the overhang.
3.   Concrete, CMU and similar mass walls are 6 inches or greater in thickness
and have an unpainted finish with or without a clear sealer.
(17)   Amending Section C402.4.1.2. Section C402.4.1.2 is amended to read:
C402.4.1.2 Increased skylight area with daylight responsive controls. The
skylight area shall be permitted to be not more than six percent of the roof
area provided daylight responsive controls complying with Section C405.2.3.1
are installed in daylight zones under skylights.
Exception: Spaces where the designed general lighting power densities are less
than 80 percent of the lighting power densities specified in Table C405.3.2(1)
or C405.3.2(2).
(18)   Amending Section C403.2.2. Section C403.2.2 is amended to read:
C403.2.2 Ventilation. Ventilation, either natural or mechanical, shall comply
with the minimum standards of Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR), Title 11
Department of Health Chapter 39 Air Conditioning and Ventilating.
(19)   Amending Section C404.5. Section C404.5 is amended to read:
C404.5 Heated water supply piping. Heated water supply piping shall be in
accordance with Sections C404.5.1, C404.5.2 or C404.5.3, as amended.
(20)   Amending Section C404.5. Section C404.5 is amended by adding Section
C404.5.3 to read:
C404.5.3 Pipe insulation method. Hot water piping system shall be insulated in
accordance with Table C403.11.3.
(21)   Amending Section C405.2. Section C405.2 is amended by adding Exceptions
4 and 5 to read:
Exceptions:
4.   Spaces that use 80 percent or less of the lighting power densities
(designated watts per square foot), as specified in Table C405.3.2(1) and Table
C405.3.2(2), are exempt from Sections C405.2.2 (Time switch controls) and
C405.2.3 (Daylight-responsive controls).
5.   Corridors, passageways, lobbies, and other circulation spaces within
multi-family buildings that are required to remain lighted for egress purposes.
(22)   Amending Section C406.3. Section C406.3 is amended to read:
C406.3 Reduced lighting power. The total connected interior lighting power
(watts) shall be calculated in accordance with Section C405.3.1 and shall be
less than 80 percent of the lighting power density allowance specified in the
code, in accordance with Section C405.3.2.
(23)   Amending Section C408.2.4.1. Section C408.2.4.1 is amended to read:
C408.2.4.1 Acceptance of reports. Buildings, or portions thereof, shall not be
considered acceptable for a certificate of occupancy until the code official
has received a letter of transmittal from the building owner acknowledging that
the building owner or owner’s authorized agent has received the Preliminary
Commissioning Report.
(24)   Amending Section C408.3.1. Section C408.3.1 is amended to read:
C408.3.1 Functional testing. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy,
the registered design professional shall provide evidence that the lighting
control systems have been tested to ensure that control hardware and software
are calibrated, adjusted, programmed and in proper working condition in
accordance with the construction documents and manufacturer’s instructions.
Functional testing must be in accordance with Sections C408.3.1.1 through
C408.3.1.3 for the applicable control type.
(25)   Adding Section C409. Section C409 is added to read:
C409 Electric vehicle infrastructure. All newly-created parking stalls for
newly-constructed residential multi-unit and commercial buildings must comply
with one of the electric vehicle readiness compliance pathways specified in
Section C409.1 (Prescriptive) or Section C409.2 (Point-based). For purposes of
Section C409.1, Section C409.2, and Tables
C409.1 and
C409.2, the following apply:
(a)   COMMON AREA STALL means any parking stall that is not intended to be
assigned, sold, leased, or attached contractually to a specific dwelling unit
or commercial establishment;
(b)   DEDICATED STALL means any parking stall that is intended to be assigned,
sold, leased, or attached contractually to a specific dwelling unit or
commercial establishment; and
(c)   When computation of the number of required electric vehicle charger ready
stalls results in a fractional number with a fraction of 0.5 or greater, the
number of required electric vehicle charger ready stalls required will be the
next highest whole number.
C409.1 Baseline percentage electric vehicle readiness compliance path. Newly-
constructed parking stalls for newly-constructed residential multi-unit
buildings that add eight or more new parking stalls must be electric vehicle
charger ready for at least 25 percent of the newly-added parking stalls. Newly-
constructed parking stalls for newly-constructed commercial buildings that add
12 or more new parking stalls must be electric vehicle charger ready for at
least 25 percent of the newly-added parking stalls. Construction Plans must
reflect these developments.
Exceptions:
1.   For retail uses under ROH Chapter 21, the total number of newly-added
parking stalls that must be electric vehicle charger ready is reduced by 20
percent, rounding up to the next whole number.
2.   For affordable housing units offered for sale, the total number of newly-
added parking stalls that must be electric vehicle charger ready is reduced by
20 percent, rounding up to the next whole number.
3.   For affordable housing units offered for rent, none of the total number of
newly-added parking stalls are required to be electric vehicle charger ready.
 
Table C409.1
CHARGE METHODS ELECTRICAL RATING
Charge Method       Normal Supply      Maximum Current     Supply Power
                    Voltage (Volts)    (Amps - Continuous)
AC Level 2
(enclosed attached  208 to 240V AC, 1- Minimum 16A         208/240V AC/20-100A
residential garages phase                                  (16- 80A continuous)
only)
AC Level 2          208 to 240V AC, 1- Minimum 32A         208/240V AC/40-100A
                    phase                                  (32- 80A continuous)
 
C409.2 Points-based electric vehicle readiness compliance path. Newly-
constructed parking stalls for newly-constructed residential multi-unit
buildings that add eight or more parking stalls must be equipped to achieve no
less than one point for every four parking stalls based on the EV charger
capacity requirements and values listed in Table C409.2. Newly-constructed
parking stalls for newly-constructed commercial buildings that add twelve or
more parking stalls must be equipped to achieve no less than one point for
every four parking stalls based on the capacity requirements and values listed
in Table
C409.2. Construction plans must demonstrate that the stalls are equipped to
achieve no less than one point for every four parking stalls based on the
capacity requirements and values listed in Table C406.8.2.
Retail uses under ROH Chapter 21 may only qualify for compliance points under
Table
C409.2 in the following two categories:
(a)   Dedicated electric vehicle charger ready stalls; or
(b)   Common Area Stall with electric vehicle supply equipment installed.
For purposes of compliance under this subsection, building developers may
aggregate points across multiple projects and phases; provided that each
individual project achieves no less than 10 percent compliance or adds a
minimum of one electric vehicle charger ready stall per project, whichever is
greater. All aggregation plans under this subsection must be identified and
verified by a registered design professional and the building official at the
time of permitting.
Exceptions:
1.   For retail uses under ROH Chapter 21, the total number of points that
would otherwise be required to comply with the points-based requirements under
this subsection will be reduced by 20 percent.
2.   For affordable housing units offered for sale, the total number of points
that would otherwise be required to comply under this subsection will be
reduced by 20 percent.
3.   For affordable housing units offered for rent, no points under this
subsection will be required.
 
Table C409.2
ELECTRIC VEHICLE READINESS POINT-BASED COMPLIANCE VALUES
                                        Compliance Points
Electric
Vehicle      Charging     Time to       Dedicated EV  Common Area  Common Area
Charger      Rate (kW) at charge 50 kW  Charger Ready EV Charger   Stall w/EVSE
Capacity     208 Vac      battery (hrs) Stalls        Ready Stalls Installed
Level
                                        1 (in
Level 2,     3.4          15            enclosed      N/A          N/A
Minimum 16A                             attached
                                        garage)
Level 2,     6.7          7.5           1             4            7
Minimum 32A
Level 2, 64A 13.3         3.8           1             7            14
to 80A
DCFC 50 kW
(480.277 Vac 50.0         1.0           1             25           50
3-phase)
(26)   Adding Appendix CB. Appendix CB is a voluntary provision and is added to
read:
APPENDIX CB VOLUNTARY STRETCH CODE - COMMERCIAL
SECTION CB101   GENERAL
CB101.1 Purpose. The purpose of this appendix is to support the City and County
of Honolulu’s energy and climate goals by accelerating the savings obtained
from the commercial building sector through their local building energy codes.
The City and County of Honolulu recognizes the need for Hawai‘i to dramatically
reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to avoid the most catastrophic effects of
climate change. This voluntary Stretch Code is supportive of the State’s goal
of achieving net negative GHG emissions no later than 2045 and advancing
implementation of the O‘ahu Resilience Strategy. In addition, the Stretch Code
helps deliver significant co-benefits to the community of Honolulu, which will
enhance the quality of life within the community. The Stretch Code was
developed to focus on the interaction of commercial buildings with the energy
grid, supporting both grid and building decarbonization.
CB101.2 Scope. This code applies to commercial buildings, as defined by the
International Energy Conservation Code and ASHRAE Standard 90.1, that opt to
follow the voluntary Stretch Code.
CB101.3 Requirements. Commercial buildings shall comply with the requirements
of sections indicated within Table
CB 101.3 and Sections CB 103 through CB105.
Table CB101.3
REQUIREMENTS FOR STRETCH CODE
IECC SECTION TITLE
Table CB101.3
REQUIREMENTS FOR STRETCH CODE
IECC SECTION                                TITLE
Envelope
   C402.5                                Air leakage-thermal envelope
Mechanical
   C403.1.1                              Calculation of heating and cooling
                                            loads
   C403.1.2                              Data centers
   C403.2                                System design
   C403.3                                Heating and cooling equipment
                                            efficiencies
   C403.4, except C403.4.3, C403.4.4 and Heating and cooling system controls
C403.4.5
   C403.5.5                              Economizer fault detection and
                                            diagnostics
   C403.7, except C403.7.4.1             Ventilation and exhaust systems
   C403.8, except C403.8.6               Fan and fan controls
   C403.9                                Large-diameter ceiling fans
   C403.11, except C403.11.3             Refrigeration equipment performance
   C403.12                               Construction of HVAC system
                                            elements
   C403.13                               Mechanical systems located outside
                                            of the building thermal envelope
Service Water Heating
   C404                                  Service water heating
Electrical Power and Lighting
   C405, except C405.3                   Electrical power and lighting
                                            systems
Maintenance and Commissioning
   C408.1.1                              Building operations and maintenance
                                            information
 
SECTION CB102   DEFINITIONS
CB102.1 Definitions. The definitions contained in this section supplement or
modify the definitions in the International Energy Conservation Code and ASHRAE
Standard 90.1.
(a)   DEMAND RESPONSE SIGNAL means a signal that indicates a price or a request
to modify electricity consumption for a limited time period.
(b)   DEMAND RESPONSIVE CONTROL means a control capable of receiving and
automatically responding to a demand response signal.
(c)   ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV) means an automotive-type vehicle for on-road use,
such as passenger automobiles, buses, trucks, vans, neighborhood electric
vehicles, electric motorcycles, and the like, primarily powered by an electric
motor that draws current from a rechargeable storage battery, a fuel cell, a
photovoltaic array, or another source of electric current. Plug-in hybrid
electric vehicles are electric vehicles having a second source of motive power.
Off-road, self-propelled electric mobile equipment, such as industrial trucks,
hoists, lifts, transports, golf carts, airline ground support equipment,
tractors, boats and the like, are not considered electric vehicles.
(d)   ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEM (ESS) means one or more devices, assembled
together, capable of storing energy in order to supply electrical energy at a
future time.
SECTION CB103   MINIMUM ENERGY EFFICIENCY
CB103.1 Minimum energy efficiency. All buildings shall be designed using ASHRAE
Standard 90.1 Appendix G methodology. Buildings shall achieve a savings
reduction over baseline in accordance with Table
103.1 without the inclusion of on-site renewable energy or renewable energy
purchases.
TABLE 103.1
MINIMUM ENERGY SAVINGS OVER BASELINE
Building Type % Better Than Standard 90.1-2004
TABLE 103.1
MINIMUM ENERGY SAVINGS OVER BASELINE
Building Type              % Better Than Standard 90.1-2004
High-Rise Apartment        49%
Mid-Rise Apartment         60%
Hospital                   56%
Large Hotel                38%
Small Hotel                51%
Large Office               55%
Medium Office              53%
Small Office               59%
Outpatient Healthcare      60%
Fast Food Restaurant       24%
Full Service Restaurant    39%
Standalone Retail          66%
Strip Mall Retail          66%
Primary School             65%
Secondary School           63%
Non-Refrigerated Warehouse 73%
All Others                 57%
 
CB104.1 General. Buildings shall be designed to comply with this section for
the purpose of reducing demand and providing flexibility for the electric grid.
CB104.2 Demand responsive controls. All buildings shall provide controls and
capability for grid integration through participation in demand response
programs in accordance with this section.
CB104.2.1 Demand responsive water heating. Electric storage water heaters shall
be provided with demand responsive controls in accordance with Table
CB104.2.1 or another equivalent approved demand responsive control.
Exceptions:
1.   Water heaters that provide a hot water delivery temperature of 180°F
(82°C) or greater.
2.   Water heaters that comply with Section IV, Part HLW or Section X of the
ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code.
3.   Water heaters that use 3-phase electric power.
 
TABLE CB104.2.1
DEMAND RESPONSIVE WATER HEATING
          SIZE     Rated   Controls
Equipment CATEGORY Water   Manufactured
Type      (input)  Storage Before 7/1/  Manufactured on or after 7/1/2025
                   Volume  2025
                           ANSI/CTA-
                           2045-B
                           Level 1 and
                           also capable
                           of
Electric                   initiating
Storage            40-120  water        ANSI/CTA-2045-B Level 2, except “Price Steam Communication” functionality as
Water     12 kW    gallons heating to   defined in the standard.
heaters                    meet the
                           temperature
                           set point in
                           response to
                           a demand
                           response
                           signal.
 
CB104.2.2 Heating and cooling systems controls. Heating and cooling systems
shall be provided with controls in accordance with Sections CB104.3.1 through
CB 104.3.6.
CB104.2.2.1 Demand responsive controls. Buildings shall be provided with demand
responsive controls capable of executing the following actions in response to a
demand response signal:
(a)   Automatically increasing the zone operating cooling set point by the
following values: 1°F (0.5°C), 2°F (1°C), 3°F (1.5°C), and 4°F (2°C).
(b)   Automatically decreasing the zone operating heating set point by the
following values: 1°F (0.5°C), 2°F (1°C), 3°F (1.5°C), and 4 °F (2°C).
(c)   Automatically decreasing the zone operating cooling set point by the
following values: 1°F (0.5°C), 2°F (1°C).
(d)   Both ramp-up and ramp-down logic to prevent the building peak demand from
exceeding that expected without the DR implementation.
Where a demand response signal is not available the heating and cooling system
controls shall be capable of performing all other functions. Where thermostats
are controlled by direct digital control including, but not limited to, an
energy management system, the system shall be capable of demand responsive
control and capable of adjusting all thermal setpoints to comply. The demand
responsive controls shall comply with one of the following:
(a)   CB104.2.2.1.1 Air conditioners and heat pumps with two or more stages of
control and cooling capacity of less than 65,000 Btu/h. Thermostats for Air
conditioners and heat pumps with two or more stages of control and a cooling
capacity less than 65,000 Btu/h shall be provided with a demand responsive
control that complies with the communication and performance requirements of
AHRI 1380.
(b)   CB104.2.2.1.2 All other HVAC systems.  Thermostats for HVAC systems shall
be provided with a demand responsive control that complies with one of the
following:
(1)   Certified Open ADR 2.0a VEN, as specified under Clause 11, Conformance.
(2)   Certified Open ADR 2.0b VEN, as specified under Clause 11, Conformance.
(3)   Certified by the manufacturer as being capable of responding to a demand
response signal from a certified Open ADR 2.0b VEN by automatically
implementing the control functions requested by the VEN for the equipment it
controls.
(4)   IEC 62746-10-1.
(5)   The communication protocol required by a controlling entity, such as a
utility or service provider, to participate in an automated demand response
program.
(6)   The physical configuration and communication protocol of CTA 2045-A or
CTA 2045-B.
Exceptions:
1.   Group I occupancies.
2.   Group H occupancies.
3.   Controls serving data center systems.
4.   Occupancies or applications requiring precision in indoor temperature
control as approved by the code official.
CB104.2.3 Energy storage readiness. Buildings shall comply with one of
CB104.2.3.1 or CB104.2.3.2.
CB104.2.3.1 Electrical energy storage energy capacity. Each building shall have
an ESS with rated energy capacity and rated storage capacity as follows:
(a)   ESS rated energy capacity (kWh) 1.0 x Installed PV System Rated Power
(kWDC).
(b)   ESS rated power capacity (kW) 0.25 x Installed PV System Rated Power
(kWDC)
Exception: DC-coupled battery systems shall comply with energy capacity only.
CB104.2.3.2 Electrical energy storage system ready. Each building shall have a
reserved ESS-ready area to accommodate future electrical storage meeting the
following electrical criteria:
(a)   Energy storage system rated energy capacity (kWh) Area of three largest
stories (ft2) x 0.0008 kWh/ft.
(b)   Energy storage system rated power capacity (kW) Area of three largest
stories (ft2) x 0.0002 kW/ft2.
CB104.2.3.2.1 ESS-ready location. Each ESS-ready area shall be located in
accordance with Section 1207 of the International Fire Code.
CB104.2.3.2.2 ESS-ready minimum area requirements. Each ESS-ready area shall be
sized in accordance with the designated rating of the planned system UL9540 or
UL9540a. Where rated to UL9540a, the spacing shall be per the manufacturer’s
instructions.
CB104.2.3.2.3 Electrical distribution equipment. The onsite electrical
distribution equipment shall have sufficient capacity, rating, and space to
allow installation of overcurrent devices and circuit wiring in accordance with
NFPA 70 for future electrical ESS installation meeting the criteria of Section
CB104.2.3.1.
CB104.2.3.2.4 Information on construction documents. Construction documents
shall include the following information for ESS systems:
(a)   Location reserved for inverters, metering equipment, ESS, and a pathway
reserved for routing of raceways or conduit from the renewable energy system to
the point of interconnection with the electrical service and the ESS.
(b)   Location and layout of a designated area for ESS.
(c)   Rated energy capacity and rated power capacity of the installed or
planned ESS.
CB104.3 Demand Responsive Performance. Buildings shall demonstrate designed and
modeled grid integration in accordance with this section.
CB104.3.1 Grid Peak Contribution. Buildings shall demonstrate an average
reduction in grid-delivered electricity demand during on-peak hours. Buildings
shall achieve a Grid Peak Contribution Improvement over baseline in accordance
with Table
104.3.1 without the inclusion of on-site renewable energy or renewable energy
purchases. The Annual Grid Peak Contribution Improvement shall be calculated
using the following equations:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9656.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9658.jpg]
 
TABLE 104.3.1
MINIMUM ANNUAL GRID PEAK CONTRIBUTION IMPROVEMENT OVER BASELINE
Building Type Minimum Annual GPCI
TABLE 104.3.1
MINIMUM ANNUAL GRID PEAK CONTRIBUTION IMPROVEMENT OVER BASELINE
Building Type              Minimum Annual GPCI
High-Rise Apartment        54%
Mid-Rise Apartment         66%
Hospital                   61%
Large Hotel                42%
Small Hotel                56%
Large Office               60%
Medium Office              58%
Small Office               65%
Outpatient Healthcare      66%
Fast Food Restaurant       26%
Full Service Restaurant    43%
Standalone Retail          72%
Strip Mall Retail          72%
Primary School             71%
Secondary School           69%
Non-Refrigerated Warehouse 80%
All Others                 63%
 
CB104.3.2 Demand Flexibility Capability. Buildings shall demonstrate the
ability to reduce net grid-delivered electricity demand averaged over a period
of four hours, without changing indoor air temperatures by more than 4°F (2°C).
Buildings shall demonstrate a Demand Flexibility Capability (DF) of no less
than 10% using the following equations:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9660.jpg]
SECTION CB105   COMMISSIONING AND OPERATIONS
CB105.1 General. Buildings shall be designed and operated to aid in compliance
with energy reporting, benchmarking, and performance-based requirements from
the jurisdiction or building owner to aid in reducing overall energy
consumption and grid impacts and diagnosing performance issues.
CB105.2 Mechanical systems and service water-heating systems commissioning and
completion requirements. Buildings containing 25,000 square feet or more of
conditioned space shall comply with the commissioning and completion
requirements of Section C408.2. Exceptions for system sizing shall not be
allowed under the application of this stretch code.
CB105.3 Energy reporting. A data acquisition system having the capability to
store the data from the required meters and other sensing devices is required.
Data stored by the data acquisition system shall be shared with the
jurisdiction on an annual basis for no less than 36 months. Data shall be
provided in hourly, daily, monthly, and yearly logged data for each end-use
category required by Table
CB105.3.
TABLE CB105.3
ENERGY USE CATEGORIES
LOAD CATEGORY DESCRIPTION OF ENERGY USE
TABLE CB105.3
ENERGY USE CATEGORIES
LOAD CATEGORY                 DESCRIPTION OF ENERGY USE
                              Heating, cooling and ventilation, including
                              but not limited to fans, pumps, boilers,
                              chillers, and water heating. Energy used by
Total HVAC system             120-volt equipment, or by 208/120-volt
                              equipment that is located in a building
                              where the main service is 480/277-volt
                              power, is permitted to be excluded from
                              total HVAC system energy use.
Interior lighting             Lighting systems located within the
                              building.
Exterior lighting             Lighting systems located on the building
                              site but not within the building.
Plug loads                    Devices, appliances and equipment connected
                              to convenience receptacle outlets.
                              Any single load that is not included in
                              HVAC, lighting or plug load category and
                              that exceeds 5 percent of the peak
Process load                  connected load of the whole building,
                              including but not limited to data centers,
                              manufacturing equipment, and commercial
                              kitchens.
Electric vehicle charging     Electric vehicle charging loads.
                              The remaining loads not included in this
                              table, including but not limited to
Building operations and other vertical transportation systems, automatic
miscellaneous                 doors, motorized shading systems,
                              ornamental fountains, ornamental
                              fireplaces, swimming pools, in-ground spas
                              and snow-melt systems.
 
SECTION CB106   REFERENCED STANDARDS
AHRI            Air Conditions, Heating and Refrigeration
            Institute
            2311 Wilson Blvd. Suite 400
            Arlington, VA 22201
1380-2019         Demand Response Through Variable Capacity
            HVAC System in Residential and Small
            Commercial Applications CB104.2.2.1.1
ASME            American Society of Mechanical Engineers
            Two Park Avenue New York, NY 10016-5990
ASME/BPVC-2019      Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code CB 104.2.1
CTA            Consumer Technology Association
            1919 S. Eads Street
            Arlington, VA 22202
ANSI/CTA-2045-B      Modular Communications Interface for Energy
            Management T104.2.1
ANSI/CTA-2045-A      2018 Modular Communication Interface for
            Energy Management CB 104.2.2.1.2
IEC            International Electrotechnical Commission
            IEC Regional Centre for North America
            446 Main Street 16th Floor
            Worcester, MA 01608
IEC 62746-10-1-2018   Systems interface between customer energy
            management system and the power
            management system Part 10-1: Open
            Automated demand response CB104.2.2.1.2
OpenADR         Open ADR Alliance
            111 Deerwood Road Suite 200
            San Roman, CA 94583
2.0a and 2.0b- 2019      Profile Specification Distributed Energy
            Resources CB104.2.2.1.2
UL            Underwriters Laboratories LLC
            333 Pfingsten Road
            Northbrook, IL 60062
9540-2020         Standard for Energy Storage Systems and
            Equipment CB104.2.3.2.2   16B-19
9540A-2019         Standard for Safety Test Method for Evaluating
            Thermal Runaway Fire Propagation in Battery
            Energy Storage Systems CB104.2.3.2.2
(27)   Amending Section R101.5. Section R101.5 is amended to read:
R101.5 Compliance. Compliance and enforcement procedures are in accordance with
ROH Chapter 16, Article 10, and Chapter 18, Article 7.
(28)   Adding Section R103.1. Section R103.1 is added to read:
R103.1 General. Construction documents and other supporting data must be
submitted to indicate compliance with this code. The construction documents
shall be prepared, designed, approved and observed by a duly licensed design
professional, as required by HRS Chapter 464. The responsible design
professional must provide on the plans a signed statement certifying that the
project is in compliance with this Section R103.2 of this code.
Exception: Any building, electrical, or plumbing work that is not required to
be prepared, designed, approved, or observed by a licensed professional
architect or engineer, pursuant to HRS Chapter 464. Specifications and
necessary computations need not be submitted when authorized by the code
official.
(29)   Adding Section R103.2. Section R103.2 is added to read:
R103.2 Information on construction documents. Construction documents must be
drawn to scale upon suitable material or submitted in an electronic form
acceptable to the code official. Construction documents must be of sufficient
clarity to indicate the location, nature, and extent of work proposed and show,
in sufficient detail, pertinent data, and features of the building, systems,
and equipment as herein governed.
All plans, reports, and documents must be certified by the project design
professional or engineer, using the appropriate form shown below and submitted
to the code official certifying that the plans and documents conform to the
requirements of this code.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9662.jpg]
(30)   Amending Section R202. Section R202 is amended to read:
Section R202 General Definitions.
(a)   Add the definition of “High-Efficacy Lighting” to read:
HIGH-EFFICACY LIGHTING means an efficacy of not less than 70 lumens per watt
for lamps and 55 lumens per watt for fixtures
(b)   Add the definition of “LIGHT REFLECTANCE VALUE” to read:
LIGHT REFLECTANCE VALUE means the amount of visible light that reflects from a
surface expressed as a percentage, where zero means a surface absorbs all light
and 100 means a surface reflects all light.
(c)   Add the definition of “OCCUPIABLE SPACE” to read:
OCCUPIABLE SPACE means an enclosed space intended for human activities,
excluding those spaces intended primarily for other purposes, such as storage
rooms and equipment rooms, that are only occupied occasionally and for short
periods of time.
(31)   Amending Section R401.2. Section R401.2 is amended to read:
R401.2 Compliance. Buildings shall comply with Section R408 and either Sections
R401.2.1, R401.2.2, R401.2.3, or R401.2.4. Single-family homes over 7,000 sf
shall additionally comply with Section R401.3.
R401.2.1 Prescriptive compliance. Buildings shall comply with Sections R401
through R404.
R401.2.2 Total building performance. Buildings shall comply with Section R405.
R401.2.3 Energy rating index. Buildings shall comply with Section R406.
R401.2.4 Tropical zone. Buildings shall comply with Section R407.
(32)   Amending Section R401.2.1. Section R401.2.1 is re-numbered to R407.1:
R407.1 Tropical zone. [no change in text]
(33)   Amending Section R401.3. Section R401.3 is re-numbered to read R401.4:
R401.4 Certificate (Mandatory). [no change in text]
R401.4.1 Sampling.  [no change in text]
(34)   Adding Section R401.3. Section R401.3 is added to read:
R401.3 Large home compliance. Single-family homes greater than 7,000 square
feet shall comply with Section R401.3.1. Single-family homes greater than 7,000
square feet that have 2,000 square feet or more of conditioned space shall
comply with Sections R401.3.1 and R401.3.2.
(35)   Adding Subsection R401.3.1. Subsection R401.3.1 is added to read:
R401.3.1 Minimum efficiency. Buildings shall comply with the following
requirements, except where a requirement is preempted by a variance approved
pursuant to HRS § 196-6.5. These measures shall be treated as mandatory, and no
credit shall be taken for the measures in the compliance path selected for
compliance with Section R401.2:
(a)   Where used, installed electric water heaters, air conditioners over 2.5
tons (30,000 Btu), electric pool and spa pumps, and electric pool and spa
heaters shall be smart appliances capable of responding to grid signals.
(b)   Exterior walls shall have a minimum area-weighted initial solar
reflectance of 0.30 or a minimum insulation R-value of R-13.
(c)   Roofs shall be constructed with two of the following:
(1)   A minimum insulation R-value of R-30.
(2)   Attic venting in compliance with International Residential Code Section
R806.1 Radiant barrier with an emittance of 0.05 or less, tested in accordance
with ASTM C1371 or ASTM E408.
(3)   Roofs, based on slope, shall meet either an initial or three-year aged
solar reflectance index (SRI) value in accordance with Table
R401.3.1.4.
 
Table R401.3.1.4
ROOF SOLAR REFLECTANCE INDEX
                  Slope Initial SRI 3-year aged SRI
Low-sloped roof   ≤2:182          64
Steep-sloped roof >2:12 28          25
 
(36)   Adding Subsection R401.3.2. Subsection R401.3.2 is added to read:
R401.3.2 Additional efficiency. Buildings shall comply with the following
requirements, except where a requirement is preempted by a variance approved
pursuant to HRS § 196-6.5. These measures shall be treated as mandatory, and no
credit shall be taken for the measures in the compliance path selected for
compliance with Section R401.2:
(a)   Compliance must be completed in accordance with Section R401.2.2 or
R401.2.3.
(b)   For projects complying via Section R406, maximum ERI value of 52 not
including on-site power production calculated in accordance with RESNET/ICC
301.
(c)   For projects complying via Section R405, must be 10 percent lower than
the standard reference design.
(d)   HVAC systems shall be multi-stage or variable capacity systems.
(e)   Thermostats shall be provided with a demand responsive control that
complies with the communication and performance requirements of AHRI 1380 and
capable of communicating with the Virtual End Node (VEN) using a wired or
wireless bi-directional communication pathway that provides the homeowner the
ability to voluntarily participate in utility demand response programs, where
available. The thermostat shall be capable of executing the following actions
in response to a demand response signal:
(1)   Automatically increasing the zone operating set point by the following
values: 1°F (0.5°C), 2°F (1°C), 3°F (1.5°C), and 4°F (2°C).
(2)   Automatically decreasing the zone operating set point by the following
values: 1°F (0.5°C), 2°F (1°C), 3°F (1.5°C), and 4°F (2°C).
(3)   The thermostat shall be capable of performing all other functions
provided by the control when the grid-integrated controls are not available.
(37)   Amending Section R402.1. Section R402.1 is amended to read:
R402.1 General (Prescriptive). The building thermal envelope shall comply with
the requirements of Sections R402.1.1 through R402.1.5.
Exceptions: The following “low energy buildings”, or portions thereof separated
from the remainder of the building by building thermal envelope assemblies
complying with this section, shall be exempt from the building thermal envelope
provisions of Section R402.
1.   Those with a peak design rate of energy usage less than 3.4 Btu/h-ft2
(10.7 W/m2) or 1.0 watt per square foot (10.7 W/m2) of floor area for space
conditioning purposes.
2.   Unconditioned space that does not contain occupiable space.
(38)   Amending Table
R402.1.2. Row 1 of Table
R402.1.2 (Climate Zone 1) is amended to read:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9664.jpg]
(39)   Amending Section R402.2.5. Section R402.2.5 is amended to read:
R402.2.5 Mass walls. Mass walls where used as a component of the building
thermal envelope shall be one of the following:
(a)   Above-ground walls of concrete block (concrete masonry units) CMU,
concrete, insulated concrete form, masonry cavity, brick but not brick veneer,
adobe, compressed earth block, rammed earth, solid timber or solid logs.
(b)   Any wall having a heat capacity greater than or equal to 6 Btu/ft2. °F
(123 kJ/m2.K).
(c)   Mass walls shall comply with the insulation requirements of Table
R402.1.2 or the U-factor requirements of Table R402.1.4.
Exceptions: Insulation or R-value for mass walls, indicated in Table R402.1.2,
is not required when one of the following conditions is met:
1.   Walls have a covering with a light reflectance value greater than or equal
to 0.64;
2.   Walls have overhangs with a projection factor greater than or equal to
0.3. The projection factor is the horizontal distance from the surface of the
wall to the farthest most point of the overhang divided by the vertical
distance from the first floor level to the bottom most point of the overhang;
or
3.   Concrete, CMU and similar mass walls are 6 inches or greater in thickness
and have an unpainted finish with or without a clear sealer.
(40)   Amending Section R403.5.1. Section R403.5.1 is amended by deleting the
word “Mandatory” and adding Exceptions 1 and 2 to read:
   R403.5.1 Heated water circulation and temperature maintenance systems.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Piping located under a floor slab.
      2.   Buried piping.
(41)   Amending Section R403.5.1.1. Section R403.5.1.1 is amended to read:
   R403.5.1.1 Circulation systems. Heated water circulation systems may be
provided with a circulation pump. The system return pipe shall be a dedicated
return pipe or a cold water supply pipe. Controls for circulating hot water
system pumps shall start the pump based on the identification of a demand for
hot water within the occupancy. The controls shall automatically turn off the
pump when the water in the circulation loop is at the desired temperature and
when there is no demand for hot water.
(42)   Amending Section R403.5.1.2. Section R403.5.1.2 is amended to read:
   R403.5.1.2 Heat trace systems. Electric heat trace systems may comply with
IEEE 515.1 or UL 515. Controls for such systems shall automatically adjust the
energy input to the heat tracing to maintain the desired water temperature in
the piping in accordance with the times when heated water is used in the
occupancy.
(43)   Amending Section R403.5.3. Section R403.5.3 is amended to read:
R403.5.3 Hot water pipe insulation (Prescriptive). Insulation for hot water
piping with a thermal resistance, R-value, of not less than R-3 shall be
applied.
Exceptions:
1.   Piping located under a floor slab.
2.   Buried piping.
3.   Piping serving only one dwelling unit.
(44)   Amending Section R403.6. Section R403.6 is amended to read:
R403.6 Mechanical ventilation (Mandatory). The building shall be provided with
ventilation that complies with the requirements of the Housing Code, as
specified in Chapter
16A, as applicable, or with other approved means of ventilation. Outdoor air
intakes and exhausts shall have automatic or gravity dampers that close when
the ventilation system is not operating.
R403.6.1 Whole-house mechanical ventilation system fan efficacy. Fans used to
provide whole-house mechanical ventilation shall meet the efficacy requirements
of Table
403.6.1.
Exception: Where an air handler that is integral to tested and listed HVAC
equipment is used to provide whole-house mechanical ventilation, the air
handler shall be powered by an electronically commutated motor.
TABLE R403.6.1
WHOLE-HOUSE MECHANICAL VENTILATION SYSTEM FAN EFFICACYa
TABLE R403.6.1
WHOLE-HOUSE MECHANICAL VENTILATION SYSTEM FAN EFFICACYa
FAN LOCATION      AIR FLOW RATE MINIMUM MINIMUM EFFICACY  AIR FLOW RATE MAXIMUM
                  (CFM)                 (CFM/WATT)        (CFM)
HRV or ERV        Any                   1.2 cfm/watt      Any
Range hoods       Any                   2.8 cfm/watt      Any
In-line fan       Any                   2.8 cfm/watt      Any
Bathroom, utility 10                    1.4 cfm/watt      <90
room
Bathroom, utility 90                    2.8 cfm/watt      Any
room
For SI: 1 cfm = 28.3 L/min.
a. When tested in accordance with HVI Standard 916.
 
(45)   Adding an exception to Section R403.6.2. Section R403.6.2 is amended by
adding the exception to read:
Exception: For production home building, ceiling fan junction boxes shall be
provided for bedrooms and the largest interior space that is not used as a
bedroom, and ceiling fan equipment shall be provided as a buyer’s option.
(46)   Amending Section R404.1. Section R404.1 is amended by adding Section
R404.1.2 to read:
R404.1.2 High-efficacy lighting. An efficacy of not less than 70 lumens per
watt for lamps and 55 lumens per watt for fixtures.
(47)   Adding Section R408. Section R408 is added to read:
SECTION R408   SOLAR AND ELECTRIC VEHICLE READINESS
R408.1 Solar conduit and electrical panel readiness. Construction documents
shall indicate a location for inverters, metering equipment, battery equipment,
energy storage equipment, and other equipment necessary to interconnect a
residence with on-site solar energy generation facilities with the electrical
grid in compliance with applicable laws, statutes, and utility tariffs.
Construction documents shall indicate a pathway for routing of conduit from the
solar panel location to the point of interconnection with electrical service.
New single-family detached dwellings, two-family detached dwellings, and
duplexes shall install for each residence an electrical panel with reserved
space to accommodate not less than a five Kilowatt (AC) photovoltaic system.
New multifamily dwellings shall install an electrical panel that includes space
reserved to accommodate a photovoltaic system: (1) sized to serve common area
electrical loads, or (2) sized to the roof space available. The reserved space
shall be clearly labeled as solar PV ready. All feeders and electrical
distribution equipment, including switchgear, switchboards, and panel boards
that will be fed simultaneously by the electrical grid and other power sources
shall be sized to support the installation of future solar energy generation
systems per the interconnection requirements of the Electrical Code. New
residential buildings shall also install conduit not less than one and one-half
inches to provide a pathway from the electrical panel to the inverter location
and from the inverter location to the underside of the roof sufficient to allow
future installation of solar equipment. If conduits are to be installed between
separate buildings or other structures, construction documents shall provide
sufficient details to show that compliance with the Electrical Code’s
restrictions on the number of power supplies to each building or other
structure has been examined.
R408.2 Electric vehicle readiness.  In addition to what is required by the
Electrical Code, if a building permit application involves installation of an
electrical panel and parking area for a multifamily dwelling of three stories
or less or a detached dwelling or duplex, a dedicated receptacle or junction
box for an electric vehicle must be provided with a minimum AC Level 2 charge
(208 to 240V AC 1-phase minimum 16A) in each enclosed attached garage.
(Added by Ord. 23-25)
CHAPTER 16C: BUILDING MANAGEMENT
Article
   
1.   Better Buildings Benchmarking Program
ARTICLE 1: BETTER BUILDINGS BENCHMARKING PROGRAM
Section
   
16C-1.1   Definitions
   
16C-1.2   Annual benchmarking and reporting
   
16C-1.3   Benchmarking schedule
   
16C-1.4   Exemptions and time extensions
   
16C-1.5   Penalty for violations and enforcement
   
16C-1.6   Publication of data
   
16C-1.7   Benchmarking data sharing
   
16C-1.8   Maintenance of records
   
16C-1.9   Rules
§ 16C-1.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Benchmark.  To input and submit the total energy and water consumed for a
property for the previous calendar year and other descriptive information for
such property as required by the benchmarking tool.
Benchmarking Tool. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s ENERGY STAR®
Portfolio Manager, or any additional or alternative tool adopted by the
department, used to track and assess the energy and water use of certain
properties relative to similar properties.
Covered Property. A property that exceeds 25,000 square feet in gross floor
area. The following properties are not considered to be covered properties and
are not subject to any of the requirements of this article:
(1)   Single family, duplex, triplex and fourplex residential homes and related
accessory structures, or any other residential building with fewer than five
units;
(2)   Any building with less than 25,000 square feet in gross floor area, that
is not otherwise part of a campus for the purposes of benchmarking;
(3)   Properties classified as industrial per designated Standard Industrial
Classification (SIC) codes 20 through 39;
(4)   Properties owned by government bodies not subject to the authority of
this article or already governed by other articles; and
(5)   Other building types not meeting the purpose of this article, as
determined by the director.
Department. The office of climate change, sustainability and resiliency, except
where it refers to the department of planning and permitting.
Director. The executive for climate change, sustainability and resiliency,
except where it refers to the director of planning and permitting.
Energy.  Electricity, natural gas, steam, or other product sold by a utility to
a customer of a property, or renewable on-site electricity generation, for
purposes of providing heating, cooling, lighting, water heating, or for
powering or fueling other end-uses as recorded in the benchmarking tool.
ENERGY STAR® Portfolio Manager.  The tool developed and maintained by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency to track and assess the relative energy
performance of buildings.
ENERGY STAR® Score.  The numeric rating generated by the ENERGY STAR® Portfolio
Manager tool as a measurement of a building’s energy efficiency.
Financial Hardship. A property that:
(1)   Had arrears of property taxes or water or wastewater charges that
resulted in the property’s inclusion, within the prior two years, on the city’s
annual tax lien sale list;
(2)   Has a court appointed receiver in control of the asset due to financial
distress;
(3)   Is owned by a financial institution through default by the borrower;
(4)   Has been acquired by a deed in lieu of foreclosure; or
(5)   Has a senior mortgage subject to a notice of default.
Gross Floor Area.  The total property area, measured between the outside
surfaces of the exterior walls of the building. This includes all areas inside
the building including but not limited to lobbies, tenant areas, common areas,
meeting rooms, break rooms, base level atriums, restrooms, elevator shafts,
stairwells, mechanical equipment areas, basements, and storage rooms.
Owner.
(1)   An individual or entity possessing title to a property or, when a person
or entity holds the leasehold interest in an entire building for a term of five
years or longer, that person or entity in lieu of the title holder with respect
to that building;
(2)   The board of the owners’ association, in the case of a condominium
project;
(3)   The master association, in the case of a condominium project where the
powers of an owners’ association are exercised by or delegated to a master
association;
(4)   The board of directors, in the case of a cooperative apartment
corporation; or
(5)   An agent authorized to act on behalf of any of the above.
Property.
(1)   A single building;
(2)   One or more buildings held in the condominium form of ownership, and
governed by a single board of managers; or
(3)   A campus of two or more contiguous buildings that are owned and operated
by the same party, have a single shared primary function, and are:
(A)   Behind a common utility meter or served by a common mechanical/electrical
system (such as a chilled water loop) that would prevent the owner from being
able to easily determine the energy use attributable to each of the individual
buildings; or
(B)   Used primarily for:
(i)   A K-12 school;
(ii)   A hospital;
(iii)   A hotel;
(iv)   Multifamily housing; or
(v)   A senior care community.
Shared Benchmarking Information. Information generated by the benchmarking tool
and descriptive information about the physical property and its operational
characteristics that is shared with the department. The information must
include, but need not be limited to:
(1)   Descriptive information, such as:
(A)   Property address;
(B)   Primary use;
(C)   Gross floor area;
(D)   Number of floors;
(E)   Number of building parking spaces or parking area in square feet;
(F)   Number of years the property has been ENERGY STAR® Certified and the last
approval date, if applicable; and
(G)   Individual or entity responsible for the benchmarking submission.
(2)   Output information, such as:
(A)   Site and source energy use intensity;
(B)   Weather normalized site and source energy use intensity;
(C)   The ENERGY STAR® score, where available;
(D)   Total annual greenhouse gas emissions;
(E)   Monthly energy use by fuel type;
(F)   Indoor water use and water use intensity (consumption per gross square
foot);
(G)   Outdoor water use (where available);
(H)   Total water use;
(I)   The ENERGY STAR® Water Score, where available; and
(J)   General comments section, if needed, to explain the building’s ENERGY
STAR® scores.
Tenant.  A person or entity occupying or holding possession of a building, part
of a building, or premises pursuant to a rental or lease agreement or through
ownership of a unit within, or portion of, the building.
(Added by Ord. 22-17 )
§ 16C-1.2 Annual benchmarking and reporting.
(a)   For every covered property subject to this article, the owner shall
collect and enter all data needed to benchmark the entire property for the
previous calendar year into the benchmarking tool and annually submit to the
department the shared benchmarking information in an electronic report as
established by the department and by the date specified in §
16C-1.3.
(b)   The benchmarking report must be based on an assessment of the aggregated
total energy and water consumed by the property for the entire calendar year
being reported. Aggregated whole-building data for the property’s energy and
water use shall be compiled by the property owner using one or more of the
following methods:
(1)   Requesting and obtaining aggregated whole-building data from a utility;
(2)   Reading a master meter; or
(3)   Collecting data from all tenants, when a utility cannot provide
aggregated whole-building data.
(A)   Each nonresidential tenant located in a covered property must, within 30
days of a request by the owner and in a form to be determined by the
department, provide all information that cannot otherwise be acquired by the
owner and that is needed by the owner to comply with the requirements of this
article.
(B)   Nothing in this article will be construed to permit a property owner to
use tenant energy usage data for purposes other than compliance with
benchmarking reporting requirements established by this article, nor may the
reporting requirements of this article be construed to excuse property owners
from compliance with federal or State laws governing direct access to tenant
utility data from the responsible utility.
(c)   Before submitting the benchmarking report, the owner shall run all
automated data quality check functions available within the benchmarking tool.
The owner shall verify that all data has been accurately entered into the tool
or correct all missing or incorrect information as identified by the data
quality checker prior to submitting the benchmarking report.
(d)   If the current owner learns that any information reported as part of the
benchmarking report is inaccurate or incomplete, the owner must amend the
information reported within the benchmarking tool, and must provide the
department with an updated benchmarking report within 30 days of learning of
the inaccuracy.
(Added by Ord. 22-17 )
§ 16C-1.3 Benchmarking schedule.
(a)   The initial benchmarking reports for each covered property must be filed
in accordance with the schedule in the following table. Subsequent benchmarking
reports for each covered property are due by June 30 of each year thereafter.
 
Property                                                Initial Reporting Date
Covered properties 100,000 sq. ft.                      June 30, 2023
Covered properties 50,000 sq. ft. but < 100,000 sq. ft. June 30, 2024
Covered properties 25,000 sq. ft. but < 50,000 sq. ft.  June 30, 2025
 
(b)   No later than three months before each reporting deadline, for at least
the first three years during which an owner is required to provide a
benchmarking report, the department shall attempt to notify those owners of
their obligation to benchmark via direct mail, electronically via email, or
through a public posting on a website. Failure of the department to notify any
owner does not affect the obligation of the owner to complete and submit
required benchmarking reports.
(Added by Ord. 22-17 )
§ 16C-1.4 Exemptions and time extensions.
(a)   The owner of a covered property may request an exemption from submitting
a benchmarking report for a reporting year if any one or more of the following
conditions for the calendar year to be benchmarked are met:
(1)   The property did not have a certificate of occupancy or temporary
certificate of occupancy for the entire year required to be benchmarked;
(2)   A demolition permit for the entire building was issued and demolition
work has commenced prior to the benchmarking report due date for that year;
(3)   The property did not receive energy or water utility services for more
than a total of 30 days during that year; or
(4)   Due to special circumstances unique to the property, compliance with the
provisions of this article would not be in the public interest.
(b)   The owner of a covered property that contains more than six tenant meters
from a single utility may request an exemption from submitting a specified
portion of a benchmarking report for a reporting year if the owner, despite
good faith efforts, is unable to obtain aggregated whole-building data from
that utility. Documentation of good faith efforts must be provided to the
department and must include multiple requests by the owner for aggregated
whole-building data from the utility or written communication from the utility
stating its inability to provide aggregated whole-building data. An owner of a
covered property granted an exemption from submitting a specified portion of a
benchmarking report shall be required to enter and submit all other data, not
covered by the exemption, that are necessary to benchmark the property.
(c)   Any owner requesting an exemption from benchmarking must, no later than
30 days before the reporting deadline, submit to the department any
documentation reasonably necessary to substantiate the request or otherwise
assist the department in the exemption determination. The granting of any
exemption is limited to the benchmarking report for which the request was made
and does not extend to past or future submittals.
(d)   An owner may apply for a time extension to complete and submit a
benchmarking report if, despite the owner’s good faith efforts, it is unable to
complete the required actions prior to the reporting deadline. The owner
requesting an extension must, prior to the reporting deadline, submit to the
department any documentation reasonably necessary to substantiate the request
or otherwise assist the department in the determination. For each property, the
department may grant no more than two such extensions per year of no more than
60 days each.
(Added by Ord. 22-17 )
§ 16C-1.5 Penalty for violations and enforcement.
(a)   It is unlawful for any entity or person to fail to comply with the
requirements of this article or misrepresent any material fact in a document
required to be prepared or shared by this article.
(b)   If the department determines that a property owner has submitted
incomplete or false benchmarking information or failed to report benchmarking
information as required under this article, the department shall refer the
matter to the director of planning and permitting. The director of planning and
permitting may issue a written notice of violation to the property owner. The
notice of violation must require the property owner to correct the violation
and submit the initial or updated benchmarking information to the department
within 60 days of the date of the mailing of the notice of violation.
(c)   If initial or updated benchmarking information is not received by the
department within 60 days of the date of the mailing of the notice of violation
issued by the director of planning and permitting, the department will notify
the director of planning and permitting. The director of planning and
permitting may issue a notice of order requiring the property owner to comply
with the order and pay a civil fine not to exceed $1,000 and pay a civil fine
in the amount of $100 per day for each day the initial or updated benchmarking
information is not reported to the department, with civil fines not to exceed a
total of $5,000 per facility per reporting year.
(d)   The order issued by the director of planning and permitting becomes final
30 days after the date of mailing of the order. The property owner may appeal
the order to the department of planning and permitting. However, the appeal to
the department of planning and permitting will not stay any provision of the
order, including the daily fines.
(e)   The director of planning and permitting may institute a civil action in
any court of competent jurisdiction for the enforcement of any order issued
pursuant to this section. Where the civil action has been instituted to enforce
the civil fine imposed by an order, the director of planning and permitting
need only show that the notice of violation and order were served, that a civil
fine was imposed, the amount of the civil fine imposed, and that the fine
imposed has not been paid.
(Added by Ord. 22-17 )
§ 16C-1.6 Publication of data.
(a)   On an annual basis, no sooner than four months following the reporting
deadline specified in §
16C-1.3, the department shall make available on a publicly accessible website a
summary of the reported benchmarking information for each covered property for
the previous calendar year.
(b)   The summary will include, for each covered property, the property
address, gross floor area, and primary use; aggregated annual total water use;
aggregated annual energy use by fuel type; water and energy use intensity;
total annual greenhouse gas emissions; ENERGY STAR® scores where available;
year-over-year trends when applicable and available; and summary comments when
provided by the property owner.
(c)   When the ENERGY STAR® score or ENERGY STAR® Water Score is not applicable
or available for a covered property, it must be reported as “N/A” and not
designated as a numeric score.
(d)   For at least 60 days following publication, the online summary of
benchmarking information shall be considered preliminary, during which time a
property owner may review the summary. For each covered property, the owner may
report any errors, inaccuracies, or other discrepancies related to the
benchmarking information to the department for consideration and correction
where appropriate.
(e)   The department may include an aggregated summary of benchmarking
information and trends in the city’s annual sustainability report.
(Added by Ord. 22-17 )
§ 16C-1.7 Benchmarking data sharing.
(a)   The department may provide non-anonymized data from benchmarking reports
to any utility serving a covered property or to any federal, State, or city-
managed energy efficiency or management program; provided that the data will be
used only for purposes of offering programs, services, and incentives related
to energy and water efficiency and management; and provided that the department
has first obtained the covered property owner’s written or electronic
permission to share the data with the utility or energy efficiency or
management program.
(b)   The department may disclose any data from benchmarking reports to a third
party for academic or other non-commercial research purposes; provided that
such data is anonymized.
(Added by Ord. 22-17 )
§ 16C-1.8 Maintenance of records.
(a)   Owners of covered properties subject to this article shall maintain
records as the department determines is necessary for carrying out the purposes
of this article, including but not limited to the energy and water bills and
reports or forms received from tenants or utilities. The records must be
preserved for a period of at least one year. At the request of the department,
the records must be made available for inspection by the department.
(b)   When a covered property is sold or otherwise changes ownership, the
previous owner shall provide the new owner with all previous records related to
the requirements of this article and all information needed to benchmark for
the period during which the previous owner was in possession of the property.
(Added by Ord. 22-17 )
§ 16C-1.9 Rules.
   In accordance with HRS Chapter 91, the department may adopt rules having the
force and effect of law for the implementation, administration, and enforcement
of this article.
(Added by Ord. 22-17 )
CHAPTER 17: ELECTRICAL CODE
Articles
   
1.   Electrical Code
ARTICLE 1: ELECTRICAL CODE
Sections
   
17-1.1   Adoption of the State Electrical Code
§ 17-1.1 Adoption of the State Electrical Code.
   The State Electrical Code, as adopted by the State of Hawaii on August 21,
2018, which adopts, with modifications, the National Electrical Code (NEC),
NFPA 70, 2017 edition, as published and copyrighted by the National Fire
Protection Association, is adopted by reference and made a part hereof, subject
to the following amendments which, unless stated otherwise, are in the form of
amendments to the NEC 2017 edition:
(1)   Amending Section 90.2(B). Section 90.2(B) is amended by adding Subsection
90.2(B)(6) to read:
(6)   Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all electrical work and
installations in the City and County of Honolulu except the following:
a.   Electrical work on buildings or premises owned by or under the direct
control of the United States or the State of Hawaii.
b.   Electrical work by a public telephone or telegraph communication system
subject to regulation by the public utilities commission of the State of
Hawaii.
c.   The physical placement and reassembly of an electric sign, X-ray equipment
or household appliance.
d.   Existing electrical installations, which complied with the laws,
ordinances, and regulations in effect when the electrical work thereon was
performed, provided that such installations shall be subject to the provisions
of Section 90.4.1(d).
e.   Electrical work in accordance with the laws, ordinances, and regulations
in effect prior to the effective date of this code under a permit therefor
issued prior to such date.
f.   Electrical work related to work regulated by HRS Chapter 397, as amended,
relating to the Elevator Code, but not including electrical work for the supply
of power to the control panels of elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators, moving
walks and man lifts.
g.   Replacement or repair of devices and apparatus of air conditioning and
refrigeration systems, except electrical work on overcurrent devices which are
not physically attached to, or physically mounted on, such systems.
h.   Electrical work on any streetlight or traffic signal light owned by or
under the direct control of the City and County of Honolulu.
i.   Work performed by an electric utility on electrical installations and
equipment owned by or under the direct control of the electric utility, and
located on real property provided by the electric utility’s customers pursuant
to rules established by the public utilities commission of the State of Hawaii.
(2)   Amending 90.2. Section 90.2 is amended by adding Section 90.2(D) to read:
(D)   Interpretation-Same Subject Matter and Compliance. If there are two or
more provisions in this code or any other ordinances or statutes, covering the
same subject matter, the provisions which provide the greater safety to life or
limb, property or public welfare shall prevail as determined by the Authority
Having Jurisdiction (AHJ).
Compliance Required. No person shall do or cause to be done any electrical work
which does not comply with the provisions of this code.
Compliance with state statutes. No person shall perform any work covered by
this code in violation of the provisions of HRS Chapter 448E.
(3)   Amending Article 90. Article 90 is amended by adding Section 90.10 to
read:
90.10 General Provisions and Procedures.
(a)   Authority. The AHJ shall administer and enforce the provisions of this
code.
(b)   Right of Entry. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the AHJ may
enter, at reasonable times, any building, structure, or premises in the City
and County of Honolulu to perform any duty imposed upon the AHJ by this code.
(c)   Administrative Warrant. If the AHJ is unable to obtain the consent of a
property owner or person in possession of real property to carry out any duty
required of this code, or if such consent is denied, the AHJ may obtain an
administrative warrant issued by any circuit or district court judge within the
jurisdiction upon presenting the judge with an affidavit, confirmed by proper
oath or affirmation, showing probable cause to believe that a violation of this
code exists on the property. As an alternative, the AHJ may obtain an order
issued by a court of competent jurisdiction that authorizes the AHJ to enter
private property to abate a public nuisance by seizing, removing, repairing,
altering, demolishing, or otherwise destroying private property pursuant to
this code.
(d)   Defective Electrical Installations.
(1)   Whenever any electrical installation is found to have been installed,
altered, changed, or reconstructed contrary to the provisions of this code or
any other law; whenever any electrical installation is found to be in use
contrary to the provisions of this code or any other law; or whenever any
electrical installation, which complied with the existing laws, ordinances, and
regulations in effect when the electrical work thereon was performed, is found
to be unsafe or dangerous to persons or property, the AHJ may give the owner or
the person in control of such installation a written notice stating the
findings with respect to such installation or use and order the owner or such
other person to make the corrections to be set forth in such written notice
within ten days from the date of service of such notice or within such further
time as the AHJ may allow.
(2)   In addition, the AHJ may disconnect such installation from its source of
electrical energy and order the supplying of electrical energy to such
installation to be stopped. Thereafter, no person shall use or supply
electrical energy to such installation before the corrections set forth in the
notice have been made.
(e)   Final Inspection Required.
(1)   No person shall use or supply electrical energy to any electrical
installation on which electrical work was or is being performed under a permit,
before the AHJ has completed all inspections, provided, that the AHJ may
authorize the use of, and the supply of electrical energy to, such installation
before completion of such inspections when the use of, and the supply of
electrical energy to, such installation will not endanger life or property and
there is good cause for making such exception.
(2)   No notice of completion shall be issued unless such installation has been
inspected and approved in accordance with the following:
(A)   The AHJ inspected and approved the roughing-in of the installation and
the completed installation in the company of the duly licensed electrician
performing the electrical work thereon;
(B)   The AHJ inspected and approved the completed installation after all
piping and tubing, including gas, steam, water, sewer, and furnace piping and
tubing, located near such installation were in place, and in the case of an
installation that is to be concealed, after all lathing strips, furring,
bridging, backing, and headers were in place; and
(C)   The AHJ inspection of the completed installation was not impaired by
obstructions or concealments.
(f)   Request for Inspection. Whenever any electric wiring, or portion thereof,
is ready for inspection, the permittee shall notify the AHJ not less than 48
working hours before such inspection is desired, excluding Saturdays, Sundays,
and holidays.
(g)   No Concealment from Inspection. No person shall conceal, enclose, or
cover, or cause or permit to be concealed, enclosed, or covered, any portion of
any electrical wiring in any manner which will interfere with or prevent the
inspection thereof, except when the AHJ having received a request for
inspection fails to appear for the inspection without notification.
(h)   Nothing in this code precludes the AHJ from initiating an investigation
into potential violations of this code that are not reported.
(4)   Amending Article 90. Article 90 is amended by adding Section 90.11 to
read:
90.11 Non-liability for damages.  The building official or any other officer or
employee of the City and County of Honolulu charged with the enforcement of
this code, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the
duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not
thereby be rendered personally liable for damages that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of
such duties. A suit brought against the building official or such officer or
employee because of such act or omission of the building official or such
officer or employee in the enforcement of any provision of this code, or other
pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this code
or enforced by the building official or such officer or employee, shall be
defended by the City and County of Honolulu until final termination of such
proceedings, and any judgment resulting therefrom shall be assumed by the City
and County of Honolulu.
This code shall not be construed to relieve any person owning or operating any
electrical installation or any person performing electrical work from liability
for damages to anyone injured by any defect in such installation or such
performance; however, the City and County of Honolulu, the building official,
and any other agent, officer, or employee of the City and County of Honolulu
shall not be held liable for such damages by reason of the issuance of any
permit, performance of any inspection, or issuance of a certificate certifying
that an electrical installation has been inspected and approved.
(5)   Amending Article 90. Article 90 is amended by adding Section 90.12 to
read:
90.12 Appeals. The discretionary decisions of the AHJ in the administration of
this code and enforcement orders issued by the AHJ in the enforcement of this
code may be appealed to the City and County of Honolulu building board of
appeals, pursuant to ROH
Chapter 16.
(6)   Amending Article 90. Article 90 is amended by adding a new Section 90.13
to read:
90.13 Electrically charged fences or structures. No electrically charged fences
or structures shall be installed, maintained, or used, except for insecticidal
or agricultural purposes for which the AHJ may grant approval thereto in
writing upon finding that measures adequate to protect the safety of the public
have been taken by the person installing, maintaining, or using such fence or
structure.
(7)   Amending Article 90. Article 90 is amended by adding Section 90.14 to
read:
90.14 Meter installation.
(a)   Electric watt-hour meters shall not be installed to serve illegal
dwelling units. No more than one electric watt-hour meter shall be installed to
serve a legal dwelling unit, except as provided herein.
(b)   One additional electric watt-hour meter may be installed to serve a legal
dwelling unit, provided that:
(1)   The meter measures electricity used solely for the purpose of charging an
electric vehicle; and
(2)   A permit is issued for the installation of the meter by the director of
planning and permitting pursuant to ROH
Chapter 18.
(c)   In addition to any other information required to be provided under ROH
Chapter 18, the applicant for the additional electric watt-hour meter permitted
under subsection (b) shall provide the director of planning and permitting with
the following information along with the permit application:
(1)   For each electric vehicle to be charged by electricity measured by the
meter, a current certificate of motor vehicle registration issued to the
applicant or an occupant of the applicant’s dwelling unit to verify that the
applicant or occupant is the registered owner of the electric vehicle; and
(2)   A copy of a sales contract or a lease agreement for the electric vehicle.
(d)   Within 15 days after either:
(1)   An electric vehicle ceases to be under the registered ownership of the
permittee or a resident of the permittee’s dwelling unit; or
(2)   The permittee no longer resides at the dwelling unit;
the permittee shall notify the director of planning and permitting and the
utility company responsible for the installation of the electric meter of the
occurrence of the event described in subdivision (1) or (2).
(e)   Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be subject
to the penalties established in this code.
(8)   Amending Article 90. Article 90 is amended by adding Section 90.15 to
read:
90.15 Meter to measure created energy.
(a)   One additional electric watt-hour meter or net metering informational
meter may be installed in a legal dwelling unit, provided that:
(1)   The meter is used solely for the purpose of measuring energy produced by
a solar photovoltaic or other alternative energy system;
(2)   The solar photovoltaic or other alternative energy system has been
preapproved by the AHJ; and
(3)   A permit is issued for the installation of the meter by the director of
planning and permitting pursuant to ROH
Chapter 18.
(b)   The applicant for an additional electric watt-hour or net-energy metering
informational meter shall provide the director of planning and permitting and
the applicable public utility company with a copy of the net-energy metering
agreement within 60 days after completion of the permit.
(c)   Within 15 days after the permittee no longer resides at the dwelling unit
where the meter is installed, the permittee shall notify the director of
planning and permitting and remove or cause the removal of the meter from the
dwelling.
(d)   Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be subject
to the penalties provided in Section 90.16.
(e)   For the purposes of this section “alternative energy system” includes any
system that produces energy from a source other than fossil fuels, or uses a
process which does not use fossil fuels. The source or process may include the
sun, wind, or hydroelectric power.
(9)   Amending Article 90. Article 90 is amended by adding a new Section 90.16
to read:
90.16 Violation—Penalties—Notice—Enforcement.
(a)   General. It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to perform
any electrical work, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation
of any of the provisions of this code.
(b)   Notice of Violation. Whenever any person, firm, or corporation violates
any provision of this chapter, the AHJ may serve a notice of violation to the
party responsible for the violation to make the building or structure or
portion thereof comply with the requirements of this chapter. A notice of
violation must be served upon responsible persons either personally or by
certified mail. However, if the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the
same cannot be ascertained by the AHJ in the exercise of reasonable diligence
and the AHJ makes an affidavit to that effect, then a notice of violation may
be served by publishing the same once each week for two consecutive weeks in a
daily or weekly publication in the City and County of Honolulu pursuant to HRS
§ 1-28.5.
The notice of violation shall include at least the following information:
(1)   Date of the notice;
(2)   The name and address of the person noticed and the location of the
violation;
(3)   The section number of the ordinance, code or rule which has been
violated;
(4)   The nature of the violation; and
(5)   The deadline for compliance with the notice.
(c)   Criminal Prosecution.
(1)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
code is deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person is deemed guilty
of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which
any violation of any provisions of this code is committed, continued, or
permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person is subject to
punishment by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment for not
more than one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(2)   Any officer or inspector designated by the AHJ who has been deputized by
the chief of police as a special officer for the purpose of enforcing the
provisions of the building, plumbing, electrical, or housing codes (hereinafter
referred to as “authorized personnel”), may arrest without warrant alleged
violators by issuing a summons or citation in accordance with the procedure
specified in this section. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
barring such authorized personnel from initiating prosecution by warrant or
such other judicial process as is permitted by statute or rule of court.
(3)   Any authorized personnel designated by the AHJ, upon making an arrest for
a violation of the building, plumbing, electrical, or housing codes, may take
the name and address of the alleged violator and shall issue to such person in
writing a summons or citation hereinafter described, notifying such person to
answer the complaint to be entered against such person at a place and at a time
provided in the summons or citation.
(4)   There shall be provided for use by authorized personnel a form of summons
or citation for use in citing violators of the building, plumbing, electrical,
or housing codes which does not mandate the physical arrest of such violators.
The form and content of such summons or citation shall be as adopted or
prescribed by the administrative judge of the district court and shall be
printed on a form commensurate with the form of other summonses or citations
used in modern methods of arrest, so designed to include all necessary
information to make the same valid within the laws and regulations of the State
of Hawaii and the City and County of Honolulu.
(5)   In every case when a citation is issued, the original of the same shall
be given to the violator; provided, that the administrative judge of the
district court may prescribe giving to the violator a copy of the citation and
provide for the disposition of the original and any other copies.
(6)   Every citation shall be consecutively numbered and each copy shall bear
the number of its respective original.
(d)   Administrative Enforcement. In lieu of or in addition to enforcement
pursuant to subsection (c), if the AHJ determines that any person, firm, or
corporation is not complying with a notice of violation issued pursuant to
subsection (b), the AHJ may have the party responsible for the violation
served, by mail or delivery, with an order pursuant to this subsection. A
notice of order must be served upon responsible parties either personally or by
certified mail. However, if the whereabouts of such parties are unknown and the
same cannot be ascertained by the AHJ in the exercise of reasonable diligence
and the AHJ makes an affidavit to that effect, then a notice of order may be
served by publishing the same once each week for two consecutive weeks in a
daily or weekly publication in the City and County of Honolulu pursuant to HRS
§ 1-28.5.
(1)   Contents of the Order.
(A)   The order may require the party responsible for the violation to do any
or all of the following:
(i)   Correct the violation within the time specified in the order;
(ii)   Pay a civil fine not to exceed $10,000 in the manner, at the place and
before the date specified in the order; or
(iii)   Pay a civil fine not to exceed $2,000 per day for each day in which the
violation persists, in the manner and at the time and place specified in the
order.
(B)   The order shall advise the party responsible for the violation that the
order shall become final 30 calendar days after the date of its delivery. The
order shall also advise that the AHJ’s action may be appealed to the building
board of appeals.
(2)   Effect of Order–Right to Appeal. The provisions of the order issued by
the AHJ under this section shall become final 30 calendar days after the date
of the delivery of the order. The party responsible for the violation may
appeal the order to the building board of appeals as provided in ROH
Chapter 16. The appeal must be received in writing on or before the date the
order becomes final. However, an appeal to the building board of appeals shall
not stay any provision of the order.
(3)   Judicial Enforcement of Order. The AHJ may institute a civil action in
any court of competent jurisdiction for the enforcement of any order issued
pursuant to this section. Where the civil action has been instituted to enforce
the civil fine imposed by the order, the AHJ need only show that the notice of
violation and order were served, that a civil fine was imposed, the amount of
the civil fine imposed, and that the fine imposed has not been paid.
(10)   Amending Article 90. Article 90 is amended by adding Section 90.17 to
read:
90.17 Permits and Inspection Fees
90.17.1 Permit required.
A building permit is required to perform work covered by this code as provided
under ROH
Chapter 18.
90.17.2 Charge for extra inspection.
(a)   Extra Inspections. If, after notice to a permit holder, more than one
inspection is necessary to ensure that deficient or defective electrical work
under the permit has been corrected, the holder of the permit shall pay the
City and County of Honolulu $200.00 for each additional inspection.
(b)   Miscellaneous Inspections. For the inspection of any electrical
installation not covered by a fee specified in this code, the person requesting
the inspection shall pay the City and County of Honolulu $50.00 for each hour
or portion thereof that is required to make the inspection and travel to and
from the installation.
(c)   Inspections Outside of Normal Business Hours. For a requested inspection
of an electrical installation under a permit outside of normal business hours,
the holder of the permit shall be charged at an hourly rate of $75.00 for a
minimum of three hours. Eligibility for such inspection shall be as determined
by the AHJ based upon the nature of the inspection requested and the
availability of personnel to perform the inspection.
(11)   Amending Article 90. Article 90 is amended by adding Section 90.18 to
read:
90.18 Electrical Work within Flood Hazard Areas and Development Adjacent to
Drainage Facilities
(a)   General.
(1)   The provisions contained in this section are applicable to the
construction of all new electrical systems, and all renovations to and major
alterations, additions, or reconstruction of existing electrical systems within
the flood area district as delineated on the flood boundary and floodway maps
and flood insurance rate maps, and any amendments by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, on file with the department.
(2)   These provisions shall also apply to developments adjacent to drainage
facilities outside the flood hazard area which are determined to be within a
floodway area or a flood fringe area in accordance with the Flood Hazard Areas,
ROH
Chapter 21A.
(b)   Existing Electrical Systems. Any electrical system thereof which was
lawful before the effective date of this article but which is not in conformity
with the provisions of this article may be continued subject to the provisions
of the Flood Hazard Areas, ROH
Chapter 21A .
(c)   Exemption. The provisions contained herein shall not apply:
(1)   To electrical systems serving buildings and structures exempted from the
flood hazard area provisions of the Flood Hazard Areas, ROH
Chapter 21A; and
(2)   To electrical systems serving buildings and structures which have been
granted a flood hazard variance under the provisions of the Flood Hazard Areas,
ROH
Chapter 21A.
(d)   For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall be as defined
in the Flood Hazard Areas, ROH
Chapter 21A:
“Base flood elevation;”
“Flood fringe;”
“Flood Hazard Area;”
“Flood proof;” and
“Floodway.”
(e)   For electrical work on projects subject to the provisions of this
article, the provisions of this section shall supplement the requirements of
Section 90.2(D).
(1)   Main Power Service. The incoming main commercial power service equipment,
including all metering equipment, shall be located above the base flood
elevation or in a waterproof enclosure or barrier with GFP on the main
disconnecting means.
(2)   Stationary and Portable Equipment. Switchgear, control centers,
transformers, distribution and power or lighting panels shall be located above
the base flood elevation or in a waterproof enclosure or barrier, with the
ground fault protector (GFP) on the main disconnecting means. Stationary and
portable electrical equipment shall be permitted to be located below the base
flood elevation provided that the circuit and equipment shall be protected with
the ground-fault circuit interrupter (GFCI), except a sump pump and its circuit
may be without GFCI. In cases where GFCI cannot be installed because of
amperage size or usage, GFP shall be installed.
(3)   Normal and Emergency Lighting Circuits. All normal lighting circuits
extending into areas below the base flood elevation shall be energized from a
common distribution panel located above the base flood elevation or in a
waterproof enclosure or barrier with GFP. All emergency lighting circuits into
areas below the base flood elevation shall be energized from an independent
distribution panel also located above the base flood elevation or in a
waterproof enclosure or barrier with GFP.
(4)   Emergency Lighting Requirements. All components of emergency lighting
systems installed below the base flood elevation shall be so located that no
component of the emergency lighting system is within reach of personnel working
at floor level in the areas where emergency lighting systems are utilized
unless the emergency lighting circuits are provided with GFCI. The emergency
lighting may be furnished by a storage battery, prime mover generator system, a
separate commercial power supply system, the same commercial power system, or a
combination thereof, subject to the following provisions:
(i)   Storage Battery (including battery operated lighting units). Battery
operated lighting units shall be completely self-contained and shall indicate
the state of charge of the battery at all times. Lighting units shall
automatically provide light when the normal source of lighting in the areas is
de-energized.
(ii)   Separate Commercial Power Supply System. This source of energy shall
have a degree of reliability satisfactory to the AHJ. A system fed from a
transformer other than that used for the regular supply and not on the same
poles (except service pole) as the regular supply is deemed to have the
required degree of reliability. A secondary circuit fed from the same primary
circuit as the regular supply shall be regarded as a separate system.
(iii)   Separate Commercial Power Supply System. The system shall be an
underground secondary system and a separate service shall be connected on the
line side of that service switch or breaker of the regular service.
(5)   Receptacle circuits below base flood elevation. Receptacle circuits shall
be permitted to be installed below the base flood elevation, provided that
these circuits shall be protected with GFCI.
(12)   Amending Article 100. Article 100 is amended by amending the definition
of “Authority having jurisdiction” and adding definitions of “Department,”
“Duly licensed electrician,” “Electrical wiring,” “Electrical work,” “Emergency
electrical work,” “Ground fault protector (GFP),” and “Maintenance work” to
read:
“Authority Having Jurisdiction” or “AHJ” means the director of planning and
permitting of the City and County of Honolulu or the director’s authorized
representative.
“Department” means the department of planning and permitting of the City and
County of Honolulu.
“Duly licensed electrician” means any person licensed as an electrician under
the provisions of HRS Chapter 448E.
“Electrical wiring” means any conductor, material, device, fitting, apparatus,
appliance, fixture or equipment, constituting a part of or connected to any
electrical installation, attached or fastened to any building, structure, or
premises and which installation or portion thereof is designed, intended, or
used to generate, transmit, transform, or utilize electrical energy within the
scope and purpose of the SEC of this chapter.
“Electrical work” means the installation, alteration, reconstruction, or repair
of electrical wiring.
“Emergency electrical work” means repair of electrical wiring to restore
electrical service to a building following a fire, remedy a power failure, and
protect persons and property against short circuiting and open circuits.
“Ground fault protector (GFP)” means a device or equipment which disconnects
all ungrounded conductors of the faulted circuit to protect wiring and
equipment from damage.
“Maintenance work” means the keeping in repair and operation of any electrical
installation, apparatus, fixtures, appliance, or equipment.
(13)   Amending Section 101.1. Section 101.1 is amended to read:
This chapter shall be known as the “Electrical Code of the City and County of
Honolulu” and is referred to in this chapter as “this code.”
(14)   Amending Section 220.12. Exception No. 2 of Section 220.12 is amended to
read:
Exception No. 2: Where a building is designed and constructed to comply with an
energy code adopted by the local authority and specifying an overall lighting
density of less than 13.5 volt-amperes/m2 (1.2 volt-amperes/ft2), the unit
lighting loads in Table 220.12 for office and bank areas within the building
shall be permitted to be reduced by 11 volt-amperes/m2 (1 volt-amperes/ft2).
(15)   Amending Section 336.10(9). Section 336.10(9) is amended to read:
(9)   In one- and two-family dwelling units, Type TC-ER cable containing both
power and control conductors that is identified for pulling through structural
members shall be permitted. Type TC-ER cable used as interior wiring shall be
installed per the requirements of Part II of Article 334 and, where installed
as exterior wiring, shall be installed per the requirements of Part II of
Article 340.
Exception: Where used to connect a generator and associated equipment having
terminals rated 75°C (140°F) or higher, the cable shall not be limited in
ampacity by 334.80 or 340.80.
(16)   Amending Section 406.4(D)(4). Exception No. 2 of Section 406.4(D)(4) is
amended to read:
Exception No. 2: Section 210.12(D), Exception shall not apply to replacement of
receptacles.
(17)   Amending Section 505.9(E)(2). Section 505.9(E)(2) is amended by amending
the second paragraph to read:
Metric threaded fittings installed into explosion-proof or flameproof equipment
entries shall have a class of fit of at least 6g/6H and be made up with at
least five threads fully engaged
(18)   Amending Section 590.4(G). Section 590.4(G) is amended to read:
590.4(G) Splices. A box, conduit body, or other enclosure, with a cover
installed, shall be required for all splices.
Exception: On construction sites, a box, conduit body, or other enclosure shall
not be required for either of the following conditions:
(1)   The circuit conductors being spliced are all comprised entirely of
nonmetallic multi-conductor cord or cable assemblies and the equipment
grounding continuity is maintained with or without the box.
(2)   The circuit conductors being spliced are all comprised entirely of metal
sheathed cable assemblies terminated in listed fittings that mechanically
secure the cable sheath to maintain effective electrical continuity.
(19)   Amending Section 625.17(B). Section 625.17(B) is amended to read:
(B)   Output Cable to the Electric Vehicle. The output cable to the electric
vehicle shall be one of the following:
(1)   Listed Type EV, EVJ, EVE, EVJE, EVT, or EVJT flexible cable as specified
in Table 400.4.
(2)   An integral part of listed electric vehicle supply equipment
Informational Note: For information and listing requirements for electric
vehicle supply equipment, see UL Standards 2594-2016, Standard for Electric
Vehicle Supply Equipment, and UL 2202-2009, Standard for Electric Vehicle (EV)
Charging System Equipment.
(20)   Amending Section 625.44(A). Section 625.44(A) is amended to read:
625.44(A) Portable Equipment. Portable equipment shall be connected to the
premises wiring systems by one or more of the following methods:
(1)   A nonlocking, 2-pole, 3-wire grounding-type receptacle outlet rated at
125 volts, single phase, 15 or 20 amperes
(2)   A nonlocking, 2-pole, 3-wire grounding-type receptacle outlet rated at
250 volts, single phase, 15 or 20 amperes
(3)   A nonlocking, 2-pole, 3-wire or 3-pole, 4-wire grounding-type receptacle
outlet rated at 250 volts, single phase, 30 or 50 amperes
(4)   A nonlocking, 2-pole, 3-wire grounding-type receptacle outlet rated at 60
volts dc maximum, 15 or 20 amperes
The length of the power supply cord, if provided, between the receptacle outlet
and the equipment shall be in accordance with 625.17(A)(3).
(21)   Amending Section 625. Section 625 is amended by adding Section 625.54 to
read:
625.54 Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection for Personnel. All single-
phase receptacles installed for the connection of electric vehicle charging
that are rated 150 volts to ground or less, and 50 amperes or less shall have
ground- fault circuit-interrupter protection for personnel.
(22)   Amending Section 625. Section 625 is amended by adding Section 625.56 to
read:
625.56 Receptacle Enclosures. All receptacles installed in a wet location for
electric vehicle charging shall have an enclosure that is weatherproof with the
attachment plug cap inserted or removed.
(23)   Amending Section 682.2. Section 682.2 is amended by adding a definition
of “Pier” to read:
Pier. A structure extending over the water and supported on a fixed foundation,
or on flotation, that provides access to the water.
(24)   Amending Section 682.15. Section 682.15 is amended to read:
682.15 Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupter (GFCI) Protection. Ground-fault
protection shall be provided in accordance with (A) and (B).
(A)   Receptacles. Fifteen- and 20-ampere single-phase, 125-volt through 250-
volt receptacles installed outdoors and in or on floating buildings or
structures within the electrical datum plane area shall be provided with GFCI
protection for personnel. The GFCI protection device shall be located not less
than 300 mm (12 in.) above the established electrical datum plane.
(B)   Feeder and Branch Circuit Conductors. Feeder and branch circuit
conductors that are installed on piers shall be provided with ground-fault
protection set to open at currents exceeding 30 mA. Coordination with
downstream groundfault protection shall be permitted at the feeder overcurrent
protective device.
Exception: Transformer secondary conductors of a separately derived system that
do not exceed 3 m (10 ft) and are installed in a raceway shall be permitted to
be installed without ground-fault protection. This exception shall also apply
to the supply terminals of the equipment supplied by the transformer secondary
conductors.
(25)   Amending Section 690.56(C). Section 690.56(C) is amended to read:
690.56(C) Buildings with Rapid Shutdown. Buildings with PV systems shall have
permanent labels as described in 690.56(C)(1) through (C)(3).
(26)   Amending Section 695.14(F). Section 695.14(F) of the SEC is amended to
read:
695.14(F) Generator Control Wiring Methods. Control conductors installed
between the fire pump power transfer switch and the standby generator supplying
the fire pump during normal power loss shall be kept entirely independent of
all other wiring. The integrity of the generator remote start circuit shall be
monitored for broken, disconnected, or shorted wires. Loss of integrity shall
start the generator(s).
(27)   Amending Section 700.10(D). Section 700.10(D) is amended to read:
(D)   Fire Protection. Emergency systems shall meet the additional requirements
in (D)(1) through (D)(3) in the following occupancies:
(1)   Assembly occupancies for not less than 1000 persons
(2)   Buildings above 23 m (75 ft) in height
(3)   Educational occupancies with more than 300 occupants
(1)   Feeder-Circuit Wiring. Feeder-circuit wiring shall meet one of the
following conditions:
(1)   The cable or raceway is installed in spaces or areas that are fully
protected by an approved automatic fire suppression system.
(2)   The cable or raceway is protected by a listed electrical circuit
protective system with a minimum 2-hour fire rating.
Informational Note No. 1: Electrical circuit protective systems could include
but not be limited to thermal barriers or a protective shaft and are tested to
UL 1724, Fire Tests for Electrical Circuit Protection Systems.
Informational Note No. 2: The listing organization provides information for
electrical circuit protective systems on proper installation requirements to
maintain the fire rating.
(3)   The cable or raceway is a listed fire-resistive cable system with a
minimum 2-hour fire rating.
Informational Note No. 1: Fire-resistive cables are tested to ANSI/UL 2196,
Tests for Fire Resistive Cables.
Informational Note No. 2: The listing organization provides information for
fire-resistive cable systems on proper installation requirements to maintain
the fire rating.
(4)   The cable or raceway is protected by a listed fire-rated assembly that
has a minimum fire rating of 2 hours and contains only emergency circuits.
(5)   The cable or raceway is encased in a minimum of 50 mm (2 in.) of
concrete.
(28)   Amending Section 700.10(D)(3). Section 700.10(D)(3) is amended to read:
700.10(D)(3) Generator Control Wiring. Control conductors installed between the
transfer equipment and the emergency generator shall be kept entirely
independent of all other wiring and shall meet the conditions of 700.10(D)(1).
The integrity of the generator remote start circuit shall be monitored for
broken, disconnected, or shorted wires. Loss of integrity shall start the
generator(s).
(29)   Amending Section 725.2. Section 725.2 is amended by adding a definition
of “Nominal current” to read:
Nominal Current. The designated current per conductor as specified by equipment
design.
Informational Note: One example of nominal current is 4-pair Power over
Ethernet (PoE) applications based on IEEE 802.3-2015, IEEE Standard for
Ethernet, that supplies current over 2 or 4 twisted pairs. The nominal current
for 60-watt PoE power-sourcing equipment is 0.3 amperes per conductor, where
the current in one conductor can be 0.36 amperes and another conductor can be
0.24 amperes.
(30)   Amending Section 725.121(C). Section 725.121(C) is amended to read:
725.121(C) Marking. The power sources for limited power circuits in 725.121(A)
(3) and limited power circuits for listed audio/video, information, and
communications technology (equipment), and listed industrial equipment in
725.121(A)(4) shall have a label indicating the maximum voltage and maximum
current or maximum voltage and nominal current output for each connection
point. Where multiple connection points have the same rating, a single label
shall be permitted to be used. The effective date shall be January 1, 2018.
Exception: Marking shall not be required for power sources providing 0.3
amperes nominal current or less per conductor.
(31)   Amending Section 725.144(A). Section 725.144(A) is amended to read:
725.144(A) Use of Class 2 or Class 3 Cables to Transmit Power and Data. Where
Types CL3P, CL2P, CL3R, CL2R, CL3, or CL2 transmit power and data, the ampacity
ratings in Table 725.144 shall apply to the nominal current at an ambient
temperature of 30°C (86°F). For ambient temperatures above 30°C (86°F), the
correction factors of 310.15(B)(2) shall apply.
Exception: Compliance with Table 725.144 shall not be required for
installations where the nominal current does not exceed 0.3 amperes in any
conductor.
(32)   Amending Section 725.144(B). The first paragraph of Section 725.144(B)
is amended to read:
725.144(B) Use of Class 2-LP or Class 3-LP Cables to Transmit Power and Data.
Types CL3PLP, CL2P-LP, CL3R-LP, CL2R-LP, CL3-LP, or CL2-LP shall be permitted
to supply power to equipment at a current level up to the marked ampere limit
located immediately following the suffix LP and shall be permitted to transmit
data to the equipment. For ambient temperatures above 30°C (86°F), the
correction factors of 310.15(B)(2) shall apply. The Class 2-LP and Class 3-LP
cables shall comply with the following, as applicable:
(33)   Amending Section 770.110(A)(2). Section 770.110(A)(2) is amended to
read:
770.110(A)(2) Communications Raceways. Optical fiber cables shall be permitted
to be installed in plenum communications raceways, riser communications
raceways, and general-purpose communications raceways selected in accordance
with Table 800.154(b), listed in accordance with 800.182, and installed in
accordance with 800.113 and, 362.24 through 362.56, where the requirements
applicable to electrical nonmetallic tubing (ENT) apply.
(34)   Amending Section 840.2. Section 840.2 is amended by adding a definition
of “Nominal current” to read:
Nominal Current. The designated current per conductor as specified by equipment
design.
Informational Note: One example of nominal current is 4-pair Power over
Ethernet (PoE) applications based on IEEE 802.3-2015, IEEE Standard for
Ethernet, that supplies current over 2 or 4 twisted pairs. The nominal current
for 60-watt PoE power-sourcing equipment is 0.3 amperes per conductor, where
the current in one conductor can be 0.36 amperes and another conductor can be
0.24 amperes.
(35)   Amending Section 840.160. Section 840.160 is amended to read:
840.160 Powering Circuits. Communications cables, in addition to carrying the
communications circuit, shall also be permitted to carry circuits for powering
communications equipment. Installations of listed communications cables shall
comply with 725.144 where listed communications cables are used in place of
Class 2 and Class 3 cables.
Exception: Compliance with 725.144 shall not be required for installations of
listed 4-pair communications cables where the nominal current does not exceed
0.3 amperes in any conductor.
(Added by Ord. 19-20)
CHAPTER 18: FEES AND PERMITS FOR BUILDING, ELECTRICAL, PLUMBING, AND SIDEWALK
CODES
Articles
   
1.   Purpose
   
2.   General Provisions
   
3.   Permits
   
4.   Permit Application
   
5.   Permit Issuance
   
6.   Fees
   
7.   Violation and Penalty
ARTICLE 1: PURPOSE
Section
   
18-1.1   Purpose and intent
§ 18-1.1 Purpose and intent.
(a)   The purpose of this chapter is to:
(1)   Consolidate the building, electrical, and plumbing permits, including
permits for the construction of sidewalks, curbs, and driveways, into a single
permit and to assess fees based on the value of the work to be performed; and
(2)   Deter the making of a false statement to the building official.
(b)   The foregoing consolidation is intended to expedite the issuance of a
permit and for better administration of the building, electrical, and plumbing
codes by the department of planning and permitting, including the
administration of the sidewalks, curbs, and driveways codes by the departments
of facility maintenance and planning and permitting.
(Sec. 18-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 1, § 18-1.1) (Am.
Ords. 93-59, 24-3)
ARTICLE 2: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
18-2.1   Definitions
   
18-2.2   Rulemaking and administration
§ 18-2.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Building Official. The director of planning and permitting of the city or the
director’s duly authorized representative.
Building Permit and Permit. A consolidated permit governing work performed
under the building, electrical, plumbing, and sidewalk codes.
False Statement. Any statement in oral, written, printed, or electronic form,
that is incorrect, inaccurate, or not in accordance with truth or fact.
Person with a History of Making a False Statement. Any person who has been
convicted of unsworn falsification to authorities or making a false,
fraudulent, or fictitious claim pursuant to HRS Chapter 710, or its successor
provisions.
This Code. The building (
Chapter 16, as amended), electrical (
Chapter 17), plumbing (
Chapter 19), and sidewalk (
Chapter 14, Article 3) codes.
(Sec. 18-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 2, § 18-2.1) (Am.
Ords. 93-59, 18-41, 24-3, 24-17)
§ 18-2.2 Rulemaking and administration.
   The building official may adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 for the
implementation, administration, and enforcement of this chapter.
(Added by Ord. 24-3)
ARTICLE 3: PERMITS
Sections
   
18-3.1   Required
   
18-3.2   Separate building permit required
   
18-3.3   Emergency work
   
18-3.4   Temporary permit required
§ 18-3.1 Required.
(a)   Except as provided in subsection (b), no person shall perform any of the
following or cause any of the following to be performed without first obtaining
a building permit therefor as prescribed in this chapter:
(1)   Erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert,
or demolish any building or structure;
(2)   Any electrical work;
(3)   Install, remove, alter, repair, or replace any plumbing, fire sprinkler,
gas, or drainage piping work, or any fixture, gas appliance, or water heating
or treating equipment; or
(4)   Construct, reconstruct, or improve any sidewalk, curb, or driveway in any
public street right-of-way.
(b)   Exemptions. Except for construction work to be done within any public
utility right-of-way or easement, a permit is not required for the types of
work listed below. Exemption from the permit requirements of this code does not
grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the technical codes
or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction:
(1)   Work exempted from building code provisions under
Chapter 16. Work on sidewalks, curbs, or driveways regulated under
Chapter 14, Article 3, is not exempt from permit requirements;
(2)   Temporary construction sheds and temporary construction fences;
(3)   Reroofing work that will not adversely affect the structural components
for Groups R-3 and U occupancies;
(4)   Installation of siding to existing exterior walls that will not adversely
affect the structural components or fire protection of the walls of Groups R-
3 and U occupancies;
(5)   Temporary tents or other coverings, for periods not to exceed 14
consecutive days, used for private family parties or for camping; or temporary
structures that have obtained a lawful permit from another city agency;
(6)   The following structures; provided that the structures are not located on
a street corner or in a flood zone:
(A)   Fences and planter boxes that are not more than 6 feet (1829 mm) in
height;
(B)   Retaining walls and riprap walls that are not more than 30 inches (762
mm) in height; or
(C)   Walkways and outside paving that are within private property;
(7)   Individual residential television wireless cable, radio antennas, and
dish-type antennas that are less than 39.37 inches (one meter) in diameter or
diagonal dimension;
(8)   Window awnings supported by the exterior walls of Groups R-3 or U
occupancies, when projecting not more than 4 feet 6 inches (1372 mm);
(9)   Installation of wallpaper or wall covering that is exempted under Chapter
16;
(10)   Repairs and labor that:
(A)   Involve the replacement of component parts of existing work with like-
for-like materials for the purpose of maintenance;
(B)   Do not exceed $10,000 in valuation in the aggregate in any 12-month
period; and
(C)   Do not involve any electrical, plumbing, or mechanical installations;
(11)   Interior remodeling that:
(A)   Does not affect building square footage or the number of rooms or
bathrooms;
(B)   Does not modify the location of rooms, walls, or windows; and
(C)   Does not involve any electrical, plumbing, or mechanical installations;
including but not limited to painting, installation of floor covering, cabinet
and countertop work, and replacement of existing fixtures (such as windows,
doors, and appliances); provided that the value of the interior remodeling must
be included as part of the value of any new construction for which a permit is
required by this code, for the purpose of determining the amount of the fee to
be paid for such permit;
(12)   Work located on federal property, except when permits are specifically
requested by the federal agency with administrative authority over the
property;
(13)   Work performed for any government agency, except where permits are
specifically requested by the agency;
(14)   Playground equipment, monuments, statues, ornamental ponds less than 24
inches in depth, and golf course pedestrian and golf cart bridges;
(15)   Temporary motion picture, television, and theater stage sets and
scenery;
(16)   One-story detached buildings:
(A)   Accessory to Group R-3 occupancies and used as tool and storage sheds,
playhouses, and similar uses; or
(B)   Accessory to crop raising in AG-1 Restricted Agricultural or AG-2 General
Agricultural zoning districts and used as storage sheds or for water catchment
and not used as dwelling or lodging units;
provided that the aggregate floor area does not exceed 120 square feet (11 m2);
(17)   Nonfixed and movable cases, counters, racks, and partitions that do not
exceed 5 feet 9 inches (1753 mm) in height;
(18)   The following electrical work:
(A)   Electrical work and installation to which the provisions of the
electrical code are expressly not applicable;
(B)   Installation of any portable motor or other portable appliance energized
by means of a cord or cable having an attachment plug, if the cord or cable is
permitted by the electrical code;
(C)   Repair of any fixed motor or other appliance, or replacement of any fixed
motor with another motor having the same horsepower rating and situated at the
same location;
(D)   Maintenance work for commercial and industrial processing equipment
performed by a duly licensed electrician;
(E)   Electronic equipment, sound public address systems, cable television, and
communication systems for a single-unit or two-unit dwelling;
(F)   Radio and television receiving antenna systems other than master or
community systems;
(G)   Sound recording systems for a single-unit or two-unit dwelling;
(H)   Interior telephone work subject to regulation by the State public
utilities commission and wiring of interconnecting cable for data processing
equipment;
(I)   Repair work performed by a licensed electrical contractor valued at
$2,500 or less in the aggregate in any 12-month period, and that does not
involve service entrance equipment; and
(J)   Replacement of solar photovoltaic component parts or equipment with like-
for-like materials to restore system operations within the original designed
energy output of the system; provided that the original approved system
capacity is not exceeded;
(19)   The following work by a public utility supplying gas:
(A)   Disconnecting defective gas piping or equipment when authorized under
Chapter 19; and
(B)   Disconnecting or reconnecting existing gas piping or equipment for
repair, servicing, replacement, or removal;
(20)   Plumbing repair or like-for-like replacement of plumbing components when
the repair or replacement is installed by a licensed plumbing contractor valued
at $2,500 or less in the aggregate in any 12-month period that only involves
valves, pipes, or fixtures;
(21)   All structures, other than buildings, that are constructed in
conjunction with board of water supply projects or public works projects
undertaken by or on behalf of the city;
(22)   All structures, other than buildings, that are constructed in
conjunction with the subdivision of lands and in accordance with plans approved
by the city under its subdivision rules;
(23)   Sidewalks, curbs, and driveways in public street rights-of-way that are:
(A)   Constructed in conjunction with public works projects undertaken by or on
behalf of the city;
(B)   Constructed in conjunction with the subdivision of land and in accordance
with plans approved by the city under its subdivision rules and regulations; or
(C)   Subject to compliance with
Chapter 14, Article 3;
(24)   Minor repairs to sidewalks, curbs, or driveways in public street rights-
of-way; provided that reconstruction or replacement of any portion of
sidewalks, curbs, or driveways will not be construed as a repair that is exempt
under this subdivision;
(25)   Weather-protected outdoor storage regulated under
Chapter 20;
(26)   Temporary tents used for commercial purposes or other purposes of
assembly, including rallies, festivals, amusements, and sideshows, for periods
not to exceed three consecutive days; and
(27)   Exterior screen doors for R-3 dwellings or individual residential units
of R-2 occupancies, except when openings are required to be fire-rated.
(c)   Special assignment inspection. The building official may allow
construction to proceed prior to the issuance of a building permit required
under subsection (a) if the building permit applicant submits to the building
official a request for a special assignment inspection and all of the following
requirements are satisfied with respect to the project for which the building
permit is sought:
(1)   A building permit application has been accepted as complete, and the
application has been under review for at least 30 days;
(2)   All applicable discretionary permits have been obtained; provided that if
the only applicable discretionary permits are those issued by the building
official and applications for the permits are pending with the building
official, then the requirement of this subdivision may be met if the building
official determines that the pending discretionary permits are achievable;
(3)   Adequate documentation has been submitted showing the satisfaction of, or
the intent to satisfy, all applicable requirements for flood hazard
certification, stormwater quality compliance, and outstanding conditions of
approval associated with discretionary permits;
(4)   Except for notices of violation and notices of order that will be
corrected by the building permit issued pursuant to the application, there must
be no outstanding notices of violation, notices of order, or unpaid civil fines
for the subject property;
(5)   The building permit application must not involve a single-unit or two-
unit dwelling;
(6)   The work allowed to proceed must not involve work in a public right-of-
way;
(7)   The nonrefundable special assignment inspection fee specified in
Table No. 18-A must be paid at the time the request for a special assignment
inspection is made;
(8)   The drawings used for the special assignment inspection, including the
jobsite copy, must be identical to the drawings submitted with the building
permit application, and the applicant shall ensure that all sets of drawings
are consistent throughout the review period and construction phases;
(9)   The building official shall find that:
(A)   It is reasonably likely that the building permit application, including
all documents and materials submitted with or attached to the application, will
be approved and the building permit issued;
(B)   The construction poses no threat to public health and safety; and
(C)   There is a sense of urgency to commence construction in a timely manner;
examples include but are not limited to the impending lapse of funding, federal
compliance deadlines, financing obligations, or lease obligations;
(10)   Special assignment inspections will be conducted as soon as practicable
after the approval date of the initial request; if a building permit is not
issued within an 18-month period, the applicant may submit a new request for a
special assignment inspection, subject to the building official’s approval; and
(11)   Special assignment inspections must not be used for purposes of
obtaining a certificate of occupancy.
The building official may waive any or all of the requirements of this
subsection if the building permit applicant demonstrates good cause; provided
that the building official shall not approve a waiver that would result in any
conflict with other requirements of this chapter.
A building permit applicant requesting to proceed with construction under a
special assignment inspection proceeds at the applicant’s risk without
assurance that a building permit will ultimately be issued. Violations
discovered during the special assignment inspection may result in suspension of
the special assignment inspection, a notice of violation, a stop work order, or
suspension of the review of the building permit application.
(Sec. 18-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 3, § 18-3.1) (Am.
Ords. 93-59, 96-50, 96-58, 97-47, 00-39, 19-21, 20-29, 23-13, 25-2)
§ 18-3.2 Separate building permit required.
   A separate building permit shall be required for each building or structure,
provided that one permit may be obtained for:
(1)   A dwelling and its accessories, such as fence, wall, pool, and garage
without living quarters;
(2)   For electrical work only. Electrical work for main building and
electrical work for a private garage, shed, or accessory building located on
the same premises as the main building, and supplied electrical power by a
feeder or circuit from the main building;
(3)   For plumbing work only. Plumbing work for main building and plumbing work
for a private garage, shed, or accessory building located on the same premises
as the main building and served by the same building water supply and building
sewer as that serving the main building; and
(4)   Sidewalks, curbs, and driveways in public street rights-of-way and any
building or structure together with which they constitute all or part of a
construction project.
(Sec. 18-3.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 3, § 18-3.2) (Am.
Ord. 93-59)
§ 18-3.3 Emergency work.
   Emergency work may commence without a permit. However, an application for a
permit for the work shall be submitted on the working day immediately following
the day work is commenced.
(Sec. 18-3.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 3, § 18-3.3) (Am.
Ord. 93-59)
§ 18-3.4 Temporary permit required.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall erect any tent or similar structure
that is to be used for commercial or religious purposes, such as rallies,
festivals, amusements, and sideshows, without first obtaining a temporary
permit therefor from the building official. To secure such permit, approval may
be required from the chief of the fire department. Such permits for tents and
similar structures shall be limited to a period of not more than 30 consecutive
days, unless regulated by the fire code and may be canceled for cause by the
building official or the fire department at any time before expiration of the
time stated in the permit. Upon such cancellation or upon the expiration of the
time stated therein, the structure or structures shall be promptly removed.
Such tent of canvas, plastic, or similar material shall not be used as
residence.
(Sec. 18-3.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 3, § 18-3.4) (Am.
Ord. 93-59)
ARTICLE 4: PERMIT APPLICATION
Sections
   
18-4.1   Application
   
18-4.2   Plans, specifications, and other data
   
18-4.3   Information on plans and specifications
   
18-4.4   Requirement for affidavit
   
18-4.5   Applications made before subsequent ordinances or regulations
   
18-4.6   Construction inspection
   
18-4.7   Denial or refusal of applications
§ 18-4.1 Application.
(a)   To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first submit an application to
the building official.
(b)   All documents and information required in support of the application must
be submitted to the department concurrently with the application. Every
application must:
(1)   Identify and describe all work to be covered by the permit for which the
application is submitted, including a list of all applicable contractor phases
of electrical and plumbing work;
(2)   Describe the land on which the proposed work will be done by reference to
the property’s tax map key number and house and street address if one has been
assigned;
(3)   Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended;
(4)   Be accompanied by plans, specifications, calculations, and construction
inspection requirements as required in §§
18-4.2 and
18-4.3;
(5)   State the valuation of the proposed work;
(6)   Provide the name, license number, and address of all contractors,
subcontractors, and specialty contractors involved in the project, or identify
the project as an owner-builder project authorized by HRS § 444-2.5;
(7)   State the following information for each contractor, subcontractor, and
specialty contractor engaged to perform electrical or plumbing work upon the
building, structure, or project:
(A)   Name;
(B)   Address;
(C)   Contractor’s license number; and
(D)   Particular phase or phases of work to be performed;
(8)   Be signed by the responsible managing employee or authorized employee of
each contractor, subcontractor, and specialty contractor designated in
subdivision (7); and
(9)   Provide such other information as may reasonably be required by the
building official. If the application proposes excavation and backfill work
that does not require a grading permit under §
18A-1.5(2), and the building official deems it necessary to protect or promote
public safety, the building official may require the submittal of an
engineering slope hazard report. An engineering slope hazard report means the
same as defined under §
18A-1.3. The report must contain the same information as required for an
engineering slope hazard report under §
18A-2.2(d)(2).
(c)   Except to correct a violation, a permit application will not be accepted
or processed if the property that is the subject of the application has any
outstanding violations or fines payable to or liens in favor of the city.
(Sec. 18-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 4, § 18-4.1) (Am.
Ords. 92-107, 93-59, 96-50, 00-39, 04-27, 20-28, 22-8, 22-32 , 24-27)
Editor's note:
   In accordance with Ordinance 22-32, amendments made to § 18-4.1(12) take
effect on November 18, 2022 and apply to all building permit applications
submitted pursuant to Chapter 18 after November 18, 2022.
§ 18-4.2 Plans, specifications, and other data.
(a)   With each application for a building permit, three sets of plans,
specifications, calculations, construction inspection requirements, and other
data shall be submitted. One set of plans shall be submitted to and left with
the State department of health. Construction inspection requirements are as
defined in §
18-4.6.
Exception: the building official may waive the submission of plans,
specifications, calculations, construction inspection requirements, etc., if
the building official finds that the nature of the work applied for is such
that reviewing of plans is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code.
(b)   No plans or specifications are required for repair or replacement work,
unless requested by the building official.
(c)   Plans for single- or two-family dwellings are not required to show
plumbing piping plans or diagrams unless requested by the building official.
(d)   All plans and specifications relating to work that affects the public
safety or health and for which a building permit is required shall be prepared
by or under the supervision of a duly licensed professional engineer or
architect as required by HRS Chapter 464.
(e)   All plans for retaining walls 5 feet or more in height shall be prepared,
designed, or approved by a duly licensed architect or engineer in the
structural or civil branches.
(f)   Electrical plans and specifications shall bear the approval of either a
duly licensed electrical engineer, or a duly licensed architect or engineer
qualified in such work by experience; provided that if the demand load of the
proposed installation is less than 30 kilovolt-amperes, the approval of an
engineer or architect shall be required only if the building official so
directs.
(Sec. 18-4.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 4, § 18-4.2) (Am.
Ords. 93-59, 96-50)
§ 18-4.3 Information on plans and specifications.
(a)   Plans and specifications shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper
or cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent
of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to this code and
all relevant laws, ordinances, and rules. The first sheet of each set of plans
shall give the house and street address of the work and the name and address of
the owner and person who prepared them. Plans shall include a plot plan showing
the location of the proposed building and of every existing building on the
property. In lieu of detailed specifications, the building official may approve
references on the plans to a specific section or part of this code or other
ordinances or laws.
(b)   For projects that include construction of driveways in public street
rights-of-way, plans shall show the entire lot and improvements thereon, the
location of the new and existing driveways, street trees, utility poles, fire
hydrants, catch basins, parking stalls, and any other features in the sidewalk
area that may affect the construction or use of the driveway, or both. For
reconstruction of a driveway, the applicant may submit a sketch with dimensions
showing the location of the driveway.
(c)   Where the building permit application is for the erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, movement, improvement, or conversion of any building
or structure, the building official shall also require, on behalf of the real
property tax assessment division, department of budget and fiscal services, a
plot plan with a sketch of the proposed building, to be submitted on such forms
as shall be prescribed by the department of budget and fiscal services and
shall be prepared and certified to by the applicant. In lieu of the sketch, an
additional set of plans may be submitted. The completed forms or plans shall be
submitted to the building official for transmittal to the department of budget
and fiscal services, real property tax assessment division.
(Sec. 18-4.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 4, § 18-4.3) (Am.
Ords. 88-20, 93-59)
§ 18-4.4 Requirement for affidavit.
(a)   Where, in the opinion of the building official, the layout or proposed
use of a building can readily be converted to some other layout or use that,
upon conversion, would constitute a violation of the land use ordinance or the
building code, or both, the building official may require the building owner or
owners to file with the bureau of conveyances or in the case of land court
parcels with the building department, a sworn affidavit:
(1)   That the layout or use of the building will not be converted at a future
date to some other layout or use that is illegal; and
(2)   That this restriction shall also be binding upon any tenant or lessee or
any subsequent owners of the building for as long as the building is in use, or
unless otherwise released by authority of the building official.
(b)   A certified copy of the document as issued by the bureau of conveyances
shall be presented to the building department as evidence of recordation,
before the issuance of building permit.
(c)   Any person who makes a false statement in such person’s sworn affidavit
or files a false affidavit has committed perjury and is thereby subject to HRS
§ 710-1060 (Penal Code), and be punished as provided in the section.
(Sec. 18-4.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 4, § 18-4.4) (Am.
Ord. 93-59)
§ 18-4.5 Applications made before subsequent ordinances or regulations.
   An applicant for a building permit who has filed an application with the
building department before the effective date of a subsequent ordinance or
regulation shall be required to obtain the permit no later than 12 months after
the effective date of such ordinance or regulation. If the permit has not been
obtained within 12 months after the effective date of the subsequent ordinance
or regulation, the application and plans shall comply with the requirements set
forth in the subsequent ordinance or regulation. Where the subsequent ordinance
or regulation specifies a time period for obtaining a building permit other
than the 12-month period stated above, the time period specified in the
subsequent ordinance or regulation shall govern.
(Sec. 18-4.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 4, § 18-4.5) (Am.
Ord. 93-59)
§ 18-4.6 Construction inspection.
   The engineer or architect in responsible charge of the structural design
work shall include in the construction documents the special inspections
required in
Chapter 16.
(1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 4, § 18-4.6) (Added by Ord. 93-59) (Am. Ord. 96-50)
§ 18-4.7 Denial or refusal of applications.
   The building official may deny or refuse to process any application for a
permit issued under this chapter that is submitted by a person with a history
of making false statements, on the grounds that the applicant has a history of
making false statements, for a period of two years from the date of their
conviction under HRS Chapter 710, or its successor provisions.
   Any person with a history of making false statements may not circumvent the
application of this section through the use of a third party, including their
employees and agents. A third party may not submit an application for a permit
issued under this chapter on behalf of a person with a history of making false
statements to circumvent the application of this section.
   The building official may deny or refuse to process any application for a
permit issued under this chapter that is submitted for a property cited within
the last two years for a code violation related to a gambling-related public
nuisance as defined by § 41-33.1.
(Added by Ord. 24-3) (Am. Ord. 25-29)
ARTICLE 5: PERMIT ISSUANCE
Sections
   
18-5.1   Issuance—Posting—Transfer
   
18-5.2   Retention of plans
   
18-5.3   Validity
   
18-5.4   Suspension or revocation of building permits—Notice—Hearing—Appeal
   
18-5.5   Compliance with State statutes
   
18-5.6   Transferability of building permit
   
18-5.7   Nonliability of city for damages
   
18-5.8   Permit for accessory dwelling unit
   
18-5.9   Expedited permit processing for one- and two-family dwellings
   
18-5.10   Expedited permit processing for clean energy projects
   
18-5.11   Temporary certificate of occupancy
§ 18-5.1 Issuance—Posting—Transfer.
(a)   The application, plans, specifications, computations, and other data
filed by an applicant for a permit shall be reviewed by the building official.
The building official shall cause such plans to be reviewed by any other
appropriate department of the city and the State to review compliance with laws
and ordinances under their jurisdiction. If the work described in an
application for permit and the plans filed therewith conform to the
requirements of this code and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and the fee
specified in §
18-6.1 has been paid, the building official shall issue a permit therefor to
the applicant; provided that no permit shall be granted for the moving of any
building or structure or portion thereof that has deteriorated or been damaged
to an extent greater than 50 percent of the cost of replacement (new) of such
building or structure.
(b)   When the building official issues the permit, the building official shall
affix an official stamp of approval to the specifications and each sheet of the
job site copy of the plans. Such approved plans and specifications shall not be
changed, modified, or altered without authorization from the building official,
and all work regulated by this code shall be done in accordance with the
approved plans.
(c)   The building official may issue a permit for the construction of part of
a building or structure before the entire plans and specifications for the
whole building or structure have been submitted or approved, provided that
adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all
pertinent requirements of this code. The holder of such permit shall proceed at
such person’s own risk without assurance that the permit for the entire
building or structure will be granted.
(d)   The building permit must be posted in a conspicuous place on the site
during the progress of work; provided that:
(1)   If a building permit is suspended pursuant to §
18-5.4(d), within three calendar days after the date the notice of suspension
is served to the permittee pursuant to § 18-7.1(c), the permittee shall
physically post the notice of suspension directly adjacent to any building
permit that has been posted pursuant to this subsection; if the notice of
suspension is not posted within the specified time period, the building
official shall post the notice of suspension; and
(2)   If a building permit is revoked pursuant to §
18-5.4(d), within three calendar days after the date the notice of revocation
is served to the permittee pursuant to §
18-7.1(c), the permittee shall remove the building permit that has been posted
pursuant to this subsection; if the building permit is not removed within the
specified time period, the building official shall remove the building permit.
(e)   No permit issued shall authorize any person or contractor to do work upon
any phase of the building, structure, or project, unless specifically
identified in the permit application, including any attachments or amendments
thereto, as the contractor or subcontractor designated to do that particular
phase of work.
(f)   If there is a change in the designation of any contractor for any phase
of work after the issuance of a permit and before the commencement of work, the
permittee shall submit the change in writing to the building department and
request approval of the change.
(Sec. 18-5.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 5, § 18-5.1) (Am.
Ords. 93-59, 24-17)
§ 18-5.2 Retention of plans.
   One set of approved plans, specifications, and computations shall be
retained by the building official for a period of not less than 90 days from
date of completion of the work covered therein, and one set of approved plans
shall be returned to the applicant, and the set shall be kept on the site of
the building or work at all times during which the work authorized thereby is
in progress.
(Sec. 18-5.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 5, § 18-5.2) (Am.
Ord. 93-59)
§ 18-5.3 Validity.
(a)   The issuance under this section of any permit or approval of plans,
specifications, and other data shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an
approval of, any violation of this code or of any other law.
(b)   The issuance of a permit shall not prevent the building official from
thereafter requiring the correction of errors in the plans and specifications
or from halting building operations when in violation of the provisions of the
chapters and this chapter or of any other law; nor shall it prevent the
institution of criminal action and the imposition of penalty as prescribed
under §
18-7.1 hereof for violation of the chapters and this chapter.
(c)   Every permit shall be valid for a period of three years from the date of
its issuance, subject to satisfactory work progress as contained in §
18-5.4; provided that wherever time limit and appeal provisions are specified
by other ordinances or regulations, such ordinances or regulations shall
govern. Any building or structure that is not completed within the period of
validity shall fall within the purview of unfinished buildings or structures.
(Sec. 18-5.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 5, § 18-5.3) (Am.
Ords. 93-59, 96-50, 09-8)
§ 18-5.4 Suspension or revocation of building permits—Notice—Hearing—Appeal.
(a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Causes Beyond the Control of the Building Contractor or Owner. Includes but is
not limited to:
(1)   Pending litigation where the validity of the building permit is itself at
issue;
(2)   Public insurrection or devastating physical calamity such as tsunami or
earthquake;
(3)   Unavailability of materials or equipment necessary for work to progress,
where all reasonable efforts have been made to secure the materials or
equipment;
(4)   Unusually severe weather or muddy ground conditions requiring cessation
of all work on the building or structure. However, no extension of time shall
be granted unless a written application therefor stating in detail the causes,
the effect on the performance of work, the time during which the performance of
work was actually suspended, and the portion or portions of the project
affected, is filed by the contractor or owner with the building official within
seven calendar days after the commencement of the delay; or
(5)   Lack of financing shall qualify under this definition only where an
existing agreement for financing is unilaterally revoked by the lender because
of the lending agency’s financial insolvency. Where the lack of financing
prevents accomplishment of work, the building official may extend the permit
deadline for a period not to exceed six months.
Nonwork. Any of the following:
(1)   Clearing and grubbing after the initial clearing, or movement of
equipment where nothing of substance is added to the building or structure;
(2)   Excavation and backfilling without putting any parts or components of the
intended structure into place;
(3)   Financing activities of any kind;
(4)   Soil or other testing that does not meet the requirements of paragraph
(8) under the definition of “work”; and
(5)   Preparation of environmental impact statements, applications for other
permits, and reports submitted thereto.
Suspension or Abandonment. A slowdown or cessation of the activity of putting
construction into place to the extent that construction of the building or
structure cannot be completed within the time specified in §
18-5.3.
Work. Any of the following:
(1)   Demolition of buildings and structures and the removal of material from
the area where the building or structure authorized by the building permit is
to be located;
(2)   Initial clearing and grubbing;
(3)   Fencing job site;
(4)   Construction of pedestrian protection;
(5)   Surveying to locate construction;
(6)   Surcharging and load testing of foundations;
(7)   Construction, installation, or fabrication of parts or components that
are or will become part of the completed structure, such as driving piles or
pouring concrete. This paragraph shall also include off-site activity, such as
prefabrication of building components where the product of the activity will
constitute at least 1 percent of the total cost of the contemplated project, or
$10,000, whichever is less;
(8)   Soil or other testing, where:
(A)   Ordered in writing by any agency of the government of the United States,
the State of Hawaii, or the City and County of Honolulu, after the issuance of
the building permit; or
(B)   Unforeseen geological or physical conditions require additional testing
to assure compliance with existing safety requirements; or
(9)   Any other substantial overt act that has taken place on the premises
material to the effectuation of the project and that clearly indicates upon
inspection that the project is going forward.
(b)   Deadlines for construction.
(1)   After a building permit has been issued under this chapter, work thereof
shall commence within 180 days after the date of issuance of the building
permit.
(2)   After the building or work authorized by a building permit has commenced,
such building or work shall not be suspended or abandoned for a period of 120
days.
(3)   Foundation. At the end of two years after a building permit is issued,
all foundation and structural work for the building or structure up to the
ground floor level shall be completed.
(4)   In any case, all work shall be completed within three years, as
prescribed in §
18-5.3, subject to the exceptions mentioned therein.
(c)   Extension of time. When there is a strike or other causes beyond the
control of the contractor or the owner, the building official may in writing
extend the deadlines for construction specified in subsection (b) for such
periods of time as the building official deems necessary, subject to the
following conditions:
(1)   Under no circumstances may an extension of time exceed the amount of time
work has been halted by strikes or other causes beyond the control of the owner
or contractor. The building official shall maintain accurate records of all
requests for extension and their subsequent disposition. The records must
contain the name of the applicant, location of the project, and a detailed
explanation of the reasons for granting or denying the request for extension.
Any denial of extension may be appealed to the building board of appeals;
(2)   The findings of the building official must be conclusive with any facts
that were the basis of the extension of time granted or denied by the building
official, except where the building official’s findings are determined by the
building board of appeals to be clearly erroneous and not supported by the
evidence of facts, arbitrary, or capricious;
(3)   No extension of time may be granted by the building official or the
building board of appeals, unless application for extension has been made to
the building official before the deadlines specified in subsection (b) or of
any such deadlines previously extended in accordance with this section; and
(4)   Any extension of time granted on the 180-day or 120-day period by the
building official or the building board of appeals will also effect a
corresponding extension of deadlines imposed by §
18-5.3 and subsection (b)(3).
(d)   Suspension or revocation of a permit.
(1)   The building official may issue a notice to suspend or revoke a permit
pursuant to the requirements of subsection (e) whenever a permit is issued
under this chapter:
(A)   In error;
(B)   On the basis of incorrect information supplied;
(C)   In violation of the building, electrical, or plumbing codes, or any other
code, ordinance, or regulation; or
(D)   For a property cited for a code violation related to a gambling-related
public nuisance.
(2)   No suspension imposed pursuant to this section will constitute a cause
beyond the control of the building contractor or owner, as defined in this
section, for which extensions may be received under subsection (c), unless the
suspension is found by the appellate authority to be arbitrary, capricious,
characterized by an abuse of discretion, or based upon a clearly erroneous
finding of a material fact.
(3)   The building official may issue a notice to revoke a permit pursuant to
subsection (e) if the building or work authorized by the permit is not
commenced within 180 days after the date the permit was issued, or if the
building or work authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned for a
period of at least 120 consecutive days after the work has commenced.
(4)   The building official may issue a notice to revoke a permit pursuant to
the requirements of subsection (e) when a building or structure is not
completed within the time specified in subsection (b)(3) and (b)(4).
(e)   Notice of suspension or revocation of a permit.
(1)   The building official shall serve to the permittee, pursuant to §
18-7.1(c), a written notice of the suspension or revocation of a permit that
sets forth the specific grounds for the suspension or revocation of the permit.
The notice must state that the permittee may apply in writing for a hearing
before the building board of appeals, and that such application must be
submitted within 10 working days of receipt after the notice of suspension or
revocation of a permit.
(2)   In computing the 10 working day deadline specified in subdivision (1) for
the permittee to file an appeal, the day on which the permittee receives the
building official’s notice will be omitted and the 10 working days will be
calculated from the next working day. The last day of the period so computed
will be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, in which case
the period will end on the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday.
As used in this subdivision, “holiday” means any day designated as such
pursuant to HRS § 8-1.
(3)   If a notice of suspension is served to the permittee pursuant to §
18-7.1(c), the permittee shall comply with the physical posting requirements of
§
18-5.1(d)(1). If a notice of revocation is served to the permittee pursuant to
§
18-7.1(c), the permittee shall remove the building permit in compliance with §
18-5.1(d)(2).
(f)   Hearing by the building board of appeals.
(1)   Upon receipt of a written notice indicating that the permittee desires a
hearing before the building board of appeals, the building official shall
notify the permittee in writing of the date of such hearing.
(2)   Upon service of the notice by the building official as prescribed herein,
any work in progress shall be suspended and stayed until a favorable written
decision of the building board of appeals is served upon the permittee. If an
unfavorable written decision is served upon the permittee, any work under the
permit shall be stayed until the judge of the court in which an appeal has been
filed pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 rules otherwise.
(3)   Every hearing held pursuant to this section shall be conducted in
conformity with HRS Chapter 91.
(g)   Waiver. If the permittee indicates that such person does not desire a
hearing before the building board of appeals or fails to apply for a hearing
within the time specified in subsection (e)(1), the suspension or the
revocation shall become effective from the date of service of such notice or
the date noted on the return receipt for the certified or registered mail.
(h)   Permit revocation not appealed—compliance.
(1)   Where a permit has been revoked in accordance with this section and the
permittee does not appeal the revocation to the circuit court as provided in
HRS § 91-14, the permittee shall:
(A)   Remove or demolish the building or structure within 180 days from the
date of such written notice; or
(B)   Obtain a new building permit to complete the required work in compliance
with current laws and regulations and diligently pursue the work to completion.
The fee for the new permit to complete construction of a project after
revocation of a permit under this subsection shall be as provided in §
18-6.2(c).
(2)   Where changes in applicable laws and regulations preclude obtaining a new
permit under subsection (h)(1)(B), the owner may:
(A)   Finish the building up to the highest point of construction having a
completed roof or floor slab. All structural walls, frames, and exterior walls
below such roof or floor slab level shall be completed. Elevator machinery
rooms, mechanical equipment rooms, other similar rooms and stairshafts located
above the roof in the original plans and specifications may be installed above
such completed roof or floor slab and finished together with the building.
Other portions of the structure above the completed roof or floor slab shall be
removed; or
(B)   Continue work according to approved plans and specifications upon payment
of a “deadline extension” fee to the city that shall be 0.0005 times the
original building valuation for each day of work estimated beyond the project
completion deadline, up to a maximum of $1,000 per day to complete the
structural walls and frames, exterior walls, and slabs. Where the structural
walls, frames, exterior walls, and slabs are not completed within the estimated
number of days covered by the deadline extension fee, an additional deadline
extension fee shall be paid to the city based on an estimate of additional
number of days to complete such work before work can again proceed. No refund
shall be made where such work is completed in less than the number of days for
which a deadline extension fee has been paid.
Paragraphs (A) and (B) shall not apply to foundation and structural work for a
building or structure up to the ground floor level.
(i)   This section shall not be construed to affect in any manner the authority
of the building official to issue a stop work order pursuant to
Chapter 16.
(Sec. 18-5.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 5, § 18-5.4) (Am.
Ords. 91-28, 93-59, 96-50, 96-58, 24-17, 25-29)
§ 18-5.5 Compliance with State statutes.
   It is unlawful for any permittee to perform, or allow to be performed, any
work covered by the permit issued under this chapter in violation of HRS
Chapter 444 relating to the licensing of contractors and HRS Chapter 448E
relating to licensing of electricians and plumbers.
(Sec. 18-5.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 5, § 18-5.5) (Am.
Ord. 93-59)
§ 18-5.6 Transferability of building permit.
(a)   Any assignment or transfer, or both, of a valid building permit for which
construction has not started shall be subject to the approval and consent of
the council. Such approval and consent shall not be unreasonably withheld;
provided that the assignee or transferee, or both, agrees in writing to the
following:
(1)   To comply with the plans and specifications upon which the building
permit was issued in the absence of any subsequent amendments to any applicable
existing laws and ordinances as indicated in subdivision (2); or
(2)   To comply with the terms of any subsequent amendments to the land use
ordinance, building code, as well as all other relevant laws, ordinances, and
rules that would affect any one or more of the following: the development’s
height, floor area, lot coverage, fire safety, or land use.
(b)   The stricter requirements prescribed in subsection (a)(2) shall not be
applicable in situations in which the permit holder can offer documented
evidence to the council that the permit holder has made, in good faith, a
substantial and material change in position in reliance upon the issuance of
the building permit.
(c)   This section shall not apply to:
(1)   One- and two-family dwellings that are not part of a larger development;
or
(2)   Projects that do not exceed $500,000 in valuation.
(Sec. 18-5.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 5, § 18-5.6) (Am.
Ords. 93-59, 96-50, 00-39)
§ 18-5.7 Nonliability of city for damages.
   Any permit issued under this chapter shall not be construed to relieve any
person doing any work authorized under any permit issued under this chapter
from liability for damages for any injury or death to anyone caused by any
defect in such work or performing such work; nor shall the city, including its
officers and employees or any other agents of the city, be held liable for such
injury or death by reason of the issuance of any permit under this chapter, or
the performance of any inspection by the city or the issuance of a certificate
certifying that such work has been inspected and approved by the city.
(Sec. 18-5.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 5, § 18-5.7) (Am.
Ord. 93-59)
§ 18-5.8 Permit for accessory dwelling unit.
(a)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit for construction of an
accessory dwelling unit or conversion of an existing structure to an accessory
dwelling unit, the building official will have a maximum of 60 calendar days to
do both of the following:
(1)   Notify the applicant in writing whether the application is complete or
incomplete, and if the application is found incomplete, the written notice must
state the corrective action necessary to complete the application; and
(2)   Review and approve or deny an accepted permit application for
construction of an accessory dwelling unit, or conversion of an existing
structure to an accessory dwelling unit. If the application is denied, the
building official shall provide written notice of the reason for denial and
state the necessary corrective action, if any.
If the building official fails to complete the actions specified in both
subdivisions (1) and (2) within 60 calendar days, the permit is approved;
provided that the days between the notification of the applicant that an
application is incomplete and the resubmittal of the application will be
excluded.
(b)   The applicant shall be responsible for ensuring that the plans for the
project deemed approved comply with all applicable regulations, governmental
provisions, and requirements.
(c)   The building official may suspend or revoke a permit deemed approved for
noncompliance as provided under §
18-5.4(d).
(1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 5, § 18-5.8) (Added by Ord. 16-19)
§ 18-5.9 Expedited permit processing for one- and two-family dwellings.
(a)   Under the following conditions, the building official shall process
applications for building permits for one- and two-family dwellings within 60
days of acceptance of the application:
(1)   The applicant utilizes a one-time review process, as defined in
subsection (c); and
(2)   The application is prepared and stamped by a duly licensed professional
engineer or architect who has not had either a building permit application or
plans prepared for submission with a building permit application rejected by
the building official more than twice within the previous 12 months.
(b)   Any work performed under a permit issued pursuant to this section that
does not meet the applicable code at final inspection must be corrected within
30 days of issuance of a notice of violation. If the violation is not corrected
within the 30-day period, the director shall suspend or revoke the permit as
provided in this article.
(c)   As used in this section, “one-time review process” means a process and
requirements established by the building official by rule, providing for the
issuance of a building permit after only one review by the building official.
(Added by Ord. 18-41)
§ 18-5.10 Expedited permit processing for clean energy projects.
(a)   As used in this section, "clean energy project" means:
(1)   A solar photovoltaic system, an energy storage system, or an integrated
system containing both a solar photovoltaic system and an energy storage system
that:
(A)   Generates 20 kW of new renewable electricity or less;
(B)   Supplies electricity to the project site under any utility tariff or
program;
(C)   Is certified by UL or another nationally recognized testing laboratory,
or is comprised of certified components, and installed according to
manufacturer specifications;
(D)   Is roof-mounted on a building at the project site;
(E)   Has a battery system with less than 50 gallons of electrolyte capacity,
or 1,000 lbs. for lithium-ion and lithium metal polymer; and
(F)   Is independent of required emergency and standby power systems required
by this code;
(2)   A solar thermal or solar electric hot water heater that:
(A)   Has a water tank capacity of 120 gallons or less for a single tank system
or 240 gallons or less for a double tank system;
(B)   Provides heated water for use on the project site;
(C)   Is certified by UL or another nationally recognized testing laboratory,
and installed according to manufacturer specifications; and
(D)   Is structure-mounted on a building at the project site; or
(3)   An electric vehicle charging station that:
(A)   Is an AC Level 1 (120 volt) or AC Level 2 (240 volt) device, or a DC
fast-charging system;
(B)   Is certified by UL or another nationally recognized testing laboratory,
and installed according to manufacturer specifications; and
(C)   Is dedicated for use on site by one or more residents of the project
site.
(b)   In reviewing and issuing permits for clean energy projects, the building
official shall:
(1)   Establish an internet-based permitting process by which all permits
required for the operation of a clean energy project are approved or denied
within 14 calendar days after the submission of a complete application;
provided that approval or denial of permit applications must be made within
seven calendar days after submittal of required corrections; subject to the
following exceptions and requirements.
(A)   Exceptions to the maximum time limits to approve or deny a permit
application are as follows:
(i)   For clean energy projects that cost in excess $50,000, the project must
be approved or denied within 28 calendar days after the submission of a
complete application; provided that approval or denial of the permit
application must be made within 14 calendar days after submittal of required
corrections;
(ii)   Maximum time limits for approval or denial of a permit application do
not apply if the plans are withdrawn by the applicant prior to completion of
plan review, in which case the timeline will restart when the plans are
resubmitted;
(iii)   Where the applicant fails to obtain required discretionary permits or
approvals; or
(iv)   Where the applicant fails to submit a complete application, including
failure to remit payment of all required fees.
(B)   If a map is required as a means to determine where the clean energy
project will be installed, aerial or satellite photographs will be deemed
sufficient if the photographs reasonably show where the installation is
occurring on the property; provided that longitude and latitude coordinates
must be provided in addition to the aerial or satellite photographs and
property lines.
(C)   Floor plans and elevations are required for plan review, and must show
the working clearances required by the electrical code and the utility
provider. Elevations must show the required mounting heights of the equipment
and the maximum overall height of the installation as required under
Chapter 21 and
Chapter 21A.
(D)   Industry-accepted standardized load calculations are sufficient.
(E)   If plans are required, the plans must comply with §
18-4.3, but are not required to provide details for adjacent units unrelated to
the clean energy project.
(F)   If the clean energy project includes multiple meters grouped in one
readily accessible central location, the installation must include the
following:
(i)   A rapid shutdown mechanism that complies with this code;
(ii)   Permanent labels that comply with this code, and include a simple
diagram of a building with a roof that shows:
(aa)   The location of the photovoltaic panels;
(bb)   The location of the batteries; and
(cc)   The location of the meter.
The property owner and the contractor shall update the permanent labels as
needed to reflect the current location of system elements, and maintain the
permanent labels so they are legible at all times; and
(iii)   An as-built wiring diagram of the photovoltaic system that is provided
to the system owner or the occupant of the unit the system serves.
(G)   A clean energy project permit application does not require submission of
an approved materials and methods exemption; provided that a manufacturer
specification sheet, installation and operations manual, and UL or other
national testing laboratory certification may be required for new equipment not
previously reviewed.
(2)   Provide a confirmed inspection date within two working days after receipt
of the inspection request. Applicants may submit inspection requests through
electronic mail or a public online process. Inspection requests must be made by
a duly licensed electrician or duly licensed plumber, as applicable, attesting
by affidavit to performing or directly supervising the work in compliance with
this code and state laws.
(3)   The building official shall close an issued permit within seven days
after the scheduled final inspection of the project if no code deficiencies or
violations are discovered.
(c)   If the building official fails to meet any of the maximum time limits to
approve or deny a permit application, the permit application will be deemed
approved; provided that:
(1)   The building official is notified in writing by the project owner, or an
agent of the project owner, that the owner or agent requests issuance of the
permit, and is prepared to pay any required fees;
(2)   The building official is notified in writing by the duly licensed
electrician or duly licensed plumber, as applicable, who installed the subject
system that the building official failed to process the permit application in a
timely manner, and the duly licensed electrician or duly licensed plumber, as
applicable, provides the building official with a declaration certifying that
the installation of the clean energy project complies with this code and state
laws; and
(3)   The declaration is supported by an affidavit with statement, seal, and
signature of a duly licensed electrical engineer or duly licensed plumber, as
applicable, and an architect or structural engineer.
(d)   The licensed design professional providing an affidavit pursuant to
subsection (c)(3) must possess commercial general liability insurance with
minimum coverage of $1,000,000 per event.
(e)   If the notice, declaration, and affidavit requirements of subsection (c)
are satisfied, the building official shall close the permit application. The
validity of the permit will be in accordance with §
18-5.3.
(Added by Ord. 20-44)
§ 18-5.11 Temporary certificate of occupancy.
   The building official may issue, to any applicant for a permit issued under
this chapter who is a person with a history of making false statements, a
temporary certificate of occupancy that is valid for a period of two years
after issuance, or other time period after issuance established by the building
official, when a certificate of occupancy would otherwise be issued. During the
period that the temporary certificate of occupancy is valid, the department
may, with reasonable notice to the holder of the building permit, conduct
periodic inspections of the permitted building or structure to confirm that it
is in the same structural form as when the temporary certificate of occupancy
was issued.
(Added by Ord. 24-3)
ARTICLE 6: FEES
Sections
   
18-6.1   Plan review fees
   
18-6.2   Building permit fees
   
18-6.3   Refund
   
18-6.4   Expiration of plan review
   
18-6.5   Exemptions
§ 18-6.1 Plan review fees.
(a)   When a plan or other data is required to be submitted by §
18-4.2, a plan review fee must be paid when submitting plans and specifications
for review. The plan review fee is 20 percent of the tentative building permit
fee as set forth in
Table No. 18-A, set out at the end of this chapter, based upon a preliminary
estimated valuation of work, but not greater than $25,000; provided that for
applicants who are persons with a history of making false statements, the
building official may increase the plan review fee to 30 percent of the
tentative building permit fee and the $25,000 fee maximum does not apply. Plan
review fees are required in addition to the building permit fee.
(b)   Exception. Plan review fees shall not be required for building permit
applications for fences, retaining walls, swimming pools, driveways, or for any
similar work performed for any city agency.
(Sec. 18-6.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 6, §
18-6.1) (Am. Ords. 93-59, 96-50, 13-16, 24-3)
§ 18-6.2 Building permit fees.
(a)   A fee for each building permit and other fees associated with the
administration of the building codes must be paid to the building official as
set forth in
Table No. 18-A, set out at the end of this chapter.
Where a plan review fee has been paid before June 17, 2013 as set forth in §
18-6.1, the plan review fee payment will be credited toward payment of the
building permit fee.
(b)   The determination of value or valuation under this code or this chapter
must be made by the building official. The valuation to be used in computing
the permit fees is the total value of all construction work for which the
permit is issued, as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical,
plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing systems, and
any other permanent work or permanent equipment.
(c)   For a new permit that is obtained to complete the construction of a
project after the revocation of a permit under §
18-5.4(h), the fee is based on the valuation of one-half the amount of the
remaining work; provided that:
(1)   No change has been made or will be made in the original plans and
specifications for such work;
(2)   At the time the permit application is submitted, the work on the property
has not been abandoned or suspended for a period of more than one year; and
(3)   No refund has been issued under §
18-6.3(b).
(d)   For work that starts or proceeds prior to obtaining a permit as required
by this chapter, the fees specified will be tripled; provided that the payment
of the tripled fee does not relieve any persons from fully complying with the
requirements of this code or this chapter in the execution of the work, nor
from any other penalties prescribed in this code or in this chapter.
(e)   Except when the fees specified in subsection (d) will be paid, for
applicants who are persons with a history of making false statements, the fees
specified by this section may be doubled by the building official.
(Sec. 18-6.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 6, §
18-6.2) (Am. Ords. 93-59, 96-50, 14-4, 20-18, 24-3)
§ 18-6.3 Refund.
(a)   The building official shall refund 75 percent of the plan review fee when
it is found, after the plan review fee has been paid but before a building
permit for which the plan review fee has been paid is issued, that:
(1)   The application for a permit is withdrawn or canceled before any plan
reviewing is done; or
(2)   The construction of the project will be prevented by a material change in
circumstances or financial difficulties that include but are not limited to:
(A)   Pending litigation where the validity of the project is at issue;
(B)   Public insurrection or devastating physical calamity such as tsunami or
earthquake;
(C)   Unavailability of materials or equipment necessary for construction of
project within the coming six-month period; and
(D)   Lack of financing shall qualify under this paragraph only where an
existing agreement for financing is unilaterally revoked by the lender because
of lending agency’s financial insolvency.
(b)   (1)   The building official shall refund an amount equal to 50 percent of
the permit fee paid under the provisions of this chapter where a permittee, due
to a material change in circumstances or financial difficulties, is unable to
commence work authorized by the permit issued therefor; provided that a written
application for a refund shall be made on forms furnished by the building
official not later than 15 days after the revocation date of such permit.
(2)    Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, no refund shall be made in any
case where a new permit has been obtained under the provisions of §
18-5.4, for the purpose of recommencing the same work, or where the amount to
be refunded is less than $100.
(3)    All permits upon which refunds have been made in accordance with the
foregoing provisions will thereafter be null and void.
(c)    Where more than one permit has been erroneously procured by the
permittee or the permittee’s agent, or both, for the same construction or work,
the building official shall approve one permit and refund the total amount of
fees paid for the other permits upon the surrender thereof; provided that no
refund will be made on any permit that has been surrendered after 90 days from
the date of issuance of such permit, or where the amount to be refunded is less
than $100.
(Sec. 18-6.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 6, §
18-6.3) (Am. Ords. 93-59, 96-50, 18-21)
§ 18-6.4 Expiration of plan review.
(a)   Except as provided in subsection (b), applications for which plan review
fees have been paid and for which no permit is issued within 365 days following
the date of application will expire, unless the expiration date is extended by
the building official.
(b)   Applications relating to a single-unit dwelling or two-unit dwelling or
duplex-unit dwelling with a floor area ratio that exceeds three to five, for
which plan review fees have been paid and for which no permit is issued within
365 days following the date of application will expire, and the expiration date
may not be extended.
(c)   Upon expiration of an application, plans and other data submitted for
review will thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the
building official. In order to renew action on an application after its
expiration, the applicant must submit a new application and pay a new plan
review fee.
(Sec. 18-6.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 6, §
18-6.4) (Am. Ords. 93-59, 96-50, 21-4, 25-2)
§ 18-6.5 Exemptions.
(a)   The city, all agencies thereof, and contractors therewith will be exempt
from the requirement of paying plan review and permit fees.
(b)   The building official may grant an exemption from the requirement of
paying plan review and permit fees for any person seeking to restore or
reconstruct a structure damaged or destroyed as a result of a major disaster.
For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(1)   Major Disaster. Any hurricane, tornado, storm, flood, high water,
tsunami, earthquake, volcanic eruption, landslide, mud slide, fire, explosion
or other catastrophe occurring in any part of the city that causes damage,
suffering, and loss to such a degree that:
(A)   The President of the United States has declared, pursuant to the Disaster
Relief Act of 1974, P.L. 93-288, that a major disaster exists such that the
city or any part thereof is eligible for federal disaster assistance programs;
(B)   The governor of the State of Hawaii has declared pursuant to HRS Chapter
209 that a major disaster has occurred;
(C)   The mayor has issued a proclamation declaring the existence of a major
disaster; or
(D)   The council has adopted a resolution declaring the existence of a major
disaster.
(2)   Restore and Reconstruct. Any repair or other work performed to return a
structure to its former condition that does not increase the floor area of the
structure beyond that of the structure prior to the major disaster,  is in
conformance with the building code, flood hazard regulations, land use
ordinance, and other applicable laws, and is started within two years of the
major disaster.
The burden of proof that work to be performed qualifies for an exemption from
the payment of building permit fees due to a major disaster will be on the
owner of the structure. An applicant filing for such exemption must certify in
writing that the work to be performed will be in conformance with the
requirements of this section.
(c)   All owners and their contractors will be exempt from paying that portion
of any building permit fee for permits issued after September 15, 1994,
attributable to the installation of ultra-low flush toilets that they install
on their properties to replace existing non-ultra-low flush toilets.
(d)   The building official shall waive the collection of any building permit
fee for a period of three years where the business has been certified to be a
qualified business pursuant to §
35-1.3.
(e)   The building official shall waive the collection of any building permit
fee for any person seeking to replace a dilapidated dwelling unit located on
homestead land leased under the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act of 1920. For the
purposes of this section:
(1)   Dilapidated Dwelling Unit. Any residential home that has significantly
deteriorated because of age, termites, or other causes, which make the home
unsafe, uninhabitable, or unhealthy;
(2)   The burden of proof that a dwelling unit is dilapidated and qualifies for
an exemption from the payment of building permit fees will be on the owner of
the unit. An applicant filing for such exemption shall attach acceptable proof
that the dwelling unit is dilapidated to the building permit application; and
(3)   The replacement home may increase the floor area of the originally
demolished or removed structure.
(f)   The building official shall waive the collection of any plan review and
building permit fees exclusively for the creation of an “accessory dwelling
unit,” as defined in §
21-10.1. The plan review and building permit fees that were collected for the
creation of “accessory dwelling units” after September 14, 2015, will be
reimbursed if requested by the permittee. Building permit fees and plan review
fees will not be waived where a permit was required and work started or
proceeded without obtaining a permit. In these cases, fees will be required
pursuant to §
18-6.2(d).
(g)   The building official shall waive the collection of the plan review and
building permit fees for the residential portion of a project equal to:
(1)   The percentage of affordable dwelling units as defined in and as provided
within the project pursuant to
Chapter 29; or
(2)   The percentage of affordable dwelling units provided pursuant to a
planned development-transit permit pursuant to §
21-9.100-10, or an interim planned development-transit permit pursuant to §
21-9.100-5.
(h)   The building official shall waive the collection of the plan review and
building permit fees for the residential portion of a project that is in
compliance with HRS § 201H-36(a)(5).
(i)   The building official shall waive the collection of the plan review and
building permit fees for the portion of an affordable rental housing project
equal to the percentage of affordable rental housing units that:
(1)   Are rented to households earning 100 percent and below of the AMI; and
(2)   For a period of at least 15 years after a certificate of occupancy is
issued for the affordable rental housing project, the affordable units are
rented at or below the rental rate limits established by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development for households earning 100 percent
of the AMI for the applicable household size;
pursuant to
Chapter 32.
(j)   The building official shall waive the collection of that portion of any
plan review and building permit fee attributable to the installation of
automatic fire sprinkler systems for the suppression of fire in existing high-
rise residential buildings. For the purposes of this section, “existing high-
rise residential building” means any building that has floors used for human
occupancy located more than 75 feet above the highest grade, contains dwelling
units, and was erected prior to 1993.
(Sec. 18-6.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 6, §
18-6.5) (Am. Ords. 88-41, 93-59, 94-28, 94-67, 96-58, 98-54, 06-16, 08-1, 13-1,
16-19, 18-1, 18-8, 19-8, 20-11, 20-13, 20-20)
Editor’s note:
   * Amendments made to Section 18-6.5 in Ord. 16-19, as amended by Ord. 17-30,
Ord. 20-20, and Ord. 25-12, including Section 18-6.5(f) will be repealed on
June 30, 2030, in accordance with Ord. 16-19, as amended by Ord. 17-30, Ord.
20-20, and Ord. 25-12. Section 18-6.5(g) and Section 18-6.5(h) will be repealed
on June 30, 2027, in accordance with Ord. 18-1, as amended by Ord. 25-25.
Section 18-6.5(i) will be repealed on June 1, 2030, in accordance with Ords.
18-1 and 19-8, as amended by Ord. 23-12.
ARTICLE 7: VIOLATION AND PENALTY
Sections
   
18-7.1   Generally
   
18-7.2   Notice of violation
   
18-7.3   Criminal prosecution
   
18-7.4   Administrative enforcement
   
18-7.5   Stop work order
§ 18-7.1 Generally.
(a)   A person may not erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or
structure; or perform any electrical work, or install, remove, alter, repair,
or replace any plumbing, gas, or drainage piping work, or any fixture, gas
appliance or water heating or treating equipment; or construct, reconstruct, or
improve any sidewalk, curb, or driveway in public street rights-of-way, or
cause any of the aforementioned acts to be done, contrary to or in violation of
this chapter.
(b)   Any person applying for a permit or approval pursuant to this chapter
must comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter. The failure of an
applicant to comply with all applicable requirements and restrictions set forth
in this chapter is a violation of this chapter.
(c)   Service of enforcement notices issued by the building official.
(1)   The building official may serve an enforcement notice issued pursuant to
this chapter by registered or certified mail, with return receipt requested,
addressed to the last known address of each violator identified in the
enforcement notice, or by delivering a copy of the enforcement notice to the
violator in person.
(2)   The building official also may serve an enforcement notice issued
pursuant to this chapter by leaving a copy of the enforcement notice at the
violator's residence, place of employment, or usual place of business, or by
physically posting a copy of the enforcement notice in a prominent location on
the property that is the subject of the enforcement notice, in a conspicuous
manner that is likely to be discovered.
(3)   If the building official is not able to serve the enforcement notice by
any of the methods described in subdivisions (1) and (2), the building official
may serve the enforcement notice on one or more violators by publishing a copy
of the enforcement notice once each week for two consecutive weeks in a daily
or weekly publication that is in general circulation within the city.
(4)   Where one or more violators identified in an enforcement notice have the
same mailing address, place of residence, place of employment, or usual place
of business, the delivery of one copy of the enforcement notice to that place
will be effective service upon all violators named in the enforcement notice
that may be served at the place the enforcement notice has been delivered. The
physical posting of a copy of the enforcement notice pursuant to subdivision
(2) will be effective service upon all violators named in the enforcement
notice.
(Sec. 18-7.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 7, § 18-7.1) (Am.
Ords. 89-135, 93-59, 24-3, 24-17)
§ 18-7.2 Notice of violation.
(a)   Whenever any person violates this chapter, the building official shall
serve, pursuant to §
18-7.1(c), a notice of violation to the persons responsible for the violation
to notify the person or persons of the applicable violation and direct the
person or persons to make the building or structure, or portion thereof, comply
with the requirements of this chapter, as applicable.
(b)   At a minimum, the notice of violation must include the following
information:
(1)   The date of the notice of violation;
(2)   The name of the person noticed;
(3)   The address or location of the violation;
(4)   The specific ordinance, code, or rule that has been violated;
(5)   A concise description of the violation;
(6)   A requirement that the violator correct the violation by a specified
date;
(7)   A statement of the penalties that will be imposed if the violation is not
corrected by the deadline for correction established pursuant to subdivision
(6); and
(8)   A requirement that the violator send a written notice to the building
official reporting the correction of the violation when the violator believes
the violation has been corrected.
(1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 7, § 18-7.2) (Added by Ord. 89-135; Am. Ords. 93-59,
15-18, 24-3, 24-17)
§ 18-7.3 Criminal prosecution.
(a)   General. Any person, firm, or corporation violating this chapter is
guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person is guilty of a separate offense
for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of this
chapter is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction of any such
violation, such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000 or
by imprisonment for not more than one year, or by both fine and imprisonment.
(b)   Procedure on arrest—summons or citation.
(1)   Any officer or inspector designated by the building official, who has
been deputized by the chief of police as a special officer for the purpose of
enforcing the building, plumbing, electrical, or housing codes (hereinafter
referred to as “authorized personnel”), may arrest without warrant alleged
violators by issuing a summons or citation in accordance with the procedure
specified in this section. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
barring such authorized personnel from initiating prosecution by warrant or
such other judicial process as is permitted by statute or rule of court.
(2)   Procedure on arrest. Any authorized personnel designated by the building
official, upon making an arrest for a violation of the building, plumbing,
electrical, or housing codes, may take the name and address of the alleged
violator and shall issue to such person in writing a summons or citation
hereinafter described, notifying such person to answer the complaint to be
entered against the person at a place and at a time provided in the summons or
citation.
(c)   Summons or citation.
(1)   There shall be provided for use by authorized personnel a form of summons
or citation for use in citing violators of the building, plumbing, electrical,
or housing codes that does not mandate the physical arrest of such violators.
The form and content of such summons or citation shall be as adopted or
prescribed by the administrative judge of the district court and shall be
printed on a form commensurate with the form of other summonses or citations
used in modern methods of arrest, so designed to include all necessary
information to make the same valid within the laws and regulations of the State
of Hawaii and the City and County of Honolulu.
(2)   In every case when a citation is issued, the original of the same shall
be given to the violator; provided that the administrative judge of the
district court may prescribe the giving to the violator of a carbon copy of the
citation and provide for the disposition of the original and any other copies.
(3)   Every citation shall be consecutively numbered and each carbon copy shall
bear the number of its respective original.
(Sec. 18-7.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 7, § 18-7.3) (Am.
Ord. 89-135, 93-59, 96-58, 10-6)
§ 18-7.4 Administrative enforcement.
   In lieu of or in addition to enforcement pursuant to §
18-7.3, if the building official determines that any person is not complying
with a notice of violation, the building official shall serve, pursuant to §
18-7.1(c), a notice of order to the persons responsible for the violation.
(a)   Contents of the notice of order.
(1)   In addition to any other information or requirements deemed appropriate
by the building official, the notice of order must include a copy of the
applicable notice of violation issued by the building official for the
violation.
(2)   The notice of order may require the persons responsible for the violation
to do any or all of the following:
(A)   Correct the violation at the person’s own expense before a date specified
in the order; or
(B)   Except as provided in subsection (d)(2), pay a civil fine not to exceed:
(i)   $3,000 in the manner, at the place, and before the date specified in the
order; and
(ii)   $3,000 per day for each day in which the violation persists beyond the
date specified in subparagraph (i), in the manner and at the time and place
specified in the order.
In determining the appropriate penalties, the building official may take into
consideration whether the person responsible for the violation is a person with
a history of making false statements.
(3)   The notice of order must advise the persons responsible for the violation
that the order will become final 30 calendar days after the date the notice of
order was served on the persons responsible for the violation. The order must
also advise that the building official’s action may be appealed to the building
board of appeals.
(b)   Effect of the notice of order—right to appeal. The provisions of the
order issued by the building official under this section will become final 30
calendar days after the date the notice of order is served to the persons
responsible for the violation pursuant to §
18-7.1(c). The persons responsible for the violation may appeal the order to
the building board of appeals as provided in Chapter 16; provided that an
appeal to the building board of appeals will not stay any provision of the
notice of order. The appeal must be received in writing on or before the date
on which the order becomes final.
(c)   Judicial enforcement of the notice of order. The building official may
institute a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction for the
enforcement of any notice of order served to the persons responsible for the
violation pursuant to §
18-7.1(c). Where a civil action has been instituted to enforce the civil fine
imposed by the notice of order, the building official need only show that the
notice of violation and the notice of order were served, that a civil fine was
imposed, the amount of the civil fine imposed, and that the fine imposed has
not been paid.
(d)   Three orders within a three-year period. If a person incurs three final
orders under this section within a period of three years relating to a single-
unit or two-unit dwelling, as those terms are defined in §
21-10.1, then:
(1)   For a period of three years after the date the third order becomes final,
the building official may not accept any application for a permit under this
chapter from the person; and
(2)   The civil fine for any subsequent violation by the person within three
years after the date the third order became final will be $10,000. The building
official may not reduce or waive any portion of the civil fine issued pursuant
to this subdivision.
A notice of order that has been appealed will be deemed final when it has been
sustained upon appeal.
Any person who has incurred three final orders under this section within a
three-year period may not circumvent the application of this subsection through
the use of third persons, including employees and agents, and any third person
knowingly aiding a person in the circumvention of this subsection shall be
subject to the fine prescribed in subdivision (2).
(e)   Nothing in this section will preclude the building official from seeking
any other remedy available by law.
(1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 7, § 18-7.4) (Added by Ord. 89-135; Am. Ords. 93-59,
96-50, 10-6, 15-18, 22-26 , 24-3, 24-17, 25-2)
§ 18-7.5 Stop work order.
(a)   If the building official determines that work must stop, whether due to
violation of requirements of any permit issued under this chapter, or for
failure to obtain a required permit, the building official shall serve,
pursuant to §
18-7.1(c), a stop work order to the owner of the property that is the subject
of the stop work order, and shall concurrently notify and transmit a copy of
the order to the chief of police, who shall have the power to enforce the stop
work order pursuant to Charter § 6-1604.
(b)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating a stop work order issued
pursuant to subsection (a) shall be:
(1)   Deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which the
violation is committed, continued, or permitted;
(2)   Subject to punishment by a fine of not more than $2,000 or by
imprisonment for not more than one year, or by both a fine and imprisonment,
upon conviction of violating the stop work order; and
(3)   Prohibited from applying for any permit required by this chapter until
all of the violations that caused the issuance of the stop work order are
cured, and all related fines and penalties are satisfied in full; provided that
if the stop work order was issued for failure to obtain a permit, this
prohibition does not apply to the application for that permit.
The building official may enforce subdivisions (1) and (2) pursuant to §
18-7.3 and shall notify the prosecuting attorney of the violation. Prosecution
for the violation pursuant to subdivisions (1) and (2) shall be as provided by
law for the prosecution of misdemeanors.
(c)   If a stop work order is served, pursuant to §
18-7.1(c), to the owner of the property that is the subject of the stop work
order, within three calendar days after the date the stop work order was served
to the owner, the owner shall physically post the stop work order directly
adjacent to any building permit that has been posted pursuant to §
18-5.1(d); if the stop work order is not posted within the specified time
period, the building official shall post the stop work order.
(1990 Code, Ch. 18, Art. 7, § 18-7.5) (Added by Ord. 91-28; Am. Ords. 93-59,
18-38, 24-17)
Table No. 18-A
Fees for Permits
The fees for the issuance of building permits will be computed in accordance
with the following schedule:
Total Estimated Valuation of Work Fee to Be Charged
Table No. 18-A
Fees for Permits
The fees for the issuance of building permits will be computed in accordance
with the following schedule:
Total Estimated        Fee to Be Charged
Valuation of Work
From $0.01 to $500     $20
From $500.01 to $1,000 $8 + $2.50 per $100 or fraction thereof of the total
                       estimated valuation of work
From $1,000.01 to      $12 + $2.20 per $100 or fraction thereof of the total
$20,000                estimated valuation of work
From $20,000.01 to     $82 + $18 per $1,000 or fraction thereof of the total
$50,000                estimated valuation of work
From $50,000.01 to     $286 + $14 per $1,000 or fraction thereof of the total
$100,000               estimated valuation of work
From $100,000.01 to    $700 + $10 per $1,000 or fraction thereof of the total
$500,000               estimated valuation of work
From $500,000.01 to    $3,200 + $5 per $1,000 or fraction thereof of the total
$2,000,000             estimated valuation of work
From $2,000,000.01 and $4,300 + $4.50 per $1,000 or fraction thereof of the
above                  total estimated valuation of work
Other Fees
Inspection fees outside of normal business hours will be in accordance with
Chapter 6, Article 12.
   (1) Renewal of applications for material method$100
of approvals
   (2) Review of master tract model               $500
   (3) Change of contractor designation           $50
   (4) Applications for material methods of       $300
approvals
   (5) Special assignment inspection fee          $1,000
                                                     $200 or 10% of the
   (6) Plan review of revisions                   original building permit
                                                     fee, whichever is greater
   (7) Temporary certificate of occupancy         $200
   (8)   Third party initial certification     $500
   (9)   Third party certification renewal (2 y$1,000
 
(Table 18-A, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 18, Table 18-A) (Am. Ords.
92-74, 93-59, 95-28, 99-30, 03-12, 14-4, 18-21, 19-21, 20-18)
CHAPTER 18A: GRADING, SOIL EROSION, AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
Articles
   
1.   General Provisions for Grading, Soil Erosion, and Sediment Control
   
2.   Permits, Bonds, and Inspection for Grading, Soil Erosion, and Sediment
Control
   
3.   Grading, Grubbing, and Stockpiling
   
4.   Violations, Penalties, and Liabilities for Grading, Grubbing, and
Stockpiling
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR GRADING, SOIL EROSION, AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
Sections
   
18A-1.1   Purposes
   
18A-1.2   Scope
   
18A-1.3   Definitions
   
18A-1.4   Hazardous conditions—Stop work order
   
18A-1.5   Exclusions
   
18A-1.6   Erosion and sediment control plans
§ 18A-1.1 Purposes.
   The purposes of this chapter are to provide standards to protect property
and to promote the public health, safety, and welfare by regulating and
controlling grading, grubbing, stockpiling, soil erosion, sedimentation, and
land disturbing development within the city. The public health, safety, and
welfare require that environmental considerations contribute to the
determination of these standards insofar as they relate to protecting against
erosion and pollution.
(Sec. 23-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 13, § 14-13.1)
(Am. Ord. 17-28)
§ 18A-1.2 Scope.
   This chapter sets forth the rules for the control of land disturbing
development activities, grading, grubbing, stockpiling, soil erosion, and
sedimentation; establish the administrative procedure and minimum requirements
for issuance of permits; and provide for the enforcement of such rules.
(Sec. 23-1.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 13, § 14-13.2)
(Am. Ord. 17-28)
§ 18A-1.3 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Best Management Practices or BMPs. Structural devices or nonstructural
practices employed at construction sites that are designed to contain
stormwater on-site and prevent the discharge of pollutants from entering any
drainage facility or any State waters or to redirect storm runoff flow. BMPs
may include a schedule of activities, the prohibition of practices, maintenance
procedures, and other management practices to accomplish the same.
Chief Engineer. The director and chief engineer of the department of facility
maintenance, City and County of Honolulu, or such person’s duly authorized
representative.
Conservation Program. A document submitted by a land user containing
information for the conservation of soil, water, vegetation, and other
applicable natural resources for an area of land currently being implemented
and maintained.
Director. The director of planning and permitting or the director’s duly
authorized representative.
Earth Material. Any one or more of the following: rock, coral, sand, gravel,
soil or fill, or any combination thereof.
Engineer. A person duly registered as a professional engineer in the State of
Hawaii.
Engineer’s Soils Report. A report on soils conditions prepared by an engineer
qualified in the practice of soils mechanics and foundations engineering.
Engineering Slope Hazard Report. A report that uses the application of
engineering and geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation,
evaluation, and mitigation of hazards posed by potential rock, soil, or other
slope movement.
Erosion. Wearing away of the ground surface as a result of action by wind or
water, or both.
Excavation or Cut. Any act by which earth material is cut into, dug, or moved,
and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
Fill. Any act by which earth materials are placed or deposited by artificial
means, and shall include the resulting deposit of earth material.
Grading. Any excavation or fill or any combination thereof.
Grubbing. Any act by which vegetation, including tree, timber, shrubbery, and
plant, is dislodged or uprooted from the surface of the ground.
Maximum Extent Practicable or MEP. Economically achievable measures for the
control of the addition of pollutants from existing and new categories and
classes of nonpoint sources of pollution, which reflect the greatest degree of
pollutant reduction achievable through the application of the best available
nonpoint pollution control practices, technologies, processes, siting criteria,
operating methods, or other alternatives.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit or NPDES Permit. The
permit issued to a permittee pursuant to 40 CFR Part 122, Subpart B, § 122.26
(a)(1)(ii), for construction activity including clearing, grading, and
excavation activities; or a permit issued to a permittee pursuant to Hawaii
Administrative Rules, Chapter 11-55, “Water Pollution Control” for construction
dewatering activity; or a permit issued to the city pursuant to 40 CFR Part
122, Subpart B, § 122.26(a)(1)(iii), for stormwater discharges from the city’s
separate storm sewer systems.
Permittee. The person or party to whom the permit is issued and shall be the
owner or developer of the property whether it is a person, firm, corporation,
partnership, or other legal entity responsible for the work.
Soil and Water Conservation Districts. The legal subdivisions of the State of
Hawaii authorized under HRS Chapter 180.
State Waters. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 342D-1.
Stockpiling. The temporary open storage of earth materials in excess of 100
cubic yards upon any premises except the premises upon which a grading permit
has been issued for the purpose of using the material as fill material at some
other premises at a future time.
Surveyor. A person duly registered as a professional land surveyor in the State
of Hawaii.
Wetland. Has the same meaning as defined in
Chapter 25.
(Sec. 23-1.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 13, § 14-13.3)
(Am. Ords. 92-122, 96-34, 04-27, 17-28)
§ 18A-1.4 Hazardous conditions—Stop work order.
(a)   Whenever the chief engineer determines that any existing grading,
grubbing, or stockpiling is or will become a hazard to life and limb, endangers
property, or adversely affects the safety, use, or stability of a public way or
drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the excavation or fill
is located, or other person or agent in control of the property, upon receipt
of notice in writing from the chief engineer shall abate the hazard and shall
conform with the requirements of this chapter. When there are reasonable
grounds to believe that hazardous conditions may exist, the chief engineer or
an authorized representative may obtain a warrant and shall enter upon the
property to investigate or to enforce the provisions stated of this section, or
both.
(b)   If the chief engineer determines that work must stop due to hazardous
conditions, the chief engineer shall issue a stop work order to the owner of
the property and shall concurrently notify and transmit a copy of the order to
the chief of police who shall have the power to enforce the stop work order
pursuant to Charter § 6-1604, as amended.
(Sec. 23-1.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 13, § 14-13.4)
(Am. Ord. 91-07)
§ 18A-1.5 Exclusions.
   This chapter shall not apply to the following:
(1)   Mining or quarrying operations regulated by other city ordinances;
(2)   Excavation and backfill for the construction of basements and footings of
a building, retaining wall, or other structure authorized by a valid building
permit. This shall not exempt any fill made outside the building lines or the
placing of fill material obtained from the excavations on other premises;
(3)   Grading and grubbing individual cemetery plots;
(4)   Land which is being managed in accordance with soil conservation
practices acceptable to the applicable soil and water conservation district
directors, and that a comprehensive conservation program is being actively
pursued for the entire area in the program and that the conservation program
with appropriate modification is reviewed and accepted by the soil and water
conservation district directors periodically but not less than once every five
years and shall be made available to the city; provided that no grading which,
in the opinion of the chief engineer, endangers abutting properties or which
alters the general drainage pattern with respect to abutting properties shall
be commenced or performed without a grading permit;
(5)   Excavation which does not alter the general drainage pattern with respect
to abutting properties, which does not exceed 50 cubic yards of material on any
one site, and does not exceed 3 feet in vertical height at its deepest point;
provided that the cut meets the cut slopes and the distance from property lines
requirements in §
18A-3.1;
(6)   Fill which does not alter the general drainage pattern with respect to
abutting properties, which does not exceed 50 cubic yards of material on any
one site and does not exceed 3 feet in vertical depth at its deepest point;
provided that the fill meets the fill slopes and distance from property lines
requirements in §
18A-3.1;
(7)   Grubbing which does not alter the general drainage pattern with respect
to abutting properties and does not exceed a total area of 15,000 square feet;
and
(8)   Exploratory excavations not to exceed 50 cubic yards under the direction
of an engineer for the purpose of subsurface investigation; provided that these
excavations will be filled in if required by the chief engineer and provided
that the chief engineer has been advised in writing before the start of such
excavations.
(Sec. 23-1.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 13, § 14-13.5)
§ 18A-1.6 Erosion and sediment control plans.
(a)   Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, it is unlawful for any
person to perform, participate in, or allow any development or land disturbing
activity that requires a building permit, grading permit, stockpiling permit,
or trenching permit without an erosion and sediment control plan that is
approved the director.
(b)   All development and land disturbing activities that require a building
permit, grading permit, stockpiling permit, or trenching permit must be
performed in compliance with erosion and sediment control plan approved by the
director. All project sites subject to an erosion and sediment control plan
must be maintained in compliance with the erosion and sediment control plan
approved by the director.
(c)   Erosion and sediment control plans approved by the director must
effectively prohibit the discharge of pollutants from construction sites and
land disturbing activities to the municipal separate storm sewer system and
State waters to the maximum extent practicable. The director may condition the
approval of an erosion and sediment control plan on the implementation and
maintenance of any best management practices that are intended or designed to
address erosion control, run-on control, run-off control, sediment control,
pollution control, post-construction pollutant control, low impact development
standard or objectives, and water quality.
(d)   Before accepting an erosion and sediment control plan for review, the
director must collect an erosion and sediment plan review fee of $250. If the
director requires revisions or alterations to a proposed erosion and sediment
control plan, a separate plan review fee of $100 must be collected before
review of the revised or amended erosion and sediment control plan. If
development or land disturbing activities are commenced before approval of the
related erosion and sediment control plan, the director must collect a double
plan review fee for each erosion and sediment control plan reviewed by the
department. All fees for erosion and sediment control plan review are to be
deposited into the general fund.
(e)   The director may adopt and enforce administrative rules to implement the
requirements of this section.
(f)   Compliance with this section will not relieve a person of responsibility
for complying with any other law, including but not limited to ordinances and
statutes that prohibit the discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 13, § 14-13.6) (Added by Ord. 17-28)
ARTICLE 2: PERMITS, BONDS, AND INSPECTION FOR GRADING, SOIL EROSION, AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL
Sections
   
18A-2.1   Permit
   
18A-2.1A   Application for permit
   
18A-2.2   Application for a grading permit
   
18A-2.2A   Application for a grubbing permit
   
18A-2.2B   Application for a stockpiling permit
   
18A-2.3   Grading permit limitations
   
18A-2.4   Permit fees
   
18A-2.4A   Grading without a permit
   
18A-2.5   Expiration of permit
   
18A-2.6   Denial of permit
   
18A-2.7   Suspension or revocation of permit
   
18A-2.8   Bond
   
18A-2.9   Inspection
§ 18A-2.1 Permit.
   Except as excluded in §
18A-1.5 of this chapter:
(1)   No person shall commence or perform any grading without a grading permit;
(2)   No person shall commence or perform any grubbing without a grubbing
permit, except where grubbing concerns land for which a grading permit has been
issued; and
(3)   No person shall commence or perform any stockpiling without a stockpiling
permit.
(Sec. 23-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.1)
§ 18A-2.1A Application for permit.
(a)   Before commencing or performing any grading, grubbing, or stockpiling, a
person shall file an application for a permit with the chief engineer on forms
prescribed by the chief engineer.
(b)   The chief engineer may adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 for
expediting processing of a permit application.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.1A) (Added by Ord. 96-34)
§ 18A-2.2 Application for a grading permit.
(a)   An applicant for a grading permit shall file a written application which
shall:
(1)   Describe, by tax map key number or street address, the land on which the
proposed work is to be done;
(2)   State the estimated dates for the starting and completion of the proposed
work;
(3)   Show the names and addresses of the owner or owners of the property;
(4)   Show the names of the permittee, the person who shall be responsible for
the work to be performed and that person’s contractors or employees, or both,
and any person responsible for requesting the inspection required herein. A
person signing the application for the permittee shall present evidence that
the person is authorized to act for the permittee;
(5)   Include a vicinity sketch map or plan adequately indicating the site
location; property lines, easements, and setbacks of the property on which the
work is to be performed; location of any buildings, structures, and
improvements on the property where the work is to be performed and location of
any building or structure on adjacent property which is within 15 feet of the
property to be graded when the grading may affect the building or structure;
elevations, dimensions, location, extent, and the slopes of all proposed
grading shown by contours or other means, or both; the area in square feet of
the land to be graded; the quantities of excavation and fill involved; and the
locations of any streams, waterways, and wetlands;
(6)   State the current development plan land use map designation and zoning
designation of any property that will be subject to the permit;
(7)   Include a copy of any environmental impact statement or environmental
assessment required by the United States or by any State or city agency;
(8)   State the purpose of the grading work in terms of a use or structure
permitted on the zoning lot under
Chapter 21;
(9)   If the use or structure for which the grading work is being done requires
a conditional use permit, plan review use resolution, planned development
approval, site plan review permit, special district permit, special management
area use permit or special management area minor permit, the applicant shall
include a copy of the applicable permits, approvals, and resolutions; and
(10)   If the use or structure for which the grading work is being done
requires an amendment to any permit, resolution or approval referred to in
subdivision (9), the applicant shall include a copy of the amendment.
(b)   In the event the area of the zoning lot or portion thereof subject to the
permit is 15,000 square feet or more for single-family or two-family dwelling
uses or 7,500 square feet or more for other uses, or in the event the total
area to be developed is more than 15,000 square feet for single-family or two-
family dwelling uses or 7,500 square feet for other uses and grading is being
done in increments of less than that square footage, the applicant shall:
(1)   Include a contour map, prepared by a surveyor or an engineer, which shall
show the location and type of existing trees with a trunk diameter larger than
12 inches, prominent visible rock outcroppings, utility lines, structures,
dimensions, and azimuths of property lines, easements, and setbacks, and the
name and location of streets, roadways, and rights-of-way; and
(2)   Include a grading plan and specifications prepared by an engineer, which
plan shall show the contours of the land before grading and the finished
conditions to be achieved by the proposed grading, to be shown by contours,
cross-sections, spot elevations, or other means. The grading plan shall provide
information regarding the location and source of imported fill material and the
location where excess excavation material is to be disposed of when the
application is made. The borrow or disposal sites, or both, must also fulfill
the requirements of this chapter. Where the area is proposed to be graded in
increments, the grading plan shall also include the plan for the future
development of the area and the proposed grading work for the future
increments. The chief engineer may also require submittal of a plan showing the
location of proposed structures, buildings, streets, utilities, easements,
permanent engineering measures to control soil erosion and storm runoff, and
other improvements where the grading work is to be performed. One of the
purposes of the grading plan is to show that only the minimum grading necessary
to develop the area in conformity with zoning will be performed, and hence the
natural contours and topography will be retained wherever feasible, and exposed
or finished cuts or fills will be rounded off in a natural manner and sharp
angles will be avoided. The grading plan shall provide that exposed finished
soil surfaces shall be covered with vegetation or matting immediately to
control soil erosion.
(c)   (1)   In the event the total area including any areas developed
incrementally that is to be graded is 15,000 square feet or more for single-
family or two-family dwelling uses or 7,500 square feet or more for other uses,
or in the event a proposed cut or fill is greater than 15 feet in height for
single-family or two-family dwelling uses or 7.5 feet in height for other uses,
in addition to the foregoing, a drainage and erosion control plan shall be
included in the application. The objective of the drainage and erosion control
plan is to employ best management practices to the maximum extent practicable
at the construction site. BMPs shall be specified on all erosion control plans.
The drainage and erosion control plan shall:
(A)   Be prepared by an engineer in accordance with the soil erosion standards
and guidelines approved by the chief engineer, a copy of which shall be on file
in the division of engineering, department of facility maintenance, which is
incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this article;
(B)   Show the general scheme for controlling soil erosion and disposal of
stormwater runoff, including but not limited to structural best management
practices (BMPs) such as terraces, berms, ditches, culverts, subsurface drains,
dams, sediment traps, dikes, detention/retention ponds, and nonstructural BMPs
such as seeding and planting, mulching, sprigging, sodding, or temporary
covering; and
(C)   Show the acreage of the areas served by each drain and drainage
structure.
(2)   The permittee shall submit temporary erosion control plans and procedures
for the chief engineer’s approval before grading, which shall include a
statement of the schedules and sequence of construction operations. The limits
of the area to be graded shall be delineated by flagging before the
commencement of the grading work. Where construction equipment will make
frequent crossings of a natural drainage course, plans shall provide for
temporary culverts or bridge structures to be installed. Where any operations
are delayed for any reason, a revised schedule shall be submitted to the chief
engineer together with such modifications of the temporary drainage and erosion
control plan as the chief engineer may require. Plans shall provide that the
area of bare soil exposed at any one time by construction operations shall be
held to a minimum. No drainage structure shall discharge onto a fill slope in
such a manner as to cause erosion or gullying. Temporary erosion controls shall
not be removed before permanent erosion controls are in place and established;
(3)   The permittee and the permittee’s contractor shall be responsible for
construction, installation, and maintenance of structural and nonstructural
BMPs at construction sites in accordance with the approved drainage and erosion
control plan. The adequacy of any BMPs employed or any corrective action that
needs to be taken at the construction site is the responsibility of the
permittee, the permittee’s engineer, and the permittee’s contractor, and the
cost of any corrective action or work shall be borne by the permittee; and
(4)   In addition to temporary erosion control plans for construction
activities, the chief engineer may require the permittee to prepare and submit
permanent erosion control BMPs for the control of storm runoff pollutants and
erosion after construction has been completed.
(d)   (1)   If a proposed cut or fill is greater than 15 feet in height for
single-family or two-family dwelling uses or 7.5 feet in height for other uses;
the proposed grading is on land with slopes exceeding 15 percent; any fill is
to be placed over a gully, or a swamp, pond, lake, waterway, or wetland; the
fill material will be a highly plastic clay; or the fill is to be used to
support foundations for residential or other buildings, an engineer’s soils
report shall be submitted. The soils report shall include data regarding the
nature, distribution, and engineering characteristics of existing soils, the
surface and subsurface conditions at the site or the presence of groundwater
when detected, and shall recommend the limits for the proposed grading, the
fill material to be used and the manner of placing it, including the height and
slopes of cut and fill sections.
(2)   If the proposed grading includes modification to an existing slope with a
cut greater than 15 feet in height and a grade steeper than 40 percent, an
evaluation of slope hazards is required and the findings of the evaluation
shall be included in a report. The slope hazard evaluation shall, at a minimum,
include an evaluation of hazards posed by potential rock, soil, or other slope
movement to the proposed development, and an evaluation of the hazard posed to
adjacent existing properties or buildings by the proposed grading. The
engineering slope hazard report and construction plans shall include mitigative
measures to minimize the hazards posed by potential rock, soil, and other slope
movement, as well as the threat the development poses to properties adjacent to
the proposed grading.
(Sec. 23-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.2)
(Am. Ords. 91-08, 96-34, 04-27)
§ 18A-2.2A Application for a grubbing permit.
(a)   An applicant for a grubbing permit shall file a written application,
which shall:
(1)   Describe, by tax map key number or street address, the land on which the
proposed work is to be done;
(2)   State the estimated dates for starting and completion of the proposed
work;
(3)   Show the name and addresses of the owner or owners of the property;
(4)   Show the names of the permittee, and the person who shall be responsible
for the work to be performed and of that person’s contractors or employees, or
both, responsible for requesting the inspections required herein. A person
signing the application for the permittee shall present evidence that the
person is authorized to act for the permittee; and
(5)   Contain a statement of the purpose for which the grubbing is required; a
plot plan showing the location and property boundaries, easements and setbacks;
a soil erosion and sediment control plan; and other pertinent information as
may be required by the chief engineer.
(b)   Grubbing of land for the purpose of making topographic surveys shall not
be permitted. This does not prohibit the cutting of trails for survey lines and
access for soil exploration equipment.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.2A) (Added by Ord. 96-34)
§ 18A-2.2B Application for a stockpiling permit.
(a)   An applicant for a stockpiling permit shall file a written application,
which shall:
(1)   Describe, by tax map key number or street address, the land on which the
proposed work is to be done;
(2)   State the estimated dates for the starting and completion of the proposed
work;
(3)   Show the names and addresses of the owner or owners of the property;
(4)   Show the names of the permittee, and the person who shall be responsible
for the work to be performed and of that person’s contractors or employees, or
both, and of any person responsible for requesting the inspection required
herein. A person signing the application for the permittee shall present
evidence that the person is authorized to act for the permittee; and
(5)   Furnish a plot plan showing the property lines, easements and setbacks,
topography, and the location of the proposed stockpile, quantities, height of
stockpile, life of stockpile, and source of the material to be stockpiled and
furnish any other information as may be required by the chief engineer to
control the emission of air-borne dust, drainage runoff, or erosion problems.
The plot plan for stockpiling shall be approved by the chief engineer.
(b)   Where stockpiling is for the purpose of surcharging to stabilize or
consolidate an area, the chief engineer shall require the permittee to submit
an engineer’s soils report, which shall include data on the effect such
surcharging will have on adjacent buildings or structures.
(c)   Where stockpiling is to occur on lands within the AG-1 Restricted
Agricultural or AG-2 General Agricultural zoning districts, the stockpiling and
the materials generated, used, or stored on the land must comply with all other
requirements established by federal, State, or city law, ordinance, or
regulation, and any applicable permits issued thereunder.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.2B) (Added by Ord. 96-34; Am. Ord. 14-34)
§ 18A-2.3 Grading permit limitations.
(a)   In the event the plan for the development of the area to be graded or the
stated purpose of the grading work requires a conditional use permit, special
district permit, planned development approval, a site plan review permit, a
plan review use approval or a rezoning under
Chapter 21, or requires a special management area use or special management
area minor permit under
Chapter 25, approval of any such permit or rezoning for the development, or any
necessary amendment to any such approval, permit, or rezoning, shall be
obtained before approval of the grading permit application, and the grading
permit application shall conform to the conditions of the approval, the
approved permit or the rezoning.
(b)   In the event the plan for the development of the area to be graded is to
be subdivided, tentative approval of the subdivision pursuant to the
subdivision rules shall be obtained before the approval of the grading permit
application.
(c)   In the event the area to be graded requires an NPDES permit, approval of
the NPDES permit may be obtained after the approval of the grading application;
however, the grading application, including any drainage and erosion control
plans, shall conform to the conditions of the approved NPDES permit. In case of
conflicting requirements, the most restrictive shall apply.
(d)   In the event the grading work involves contaminated soil, then all
grading work shall be done in conformance with applicable State and federal
requirements.
(e)   The chief engineer may attach such conditions as may be reasonably
necessary to ensure that any grading work is for a use or structure permitted
in the zoning district and to prevent creation of a nuisance or hazard to
public or private property, health, or welfare. Such conditions may include,
but shall not be limited to:
(1)   Improvement of any existing grading to bring it up to the standards under
this chapter;
(2)   Requirements for fencing of excavation or fills which otherwise would be
hazardous;
(3)   The requirement of retaining walls adequate to prevent loss of support
to, erosion of, and interference with natural drainage patterns on adjacent
properties;
(4)   Cleaning up the area;
(5)   Limitations on the days and hours of operation; and
(6)   Increasing the effectiveness of the erosion control plan as required.
(f)   The issuance of a grading permit shall constitute an authorization to do
only that work which is described on the permit and in the plans and
specifications approved by the chief engineer.
(g)   Permits issued under the requirements of this chapter shall not relieve
the permittee of responsibility for securing required permits or approvals for
work to be done which is regulated by any other federal, State, and city codes
or regulations, department, or division of the governing agency.
(Sec. 23-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.3)
(Am. Ords. 91-08, 92-122, 96-34)
§ 18A-2.4 Permit fees.
(a)   Before issuance of a grading permit, a permit fee for grading on the same
site based on the volume of excavation or fill measured in place, whichever is
greater, will be collected according to the following schedule:
 
Volume of Material                  Permit Fee
1,000 cubic yards or less           $505 plus $55 for each 100 cubic yards or
                                    fraction thereof
More than 1,000 to less than 10,000 $1,000 for the first 1,000 cubic yards
cubic yards                         plus $55 for each additional 1,000 cubic
                                    yards or fraction thereof
                                    $1,480 for the first 10,000 cubic yards
10,000 cubic yards or more          plus $35 for each additional 1,000 cubic
                                    yards or fraction thereof
 
The fee for a permit authorizing work additional to that under a valid permit
will equal the difference between the fee paid for the original permit and the
fee computed for the entire project.
(b)   Before issuance of a grubbing permit, a permit fee of $110 for grubbing
areas up to 15,000 square feet plus $15 for each additional 1,000 square feet
or fraction thereof will be collected.
(c)   Before issuance of a stockpiling permit, a permit fee of $55 for
stockpiling in excess of the first 100 cubic yards plus $15 for each additional
1,000 cubic yards or fraction thereof will be collected.
(d)   When grading, grubbing, or stockpiling is performed by or on behalf of
the city, State, or federal government, the chief engineer shall waive the
collection of any permit fee required in subsections (a), (b), and (c).
(e)   When a business is certified as a qualified business pursuant to §
35-1.3, the chief engineer shall waive the collection of any permit fee
required in subsections (a), (b), and (c) for the qualified business for a
period of three years.
(f)   All permit fees are to be deposited into the highway fund.
(g)   When grading, grubbing, or stockpiling permits are processed in
conjunction with a building permit for the creation of an “accessory dwelling
unit”, as defined in §
21-10.1, the chief engineer shall waive the collection of the permit fees
required in subsections (a), (b), and (c). The grading, grubbing and
stockpiling permit fees that were collected for the creation of “accessory
dwelling units” from the effective date of Ordinance 15-41 (September 14,
2015), will be reimbursed if requested by the permittee.*
(Sec. 23-2.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 14,
§ 14-14.4) (Am. Ords. 96-34, 98-54, 03-12, 14-4, 16-19, 17-28, 17-30, 20-20)
Editor’s note:
   * Section 18A-2.4(g) will be repealed on June 30, 2030, in accordance with
Ord. 16-19, as amended by 17-30, Ord. 20-20, and Ord. 25-12.
§ 18A-2.4A Grading without a permit.
(a)   Where work for which a grading permit is required by this chapter has
been commenced or has been accomplished without a permit, a permit shall be
obtained, and double the fees specified in §
18A-2.4 shall be assessed, provided that such work complies with or may be made
to comply with this chapter.
(1)   If the grading work accomplished or commenced cannot be made to comply
with this chapter, the owner and developer of the property or person or persons
responsible for the initiation or accomplishment of such grading work shall
restore the land to its original condition and shall obtain a certificate of
completion therefor from the director.
(2)   Any filling performed without a permit is not a structural fill.
(3)   Any owner and developer of the property or person or persons responsible
for the initiation or accomplishment of grading work in violation of §
18A-2.1 may, at the discretion of the director, not be issued a grading permit,
and the director may issue an order requiring the owner and developer of the
property or person or persons responsible for the initiation or accomplishment
of the grading work to restore the land to its original condition. This
prohibition and requirement applies whether such person is able to make the
grading compliant with this chapter.
(4)   Exception—at the discretion of the director, the owner and developer of
the property or person or persons responsible for such grading will not have
violated this chapter by grading without a permit in cases of natural or man-
made disasters.
For the purposes of this section, a “natural disaster” includes disasters
caused by fire, flood, tidal waves, hurricanes, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions,
earthquakes, or other natural causes; and a “man-made disaster” includes
disasters caused by enemy attacks, sabotage, other hostile actions, or
disasters to individual homes, or other disasters manufactured, created, or
constructed by mankind.
(5)   Notwithstanding the above, the owner and developer of the property or
person or persons responsible for such grading will have violated this chapter
by grading without a permit.
(b)   The owner and developer of the property or the person or persons
responsible for the initiation of grading shall be responsible for correcting
any damages done by the grading on-site or off-site.
(1)   Off-site corrections and restoration shall include but not be limited to
damages to improvements within the public right-of-way, any portions of the
city-owned separate storm sewer systems, or private drain systems, and the
removal of any sediment and debris from the public right-of-way and any
drainage facility.
(2)   On-site corrections and restoration shall include covering of exposed
soil surfaces with planting, correction of improper excavation or fills, and
drainage.
(c)   Where the grading work accomplished or commenced cannot be made to comply
with this chapter, the person or persons responsible shall post a performance
bond in an amount sufficient, as determined by the director, to ensure payment
of all costs of restoring the land to its original condition, and any damages
which have occurred to any improvements in the public right-of-way if the
person or persons responsible do not satisfactorily perform the restoration.
Such performance bond shall be maintained in force for a period of one year
after the restoration work has been completed, and no certificate of completion
for the work shall be issued by the director until one year has elapsed after
the physical work of restoration has been completed.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.4A) (Added by Ord. 96-34; Am. Ord. 14-31)
§ 18A-2.5 Expiration of permit.
(a)   Every grading or grubbing permit shall expire and become void by
limitation, unless the work permitted therein is started within 90 days after
the date of issuance; if the work is suspended or abandoned at any time after
the work is commenced for a period of 60 days; or one year after the date of
issuance of the permit. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall
first be obtained to do so and the fee therefor shall be the fee as specified
in §
18A-2.4. Permit fees for an expired permit even if no work has commenced shall
not be refunded.
(b)   Every stockpiling permit shall expire and become void one year after the
date of issuance and all stockpiled material temporarily stored on the premises
shall be removed from the premises or used on the premises as fill material
under a grading permit for fill before the expiration date. Upon written
application, the chief engineer may grant extension or renewal for an expired
stockpiling permit. In granting such extension or renewal, the chief engineer
may attach such conditions as deemed appropriate to prevent the creation and
maintenance of a nuisance or hazard to individuals and property. Permit fee for
extension or renewal shall be the fee as specified above.
(Sec. 23-2.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.5)
§ 18A-2.6 Denial of permit.
   If the chief engineer finds that the work as proposed by the applicant is
likely to endanger any property or public way or structure or endanger the
public health or welfare through environmental damage, the chief engineer shall
deny the grading, grubbing, or stockpiling permit. Factors to be considered in
determining probability of hazardous conditions shall include but not be
limited to possible saturation of the ground by rains, earth movements,
dangerous geological conditions or flood hazards, undesirable surface water
run-off, subsurface conditions such as the stratification and faulting of rock,
nature and type of soil or rock. Failure of the chief engineer to observe or
recognize hazardous conditions or the chief engineer’s failure to deny the
grading, grubbing, or stockpiling permit shall not relieve the permittee or the
permittee’s agent from being responsible, nor cause the city, its officers or
agents, to be held responsible for the conditions or damages resulting
therefrom.
(Sec. 23-2.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.6)
§ 18A-2.7 Suspension or revocation of permit.
(a)   All permittees shall be required to comply with provisions of the NPDES
permit if applicable including measures to control pollutants in stormwater
discharges during construction, and with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules
or regulations of the State of Hawaii or of the City and County of Honolulu.
The chief engineer shall, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under
this chapter whenever the permit has been issued on the basis of incorrect
information supplied by the permittee; whenever the grading, grubbing, or
stockpiling is not being performed in accordance with the terms and provisions
of the permit; whenever it is determined that the permittee has not complied
with any provision of the NPDES permit if applicable and any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule or regulation of the State of Hawaii or the City and
County of Honolulu;
or whenever the grading, grubbing, or stockpiling discloses conditions that are
objectionable or unsafe. Where a permit is revoked for any reason, there shall
be no refund of any permit fees.
(b)   When a permit has been suspended, the permittee may submit detailed plans
and proposals for compliance with this chapter, and the NPDES permit if
applicable, and any other applicable laws, ordinances, rules, or regulations of
the State of Hawaii or the City and County of Honolulu, and for correcting the
objectionable or unsafe conditions. Upon approval of such plans and proposals
by the chief engineer, the chief engineer may authorize the permittee, in
writing, to proceed with the work.
(c)   When a permit has been suspended and the permittee fails to take
corrective action specified above within 30 days following the suspension, the
chief engineer may correct the objectionable or unsafe conditions and the
permittee shall be liable for the cost thereof, or, where a bond required by §
18A-2.8 has been filed with the city, from the surety executing such bond, or
shall be deducted from the cash which has been deposited with the city in lieu
of filing a bond.
(Sec. 23-2.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.7)
(Am. Ord. 92-122)
§ 18A-2.8 Bond.
(a)   Bond required. A grading permit or stockpiling permit shall not be issued
for any cut, fill, or stockpiling involving quantities more than 500 cubic
yards or for excavations or fills over 15 feet in vertical height, or for work
being done in increments of 500 cubic yards or less, which is part of a larger
development, unless the permittee shall first file a bond for the benefit of
the city; provided that if the proposed grading or stockpiling is to be
performed under an approved subdivision final map and a subdivision agreement,
or bond or other security has been approved and accepted by the city under the
subdivision rules of the city, or a contractor’s performance bond accepted by
the city, then the chief engineer shall not require a bond for grading or
stockpiling. A copy of the approved and accepted subdivision bond or other
security shall be presented as evidence by the applicant for a grading or
stockpiling permit. At the option of the applicant, the applicant may either
file a bond guaranteed by a surety company duly authorized to transact business
within the State of Hawaii, or the applicant may deposit cash or letter of
credit in lieu of a bond. No interest shall be paid by the city on such cash
deposit. The provisions herein relating to a surety bond shall be equally
applicable to a cash deposit pledged as a bond.
(b)   Amount of bond. The amount of the bond shall be based upon the number of
cubic yards of material in either excavation, fill, or stockpiling, whichever
is the greatest volume. The amount of the bond shall be computed as set forth
in the following schedule:
 
Volume of Material                 Permit Bond
10,000 cubic yards or less         $8 per cubic yard
Over 10,000 to 100,000 cubic yards $80,000 plus $3 per cubic yard for each
                                   additional cubic yard in excess of 10,000
Over 100,000 cubic yards           $350,000 plus $1 per cubic yard in excess of
                                   100,000
 
At the option of the applicant, the applicant may file a bond in an amount
equal to the cost of all work and services required to complete all of the work
under the grading or stockpiling permit as approved by the chief engineer. Cost
estimates prepared by the permittee shall be subject to approval of the chief
engineer to determine the exact amount of the bond.
(c)   Conditions. The bond shall be conditioned to be payable to the chief
engineer, and upon failure of the permittee to complete all of the required
work within the specified time, the chief engineer shall collect the moneys
from the bond and complete the necessary work to control soil erosion and
sedimentation or all unfinished work required by the permit. The parties
executing the bond shall be firmly bound to pay for this entire cost.
(d)   Additional conditions. Each bond shall provide that the surety shall be
held and firmly bound unto the city for so long as the following conditions
have not been met:
(1)   The permittee shall comply with all of the terms and conditions of the
permit to the satisfaction of the chief engineer;
(2)   The permittee shall complete all of the work authorized under the permit
within the time limit specified in the permit; and
(3)   The surety company shall not terminate or cancel the bond until notified
in writing by the chief engineer of any termination or cancellation.
(e)   Period and termination of bond. The term of each bond shall begin upon
the date of issuance of the permit and shall remain in effect for a period of
one year after the date of completion of the work to the satisfaction of the
chief engineer. Such completion shall be evidenced by a certificate signed by
the chief engineer. In the event of failure to complete the work or failure to
comply with all of the conditions and terms of the permit, the chief engineer
may order the work to be completed as required by the permit and to the
satisfaction of the chief engineer. The surety executing such bond or the cash
depositor, shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for
the payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred or
expended by the city, in causing any and all of such required work to be done,
and the surety and the permittee assents to the completion of the work even
though it is performed after the time allowed in the permit. Upon completion of
such work by the city, the bond shall be terminated. In the case of a cash
deposit, such a deposit or any unused portion thereof not required to complete
the work authorized by the permit shall be refunded to the permittee.
(Sec. 23-2.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.8)
(Am. Ord. 96-34)
§ 18A-2.9 Inspection.
(a)   Each permit issued under this chapter includes the right to the chief
engineer or the chief engineer’s authorized representatives to enter upon and
to inspect the grading, grubbing, or stockpiling operations and if applicable,
the erosion control plan and provisions and measures to control pollutants in
stormwater discharges during construction.
(b)   The permittee shall notify the chief engineer at least two days before
the permittee or the permittee’s agent begins any grading, grubbing, or
stockpiling. Where applicable and feasible, the measures to control erosion and
other pollutants shall be in place before any earth moving phase of the grading
is initiated. A copy of the permit, the erosion control plans, and the NPDES
permit where applicable, plans and specifications for grading, grubbing, or
stockpiling shall be maintained at the site during the progress of any work.
(c)   If the chief engineer or the chief engineer’s representative finds that
the work is not being done in conformance with this chapter; or the plans; or
the erosion control plans; or in accordance with accepted practices, the chief
engineer shall immediately notify the person in charge of the grading work of
the nonconformity and of the corrective measures to be taken. Grading
operations shall cease until corrective measures satisfactory to the chief
engineer have been taken. In addition, whenever the work is not being done in
conformance with an NPDES permit, the State department of health will be
notified.
(Sec. 23-2.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.9)
(Am. Ord. 92-122)
ARTICLE 3: GRADING, GRUBBING, AND STOCKPILING
Sections
   
18A-3.1   Conditions of permit
   
18A-3.2   Special requirements
§ 18A-3.1 Conditions of permit.
   The requirements of subsections (a), (b), and (c) may be modified by the
director of planning and permitting based on the engineer’s soils report and
engineering slope hazard report.
(a)   Height. Where a cut or fill is greater than 15 feet in height, terraces
or benches shall be constructed at vertical intervals of 15 feet, except that
where only one bench is required, it shall be at the midpoint. The minimum
width of such terraces or benches shall be at least 8 feet and provided with
drainage provisions to control erosion on the slope face and bench surface.
(b)   Cut slopes. Under the following soil conditions, no cut may be steeper in
slope than the ratio of its horizontal to its vertical distance as shown below:
(1)   One-half horizontal to one vertical in unweathered rock or mudrock;
(2)   One horizontal to one vertical in decomposed rock; and
(3)   One and one-half horizontal to one vertical in soils of low plasticity,
cuts of any height in highly plastic soils shall be as recommended in the
applicable report.
(c)   Fill slopes. Fills shall not be steeper than a ratio of two horizontal to
one vertical, except that fill using highly plastic clays shall have slopes as
recommended in the applicable report.
(d)   Distance from property line. The horizontal distance from the top of a
cut slope or the bottom of a fill slope to the adjoining property line shall
not be less than as follows:
 
Height of Cut or Fill       Distance from Property Line (in feet)
Zero feet to 4 feet         2
More than 4 feet to 8 feet  4
More than 8 feet to 15 feet 6
More than 15 feet           8
 
These requirements may be modified by the director of planning and permitting
when cuts or fills are supported by retaining walls or when the permittee
submits an engineer’s soils report or engineering slope hazard report stating
that the soil conditions will permit a lesser horizontal distance without
causing damage or danger to the adjoining property.
(e)   Area opened. The maximum-sized parcel of land that may be opened for
grading or grubbing is 15 acres. Noncontiguous increments may be worked
concurrently provided no single parcel exceeds 15 acres, provided the work is
in conformance with the NPDES permit. The area of land that may be opened may
be reduced by the director of planning and permitting to control pollution and
minimize storm damage. However, if soils, hydrologic, climatic and construction
conditions warrant, and adequate erosion prevention measures have been taken,
the director of planning and permitting may authorize additional area to be
opened. Additional area may not be opened for grading or grubbing until
measures to prevent dust or erosion problems in the area already graded or
grubbed have been undertaken to the satisfaction of the director.
(f)   Fills. The requirements of subdivisions (1), (2), and (3) may be modified
by the director of planning and permitting if the permittee submits an
engineer’s soils report recommending criteria for the proposed fill for its
intended use.
(1)   Fill material shall be selected to meet the requirements and conditions
of the particular fill for which it is to be used. The fill material shall not
contain vegetation or organic matter. Where rocks, concrete, or similar
materials of greater than 8 inches in diameter are incorporated into the fill,
they shall be placed in accordance with the recommendation of a soils engineer.
(2)   Preparation of ground surface. Before placing or stockpiling, the natural
ground surface shall be prepared by removing the vegetation and, if required by
the director of planning and permitting, shall be notched by a series of
benches or subsurface drains, or both, installed. No fill shall be placed over
any water spring, marsh, refuse dump, nor upon a soft, soggy, or springy
foundation; provided that this requirement may be waived by the director of
planning and permitting if the permittee submits an engineer’s soils report
recommending criteria for the fill.
(3)   Placement and compaction. Fill materials shall be spread and compacted in
a series of 8-inch to 10-inch layers when compacted, unless otherwise
recommended by the soils engineer. Except for slopes, the fill shall be
compacted to 90 percent of maximum density as determined by the most recent
ASTM soil compaction test D1557 unless the engineer’s soils report justifies a
lesser degree of compaction, or unless otherwise recommended by the soils
engineer.
(g)   Vegetation. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation should be retained by
becoming part of the erosion control plan during construction or part of the
permanent landscaping plan, if applicable. If it is necessary that vegetation
be removed, trees, timber, plants, shrubbery, and other woody vegetation, after
being uprooted, displaced, or dislodged from the ground by excavation,
clearing, or grubbing, shall not be stored or deposited along the banks of any
stream, river, or natural watercourse. After being uprooted, displaced, or
dislodged, such vegetation shall be disposed of by means approved in writing by
the director of planning and permitting or removed from the site within a
reasonable time, but not to exceed three months.
(h)   Drainage provisions. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface
waters from damaging the cut face of an excavation or the sloped surfaces of a
fill. Positive drainage shall be provided to prevent the accumulation or
retention of surface water in pits, gullies, holes or similar depressions. All
drainage facilities shall be designed to carry surface waters to a street,
storm drain inlet, or natural watercourse and shall include an erosion and
sedimentation control plan to prevent sediment-laden runoff from leaving the
site, either during or following construction. The director of planning and
permitting may require such detention or retention drainage structures and
pipes to be constructed or installed, which in the director’s opinion, are
necessary to prevent erosion damage, prevent sediment-laden runoff from leaving
the site, and to satisfactorily carry off surface waters. The flow of any
existing and known natural underground drainage shall not be impeded or changed
so as to cause damage to adjoining property.
(i)   Debris prohibited. No person shall perform any grading operation so as to
cause falling rocks, soil, or debris in any form to fall, slide, or flow onto
adjoining properties, streets, or natural watercourses.
(j)   Work days. No grading work may be done on Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays at any time without prior notice to the director of planning and
permitting; provided that the grading work is also in conformance with Hawaii
Administrative Rules Chapter 11-46, “Community Noise Control.”
(k)   Dust control. All work areas within and without the actual grading area
must be maintained free from dust that will cause a nuisance or hazard to
others and in conformance with the air pollution control standards contained in
Hawaii Administrative Rules Chapter 11-60.1, “Air Pollution Control.”
(l)   Water quality standards. All grading operations authorized under this
chapter shall be performed in conformance with the water pollution control and
water quality standards contained in Hawaii Administrative Rules Chapter 11-55,
“Water Pollution Control” and Chapter 11-54, “Water Quality Standards” and if
applicable, the NPDES permit for the project. Any dewatering discharge into
State waters will require an NPDES permit from the State department of health
under Chapter 11-55, “Water Pollution Control”. Any dewatering discharge into
the city-owned storm sewer system will require a construction dewatering permit
from the director of planning and permitting and an NPDES permit for the
discharge of any pollutant into State waters through the city-owned storm sewer
system from the State department of health.
(m)   Notification of completion. The permittee or the permittee’s agent shall
notify the director of planning and permitting or the director’s representative
when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval shall
not be given until completion of all work including installation of all
drainage structures and their protective devices, completion of all planting
showing a healthy growth in conformance with the approved plans and
specifications, and the required reports have been submitted.
(n)   Report after grading.
(1)   When grading involves cuts or fills for which an engineer’s soils report
was required, the permittee shall submit a final report, prepared by an
engineer, upon the completion of such work. This report shall contain:
(A)   A description of materials used in the fill and its moisture content at
the time of compaction, the procedure used in depositing and compacting the
fill, the preparation of original ground surface before making the fill, but
not limited to benching and subsurface drainage, and a plan or tabulation
showing the general location and elevation of compaction tests made in the fill
together with a tabulation of relative compaction densities obtained at each
location, the location of subdrains and other pertinent features of the fill
necessary for its stability; and
(B)   A certification that the work was done in conformity to this chapter, the
approved plans and specifications, and the engineer’s soils report.
(2)   Where a slope hazard evaluation and mitigation plan was required to be
submitted with a grading permit application, the permittee shall submit a final
assessment report, prepared by an engineer, upon the completion of site work,
before building construction. The assessment report shall contain a
verification that the prevention measures and any stabilization measures called
for in the engineering slope hazard report or construction plans were done in
conformity with this chapter, and the approved plans and specifications.
(o)   As-graded plan. Upon completion of grading areas over 1 acre or areas
graded under subdivision rules, an as-graded plan prepared by an engineer or
land surveyor shall be submitted if required by the director of planning and
permitting.
(Sec. 23-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 15, § 14-15.1)
(Am. Ords. 92-122, 04-27)
§ 18A-3.2 Special requirements.
(a)   Any person performing or causing to be performed any excavation or fill
shall, at such person’s own expense, provide the necessary means to prevent the
movement of earth of the adjoining properties, to protect the improvements
thereon, and to maintain the existing natural grade of adjoining properties.
(b)   Any person performing or causing to be performed, any excavation or fill
shall be responsible for the maintenance or restoration of street pavements,
sidewalks, and curbs, and improvements of public utilities which may be
affected. The maintenance or restoration of street pavements, sidewalks, and
curbs shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the city and
the maintenance and restoration of improvements of public utilities shall be in
conformity with the standards of the public utility companies affected. At cuts
fronting any street, a suitable and adequate barrier shall be installed to
provide protection to the public.
(c)   Any person depositing or causing to be deposited, any silt or other
debris in ditches, watercourses, drainage facilities, and public roadways,
shall remove such silt or other debris. If such person shall fail, neglect, or
refuse to comply with this section within 48 hours after written notice, served
upon such person, either by mail or by personal service, the chief engineer may
proceed to remove the silt and other debris or to take any other action the
chief engineer deems appropriate. The costs incurred for any action taken by
the chief engineer shall be payable by such person.
(d)   At any stage of the grading, grubbing, or stockpiling work, if the chief
engineer finds that further work as authorized by an existing permit is likely
to create soil erosion problems or to endanger any life, limb, or property, the
chief engineer may require safety precautions, which may include but shall not
be limited to the construction of flatter exposed slopes, the construction of
additional silting or sediment basins, drainage facilities, or benches; the
removal of rocks, boulders, debris, and other dangerous objects which, if
dislodged, are likely to cause injury or damage; the construction of fences or
other suitable protective barriers; or may refer to the local soil and water
conservation district for advice from the soil conservation service or other
appropriate agencies on the planting or sodding of slopes and bare areas. All
planted or sodded areas shall be maintained. An irrigation system or watering
facilities may be required by the chief engineer.
(e)   At any stage of the grading, grubbing, or stockpiling operations, if the
chief engineer finds that further work as authorized by an existing permit is
likely to create dust problems which may jeopardize health, property, or the
public welfare, the chief engineer may require additional dust control
precautions and, if these additional precautions are not effective in
controlling dust, may stop all operations. These additional dust control
measures may include such items as sprinkling water, applying mulch treated
with bituminous material, or applying hydro mulch.
(f)   Hillside lots shall be graded in such a manner that any parcels which may
be created therefrom, including all separate building sites which may be
contained within the parcels, can be satisfactorily graded and developed as
individual building sites.
(Sec. 23-3.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 15, § 14-15.2)
ARTICLE 4: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES, AND LIABILITIES FOR GRADING, GRUBBING, AND
STOCKPILING
Sections
   
18A-4.1   General
   
18A-4.2   Notice of violation—Stop work
   
18A-4.3   Criminal prosecution
   
18A-4.4   Administrative enforcement
   
18A-4.5   Liability
   
18A-4.6   Rule-making powers
   
18A-4.7   Decisions of the director of planning and permitting
   
18A-4.8   Depository of civil penalties
§ 18A-4.1 General.
   It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden, or to fail to perform
any act required, by this chapter. Whenever a corporation violates this
chapter, the violation shall be also that of the individual directors,
officers, or agents of the corporation who, in their capacity as directors,
officers, or agents of such corporation have authorized, ordered, or done any
of the acts constituting in whole or in part such violation.
(Sec. 23-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 16, § 14-16.1)
(Am. Ord. 90-71)
§ 18A-4.2 Notice of violation—Stop work.
(a)   Whenever any person, firm or corporation violates this chapter, the
director of planning and permitting shall serve the person, firm, or
corporation with a notice of violation, which shall require the person, firm,
or corporation responsible to correct the violation. A notice of violation must
be served upon responsible persons either personally or by certified mail.
However, if the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the director of planning and permitting in the exercise of
reasonable diligence and the director provides an affidavit to that effect,
then a notice of violation may be served by publishing the same once each week
for two consecutive weeks in a daily or weekly publication in the city pursuant
to HRS § 1-28.5.
(b)   The notice of violation shall include but not be limited to the following
information:
(1)   The date of issuance of the notice;
(2)   The name and address of the person or entity notified and the location of
the violation;
(3)   The section number of the ordinance, code, or rule which has been
violated;
(4)   The nature of the violation;
(5)   An order to stop work if deemed necessary by the director of planning and
permitting; and
(6)   The deadline for correction of the violation.
(c)   If the director of planning and permitting deems it necessary for work to
stop, the work shall cease upon receipt of the notice and shall not resume
until corrective measures satisfactory to the director have been taken. If the
notice includes a stop work order, the director shall notify and transmit a
copy to the chief of police concurrently with the issuance of the notice. The
chief of police shall have the power to enforce the stop work order pursuant to
Charter § 6-1604.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 16, § 14-16.2) (Added by Ord. 90-71; Am. Ords. 91-07,
15-15)
§ 18A-4.3 Criminal prosecution.
   Any person, firm, or corporation violating this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor for each and every day or portion thereof during which any
violation of this chapter is committed and, upon conviction of any such
violation, such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or
by imprisonment for not more than one year, or by both fine and imprisonment.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 16, § 14-16.3) (Added by Ord. 90-71)
§ 18A-4.4 Administrative enforcement.
(a)   In lieu of or in addition to enforcement pursuant to § 29-4.3, if the
director of planning and permitting determines that any person, firm, or
corporation is not complying with a notice of violation, the director of
planning and permitting may issue an order to the person or entity responsible
for the violation, pursuant to this section.
(b)   Contents of order.
(1)   The order may require the party responsible for the violation to do any
or all of the following:
(A)   Correct the violation within the time specified in the order;
(B)   Upon compliance with HRS Chapter 91, pay a civil fine not to exceed
$5,000 in the manner, at the place and time specified in the order;
(C)   Upon compliance with HRS Chapter 91, pay a civil fine not to exceed
$5,000 per day for each day in which the violation occurs, in the manner and at
the time and place specified in the order; and
(D)   Restore the land affected by the violation to its original condition and
obtain a certificate of completion from the director of planning and
permitting. Restoration of the land must be completed within 30 days of the
order becoming final.
(2)   The order shall advise the party responsible for the violation that the
order shall become final 30 calendar days after the date of its delivery.
(c)   Recurring violations.
(1)   Persons who have previously committed a violation under this chapter, in
a five-year period, may be required to pay initial and daily civil fines under
subsection (b) in amounts up to two times the fine amounts previously imposed
by the director of planning and permitting for the immediately preceding
violation.
(2)   Where a person commits a violation under this chapter, at the same
location, more than one time in a 12-month period, the director of planning and
permitting shall refer the finding of violation to the prosecuting attorney for
initiation of a criminal prosecution pursuant to §
18A-4.3.
(d)   Service of notice of order. A notice of order must be served upon
responsible persons either personally or by certified mail. However, if the
whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by
the director of planning and permitting in the exercise of reasonable diligence
and the director provides an affidavit to that effect, then a notice of order
may be served by publishing the same once each week for two consecutive weeks
in a daily or weekly publication in the city pursuant to HRS § 1-28.5.
(e)   Judicial enforcement of order. The director of planning and permitting
may institute a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction for the
enforcement of any order issued pursuant to this section. If a violator does
not pay the civil penalty assessed by the director of planning and permitting
within 30 days after it is due, or does not request an administrative hearing
to contest the violation within the time provided by the order, the director of
planning and permitting shall request the corporation counsel to institute a
civil action to recover the amount of the assessment. Where the civil action
has been instituted to enforce the civil fine imposed by the order, the
director of planning and permitting need only show that the notice of violation
and order were served, that a civil fine was imposed, the amount of the civil
fine imposed and that the fine imposed has not been paid.
(f)   Injunctive relief. The director of planning and permitting may institute
a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any violation,
or threatened violation of this chapter. The institution of an action for
injunctive relief does not relieve any person from liability under the civil
and criminal penalties for violations of this chapter.
(g)   Exception—at the discretion of the director, the owner and developer of
the property or person or persons responsible for such grading has not violated
this chapter by grading without a permit in cases of natural or man-made
disasters.
For the purposes of this section, a “natural disaster” includes disasters
caused by fire, flood, tidal waves, hurricanes, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions,
earthquakes, or other natural causes; and a “man-made disaster” includes
disasters caused by enemy attacks, sabotage, other hostile actions, or
disasters to individual homes, or other disasters manufactured, created,s or
constructed by mankind.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 16, § 14-16.4) (Added by Ord. 90-71; Am. Ords. 14-30,
15-15)
§ 18A-4.5 Liability.
   This chapter shall not be construed to relieve or alleviate the liability of
any person for damages resulting from performing, or causing to be performed,
any grading, grubbing, or stockpiling operation. The city, its officers, and
employees shall be free from any liability, cost, or damage which may accrue
from any grading, grubbing, or stockpiling or any work connected therewith,
authorized by this chapter.
(Sec. 23-4.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 16, § 14-16.5)
(Am. Ord. 90-71)
§ 18A-4.6 Rule-making powers.
   The director of planning and permitting shall be empowered to adopt rules
pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, for the implementation of this chapter.
(Sec. 23-4.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 16, § 14-16.6)
(Am. Ords. 90-71, 15-15)
§ 18A-4.7 Decisions of the director of planning and permitting.
   Decisions of the director of planning and permitting made in accordance with
this chapter, and decisions involving variations from the standards referred to
herein, or both, shall be made a matter of record in the permit file.
(Sec. 23-4.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 16, § 14-16.7)
(Am. Ords. 90-71, 15-15)
§ 18A-4.8 Depository of civil penalties.
   Payments of civil penalties are to be deposited into a special account of
the general fund, to be appropriately named by the department of budget and
fiscal services, and shall be used for expenses related to enforcement
activities of the department of planning and permitting.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 16, § 14-16.8) (Added by Ord. 14-30)
CHAPTER 19: PLUMBING CODE
Articles
   
1.   Adoption of the Hawaii State Plumbing Code
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections
   
19-1.1   Adoption of the Hawaii State Plumbing Code
§ 19-1.1 Adoption of the Hawaii State Plumbing Code.
   The Hawai‘i State Plumbing Code adopted by the State Building Code Council
on May 19, 2020, which adopts, with modifications, the Uniform Plumbing Code,
28th Edition (2018), 6th Printing including appendices A, B, C, G and I, as
copyrighted and published by International Association of Plumbing and
Mechanical Officials, 4755 East Philadelphia Street, Ontario, CA 91761-2816, is
adopted by reference and made a part hereof, subject to the following
amendments:
(1)   Amending Section 101.1. Section 101.1 is amended to read:
101.1 Title.  This document shall be known as the “Plumbing Code”, may be cited
as such, and will be referred to herein as “this code.”
(2)   Amending Section 101.2. Section 101.2 is amended to read:
101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the design,
construction, erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use, or maintenance of plumbing systems within the
City and County of Honolulu.
(3)   Adding Section 102.1. Section 102.1 is added to read:
102.1 Conflicts Between Codes. In general:
(a)   When the provisions of this code conflict with the mechanical code, this
code shall prevail.
(b)   When there is a conflict between this code and ROH Chapter 18 concerning
the fees or procedural requirements for obtaining a permit required by this
code, ROH Chapter 18 shall prevail except as otherwise stated herein.
(c)   When this code conflicts with ROH Chapter 18 regarding the substantive
requirements for obtaining a permit required by this code, this code shall
prevail except as otherwise stated herein.
(d)   When this code conflicts with ROH Chapter 14, ROH Chapter 14 will
prevail.
(e)   Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific
requirement in this code, the specific requirement will prevail. The Authority
Having Jurisdiction may resolve conflicts between the foregoing requirements
based on the general principles in this section when necessary to prevent
absurd results, prevent unjustified hardship to the applicant, or protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the public.
(f)   When this code conflicts with the manufacturer’s installation
instructions for plumbing systems, the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall
determine the applicable requirements, as necessary for the protection of the
public. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific
requirement in this code, the specific requirement shall prevail.
(g)   Except as otherwise stated herein, conflicts of law are to be resolved in
accordance with the rules of statutory construction and conflicts of law
recognized by Hawaii courts.
(4)   Adding Section 102.2. Section 102.2 is added to read:
102.2 Existing Installations. Plumbing systems lawfully in existence on January
22, 2023 shall be permitted to have their use, maintenance, or repair continued
provided that they do not create a hazard to health, safety, or property. If
replaced, existing showerheads, kitchen faucets, lavatory faucets, toilets, and
urinals shall comply with the water conservation requirements in ROH Chapter
30, Article 4.
(5)   Amending Section 103.1. Section 103.1 is amended by amending the first
paragraph to read:
The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be the director of the department of
planning and permitting. In addition to the powers specifically set forth
herein, the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall have all powers reasonably
necessary to administer and enforce this code, including, without limitation,
the powers to render interpretations of this code and adopt and enforce rules
that are supplemental to this code.
(6)   Amending Section 104.1. Section 104.1 is amended to read:
104.1 Permits Required. It shall be unlawful to alter, install, repair, or
replace a plumbing system regulated by this code except as permitted in ROH §
18-3.1(b), or to cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a building
permit.
In addition to the work exempt from requiring a building permit under this
section, the following work does not require a building permit:
(a)   The clearing of stoppages and blocks without the removal or replacement
of plumbing systems or parts thereof; and
(b)   The removal and replacement of water closets, shower heads, and faucets
without the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes, and other plumbing
system components.
Exemption from building permit requirements under ROH § 18-3.1(b) shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for work to be done in violation of the other
requirements of the code or any other laws or ordinances.
(7)   Deleting Section 104.2. Section 104.2 is deleted.
(8)   Deleting Section 104.3. Section 104.3 is deleted.
(9)   Adding Section 104.3. Section 104.3 is added to read:
104.3 Construction Documents. In addition to the requirements provided in ROH
Chapter 18, construction documents that are submitted with an application for a
permit must:
(a)   Provide a true and accurate description of the work that will be
performed;
(b)   Include piping plans with isometric piping diagrams, equipment piping
details, equipment schedules, and product information;
(c)   Be drawn to standard architectural scale using floor plans and elevations
or standard engineering scale appropriate to site utilities;
(d)   Use text with a minimum height of one-eighth inch; and
(e)   Be prepared, stamped, and signed by a Registered Design Professional
(mechanical or civil).
(10)   Deleting Section 104.4. Section 104.4 is deleted.
(11)   Adding Section 104.4. Section 104.4 is added to read:
104.4 Permit Expiration. A permit issued by the Authority Having Jurisdiction
under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null
and void where the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180
days from the date of such permit, or where the work authorized by such permit
is suspended or abandoned at a time after the work is commenced for a period of
180 days. Before such work is recommenced, a new permit shall first be obtained
to do so, and the fee, therefore, shall be one-half the amount required for a
new permit for such work; provided that no changes have been made or will be
made in the original construction documents for such work; and provided further
that such suspensions or abandonment has not exceeded one year.
(12)   Deleting Section 104.5. Section 104.5 is deleted.
(13)   Adding Section 104.5. Section 104.5 is added to read:
104.5 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance. Where work for which a building
permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining a
building permit, a special investigation may be required before a building
permit is issued for such work.
(14)   Amending Section 105.2.3. Section 105.2.3 is amended to read:
105.2.3 Inspection Requests. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work
authorized by a permit to notify the Authority Having Jurisdiction that such
work is ready for inspection. A request for inspection may be made in any
manner allowed by the Authority Having Jurisdiction but must be made not less
than two working days before the desired inspection date. If a request is
properly made, the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall not be required to
perform the inspection on the requested date, but shall make reasonable efforts
to perform the requested inspection on the requested date or as soon thereafter
as is practicable under the circumstances.
It shall be the duty of the person requesting inspections, in accordance with
this code, to provide access to and means for inspection of such work. After
inspection, the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall approve the inspected work
if it complies with the requirements of this code and the approved plans for
the building permit issued for the work.
As part of any inspection made under this code, the Authority Having
Jurisdiction may require verification that the work being inspected was
performed by a plumbing journey worker and/or contractor currently licensed in
the State of Hawaii. The failure to verify that work under inspection was
performed by an appropriately licensed professional will be adequate grounds
for the Authority Having Jurisdiction to determine that the work fails
inspection.
In addition to any fees payable under ROH Chapter 18, a person requesting an
inspection will be required to pay an inspection fee. A person that requests an
inspection to occur during normal business hours shall pay the city a fee of
$50 per hour for each hour that is used to perform the inspection, which
includes time used to travel to and from the inspection location. A person may
also request an inspection to occur outside of normal business hours. A request
for an inspection to be conducted outside of normal business hours may be
approved or denied at the discretion of the Authority
Having Jurisdiction, based on the nature of the work to be inspected and the
availability of personnel to perform the inspection. The fee for an inspection
to be conducted outside of normal business hours is $75 for each hour that is
used to perform the inspection, including time used to travel to and from the
inspection location. For the purposes of this section, normal business hours
are 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on a day on which the city is open for business.
In calculating inspection fees due under this section, the person requesting
the inspection will be billed for one hour of time for inspections that take up
to one hour and half the hourly rate for each additional half hour or portion
thereof used to perform the inspection.
(15)   Amending Section 105.2.4. Section 105.2.4 is amended to read:
105.2.4 Advance Notice. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work
authorized by a permit to notify the Authority Having Jurisdiction that such
work is ready for inspection. Such notification shall be given not less than
two working days before the work is to be inspected. Such notification shall be
in writing or by telephone, at the option of the Authority Having Jurisdiction.
(16)   Amending Section 105.2.6. Section 105.2.6 is amended to read:
105.2.6 Reinspections. If an inspection is made by the Authority Having
Jurisdiction and additional inspections are necessary because less than all of
the work requiring inspection is approved, the Authority Having Jurisdiction
may require a reinspection of the work that has not been approved. When a
reinspection is required, a reinspection fee will be assessed.
Reinspections may be requested in the same manner as requests for initial
inspections under Section 105.2.3 and will be billed in the same manner
described therein.
Reinspections will not be provided until all outstanding inspection fees and
the fee for reinspection have been paid.
(17)   Adding Section 105.2.7. Section 105.2.7 is added to read:
105.2.7 Plumbing Special Inspection. The Authority Having Jurisdiction may
require work governed by this code to be subject to a plumbing special
inspection when deemed necessary based on the nature of the work or resources
of the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Plumbing special inspections must be
performed by appropriately Registered Design Professionals currently licensed
in the State of Hawaii that are not involved in performing the work that will
be inspected.
Plumbing special inspectors are to be hired and paid by the applicant and may
be required to provide the Authority Having Jurisdiction with proof of their
qualifications to perform the required inspections.
Plumbing special inspectors shall review the approved construction documents
prior to the commencement of work and document the performance of work in
compliance with the approved construction documents and the requirements of
this code in reports that will be provided to the Authority Having
Jurisdiction, the applicant, and the Registered Design Professional engineer of
record, on request.
When work that is subject to a plumbing special inspection is complete, the
plumbing special inspector shall submit a final signed report stating that the
inspected work was completed in compliance with the approved construction
documents and the requirements of this code.
Plumbing special inspectors will provide written documentation to the Authority
Having Jurisdiction demonstrating the plumbing special inspectors’ competence
and relevant experience or training in each type of inspection they will
perform. Inspector personnel will not be allowed to perform inspections without
these qualifications unless directly supervised by the qualified, responsible
plumbing special inspector.
(18)   Amending Section 106.2. Section 106.2 is amended to read:
106.2 Notices of Violation and Order. Whenever any person, firm, or corporation
violates any provision of this chapter, the Authority Having Jurisdiction may
serve a notice of violation on the persons deemed responsible for the
violation, which may include the owners of the property and building or unit
thereof. A notice of violation must be served on the responsible persons by:
(a)   Hand delivery to the responsible person at any location or to another
person of suitable age and discretion at the responsible person’s workplace or
place of residence;
(b)   Certified mail, deliverable to any address at which the responsible
person is known to receive mail, with return receipt requested; or
(c)   If the whereabouts of one or more responsible persons are unknown and
cannot be readily ascertained by the Authority Having Jurisdiction, the
Authority Having Jurisdiction may, after reasonable efforts to locate and serve
the responsible person as provided for in (a) and (b), serve the notice of
violation by publishing a copy of the same in a daily or weekly publication of
general circulation within in the city, once per week for two consecutive
weeks.
A notice of violation must include at least the following information:
(a)   The date of the notice;
(b)   The name of the persons deemed responsible for the violation;
(c)   The section of the code, the rule, or the building permit condition that
has been violated;
(d)   A concise statement or description of the violation;
(e)   The deadline for correcting each violation; and
(f)   The name and phone number of the inspector responsible for issuing the
notice of violation.
If a violation remains uncorrected after the deadline specified in the notice
of violation after the notice of violation is properly served on one or more
responsible persons, the Authority Having Jurisdiction may then issue a notice
of order to the same persons who were served with the notice of violation.
A notice of order must contain the same information required for a notice of
violation and may impose civil fines of up to $2,000 per violation, per day for
each uncorrected violation that was identified in the notice of violation. In
addition, a notice of order must inform the responsible persons that the notice
of order may be appealed to the Building Board of Appeals within 30 days of
service of the notice of order. Notices of order must be served in the same
manner as notices of violation.
Service of a notice of violation or notice of order will be effective:
(a)   On the day hand delivery is made;
(b)   On the day certified mail is signed for; or
(c)   On the date the last required publication is made.
(19)   Amending Section 106.3. Section 106.3 is amended to read:
106.3 Criminal Penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any
provisions of this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; provided that each
day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. The penalty
for a criminal violation of this code shall be a fine of not more than $2,000
per violation, imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.
Any officer or inspector designated by the Authority Having Jurisdiction that
has been deputized by the chief of police as a special officer for the purpose
of enforcing the provisions of the this code may arrest the person responsible
for the violation upon a warrant of arrest or issue a citation using a summons
and complaint form issued by the State of Hawaii Judiciary for violations of
this code. The form and content of such summons and complaint form shall be as
adopted or prescribed by the administrative judge of the district court and
shall be printed on a form commensurate with the form of other summonses or
citations used in modern methods of arrest, so designed to include all
necessary information to make the same valid within the laws and regulations of
the State of Hawaii and the city.
(20)   Amending Section 106.4. Section 106.4 is amended to read:
106.4 Stop Orders. If the Authority Having Jurisdiction determines that work is
being done in violation of this code or any building permit issued hereunder,
the Authority Having Jurisdiction may issue a written stop work order to the
owner of the property, building, and building unit and to any persons engaged
in or causing the work to be done. Upon service of a stop work order, all
persons served with the order must immediately stop work until the Authority
Having Jurisdiction authorizes further work.
In addition to the information required for a notice of violation under Section
106.2, a stop work order must contain a concise description of the work that is
prohibited by the stop work order. A stop work order may be served in the same
manner as a notice of violation or notice of order under Section 106.2. The
provisions in Section 106.2 regarding the effective date of service will apply
to stop work orders.
(21)   Adding Section 106.7. Section 106.7 is added to read:
106.7 Effect of a Notice of Order—Right to Appeal. All notices of order issued
by the Authority Having Jurisdiction will become final 30 calendar days after
the effective date of service. Any person served with a notice of order issued
under this code may appeal the notice of order to the Building Board of Appeals
before that time. The filing of an appeal will not stay any provision of the
notice of order being appealed.
(22)   Adding Section 106.8. Section 106.8 is added to read:
106.8 Judicial Enforcement. The Authority Having Jurisdiction may institute a
civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of
this code and any rule adopted or building permit issued hereunder.
The Authority Having Jurisdiction may also institute a civil action to enforce
the civil fine imposed by a notice of order that has become final. In such
cases, the Authority Having Jurisdiction need only show that the notice of
violation and notice of order were properly served, that a civil fine was
imposed, the amount of the civil fine that it seeks to enforce, and that the
civil fine has not been paid.
(23)   Amending Section 107.1. Section 107.1 is amended to read:
107.1 Building Board of Appeals. The Building Board of Appeals constituted
under the ROH Chapter 16 shall have the authority hear and determine appeals
from the actions of the Authority Having Jurisdiction in the administration and
enforcement of this code. The procedures and standards for appeals from the
actions of the Authority Having Jurisdiction in the administration and
enforcement of this code will be as provided in ROH Chapter 16.
(24)   Deleting Section 107.2. Section 107.2 is deleted.
(25)   Amending Section 203.0. Section 203.0 is amended by amending the
definition of “Authority Having Jurisdiction” to read:
Authority Having Jurisdiction. Authority Having Jurisdiction means the Director
of Planning and Permitting, of the City and County of Honolulu. When references
are to the Health Officer, Health Department or Health, the Authority Having
Jurisdiction shall be the Director of Health of the State of Hawaii Department
of Health.
(26)   Amending Section 204.0. Section 204.0 is amended by adding a definition
for “Building Code” to read:
Building Code. As defined in ROH Chapter 16.
(27)   Amending Section 205.0. Section 205.0 is amended by adding a definition
for “Control Valve” to read:
Control Valve. A control valve is any type of valve which can change the flow
rate of water, and includes a compression stop valve.
(28)   Amending Section 206.0. Section 206.0 is amended by adding definitions
for “DOH” and “Dwelling” to read:
DOH. DOH means the State of Hawaii Department of Health.
Dwelling. A house, apartment, or other place that is intended to provide living
accommodations to one or more persons and equipped with amenities for sleeping,
cooking, and sanitation.
(29)   Amending Section 220.0. Section 220.0 is amended by amending the
definition of “Registered Design Professional” to read:
Registered Design Professional. An engineer licensed in the State of Hawaii
under Chapter 464 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes, as amended.
(30)   Amending Section 221.0. Section 221.0 is amended by adding a definition
of “SPC” to read:
SPC. The Hawaii State Plumbing Code, adopted by the State Building Code Council
on May 19, 2020.
(31)   Amending Section 223.0. Section 223.0 is amended by adding a definition
of “UPC” to read:
UPC. The 2018 Uniform Plumbing Code, 28th Edition (2018), 6th Printing.
(32)   Amending Section 301.4. Section 301.4 is amended to read:
301.4 Flood Hazard Areas. Plumbing systems that are located in special flood
hazard area, floodway area, or flood fringe area identified in ROH Chapter 21A
must be designed and installed to ensure that water will not enter or
accumulate within its components during flooding. Plumbing systems located
below the base flood elevation shall be designed and installed to resist
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of
buoyancy. All pipe openings shall terminate at an elevation of at least one
foot above the base flood elevation unless the drainage system is equipped with
an automatic backwater valve in each discharge line passing through the
building exterior wall. Fixtures located at a floor level above the base flood
elevation shall not discharge through the backwater valve.
(33)   Amending Section 301.5.1. Section 301.5.1 is amended to read:
301.5.1 Permit Application. In addition to the requirements of ROH Chapter 18,
the following will apply to applications for building permits involving
alternative engineered designs. The Registered Design Professional shall
indicate on the design documents that the plumbing system, or part thereof, is
an alternative engineered design and note the same in the building permit
application. The building permit and permanent permit records must indicate
that an alternative engineered design was part of the approved installation. A
written request by a Registered Design Professional (mechanical) with the
concurrence of the building or project owner must be made to the Authority
Having Jurisdiction. The details of this approval shall be recorded and entered
in the files of the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Submittals shall be stamped
and signed by the Registered Design Professional (mechanical). The Registered
Design Professional (mechanical) responsible for the design supervision and
construction observation of the plumbing system shall provide a statement that
they have personally verified all tests and certifications and, if appropriate,
state that the installation complies with the installation requirements.
(34)   Amending Section 301.5.6. Section 301.5.6 is amended to read:
301.5.6 Inspection and Testing. Plumbing special inspections, as specified in
Section 105.2.7, will be required for work involving alternative engineered
designs. The alternative engineered design will be tested and inspected in
accordance with the submitted testing and inspection plan and the requirements
of this code.
(35)   Adding Section 306.3. Section 306.3 is added to read:
306.3 Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permits. Sanitary sewer systems that
require an industrial wastewater discharge permit under ROH Chapter 14 must
comply with the design and maintenance requirements adopted by the Department
of Environmental Services.
(36)   Amending Section 310.4. Section 310.4 is amended to read:
310.4 Use of Vent and Waste Pipes. Except as hereinafter provided in Section
908.0 Wet Venting, Section 909.0 Special Venting for Island Fixtures, Section
910.0 Combination Waste and Vent Systems, no vent pipe shall be used as a soil
or waste pipe, nor shall a soil or waste pipe be used as a vent.
(37)   Amending Section 312.3. Section 312.3 is amended to read:
312.3 Building Sewer and Drainage Piping. No building sewer or other drainage
piping or part thereof, constructed of materials other than those approved for
use under or within a building, shall be installed under or within 5 feet (1.5
m) of any building or structure, less than 1 foot (0.3 m) below the surface of
the ground or as approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction.
(38)   Amending Section 312.7. Section 312.7 is amended to read:
312.7 Fire-Resistant Construction. Piping penetrations of fire-resistance-rated
walls, partitions, floors, floor/ceiling assemblies, roof/ceiling assemblies,
or shaft enclosures shall be protected in accordance with the requirements of
the Building Code.
(39)   Deleting Sections 317.0 and 317.1. Sections 317.0 and 317.1 are deleted.
(40)   Amending Section 408.2. Section 408.2 is amended to read:
408.2 Water Consumption. Showerheads shall have a maximum flow rate of not more
than 1.8 gallons per minute (gpm) at 80 psi (6.8 L/m at 552 kPa).
(41)   Amending Section 411.2. Section 411.2 is amended to read:
411.2 Water Consumption. Water closets shall have a maximum consumption not to
exceed 1.28 gallons (4.8 liters/minute) of water per flush.
(42)   Amending Section 411.2.2. Section 411.2.2 is amended to read:
411.2.2 Flushometer Valve Activated Water Closets. Flushometer valve activated
water closets shall have a maximum flush volume of 1.28 gallons (4.8 liters) of
water per flush.
(43)   Deleting Section 415.2. Section 415.2 is deleted.
(44)   Amending Section 422.0. Section 422.0 is amended to read as follows:
422.0 Minimum Number of Required Fixtures. Plumbing fixtures shall be provided
for the type of building occupancy and in the minimum number required in the
Building Code.
(45)   Deleting Section 422.1 and Table 422.1. Section 422.1 and Table 422.1
are deleted.
(46)   Amending Section 501.1. Section 501.1 is amended to read:
501.1 Applicability. The regulations of Chapter 5 of this code shall govern the
construction, location, and installation of fuel-burning and other types of
water heaters heating potable water, together with chimneys, vents, and its
connectors. The minimum capacity for storage water heaters shall be in
accordance with the first-hour rating listed in Table 501.1(2). No water heater
shall be hereinafter installed that does not comply with the manufacturer’s
installation instructions and the type and model of each size thereof approved
by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. A list of accepted water heater appliance
standards is referenced in Table 501.1(1). Listed appliances shall be installed
in accordance with manufacturer installation instructions.
(47)   Amending Section 601.2. Section 601.2 is amended to read:
601.2 Hot and Cold Water Required. Except where not deemed necessary for safety
or sanitation by the Authority Having Jurisdiction, each plumbing fixture shall
be provided with an adequate supply of potable running water piped thereto in
an approved manner, so arranged as to flush and keep it in a clean and sanitary
condition without danger of backflow or cross-connection. Water closets and
urinals shall be flushed using an approved flush tank or flushometer valve.
Exception: Listed fixtures that do not require water for their operation and
are not connected to the water supply.
(48)   Adding Section 601.4. Section 601.4 is added to read:
601.4 Private Water Systems. Owners of private water systems are responsible
for maintaining the potability of their water systems. This section applies to
water systems that are not defined as public water systems as defined by the
Health Officer.
(49)   Amending Section 603.5.5. Section 603.5.5 is amended by adding a new
subparagraph (4) to read:
(4)   No gravity tank may be directly connected to the city water main. Gravity
tanks must be provided with an over-the-rim filler, the orifice or outlet of
which must be elevated a distance of 6 inches (152.4 mm) above the overflow. A
drain shall be provided at the bottom of the tank.
(50)   Amending Section 603.5.14. Section 603.5.14 is amended by adding new
subparagraphs (5) and (6) to read:
(5)   Systems with alarm check valve assembly.
(6)   Systems with booster pump and check valve assembly.
(51)   Amending Section 610.4. Section 610.4 is amended to read:
610.4 Sizing Water Supply and Distribution Systems. Except as otherwise
required by the Board of Water Supply, systems within the range of Table 610.4
may be sized as described therein or as provided in Section 610.5 of this code.
(52)   Deleting Sections 612.0 through 612.7. Sections 612.0 through 612.7 are
deleted.
(53)   Amending Section 701.2. Section 701.2 is amended by amending
subparagraph (2) to read:
(2)   ABS and PVC DWV piping installations must be installed in accordance with
applicable standards referenced in Table 701.2, provided that “Firestop
Protection” requirements will be determined by the Building Code. Except for
single-family dwellings, materials exposed within ducts or plenums must have a
flame-spread index of a maximum of 25 and a smoke-developed index maximum of
50, where tested in accordance with ASTM E 84 and UL 723. These tests must
comply with all requirements of the standards to include the sample size, both
for width and length. Plastic pipe may not be tested while filled with water.
(54)   Amending Section 704.3. Section 704.3 is amended to read:
704.3 Commercial Sinks. Sinks in commercial kitchens and food service
establishments must comply with the requirements adopted by the Health Officer.
(55)   Adding Section 707.15. Section 707.15 is added to read:
707.15 Residential Cleanouts. All cleanouts located on the ground floor within
any residential occupancy shall be extended outside of the building, arranged
in an accessible location below the building, or above the floor, and extend no
less than 6 inches (152.4 mm) above the flood level rim of the lowest fixture.
(56)   Amending Section 710.6. Section 710.6 is amended to read:
710.6 Backwater Valves. Backwater valves, gate valves, fullway ball valves,
unions, motors, compressors, air tanks, and other mechanical devices required
by this section must be located where they will be accessible for inspection
and repair. Unless continuously exposed, these items must be enclosed in a
masonry pit fitted with an adequately sized removable cover or other approved
compartment.
Backwater valves must:
(a)   Have bodies of cast-iron, plastic, brass, or other approved materials;
(b)   Have noncorrosive bearings, seats, and self-aligning discs; and
(c)   Be constructed so as to ensure a positive mechanical seal. Backwater
valves must remain open during periods of low flows to avoid screening of
solids and shall not restrict capacities or cause excessive turbulence during
peak loads. Unless otherwise listed, valve access covers must be a bolted type
with gasket, and each valve must bear the manufacturer’s name cast into the
body and the cover.
(57)   Amending Section 713.1. Section 713.1 is amended to read:
713.1 Where Required. A building in which plumbing fixtures are installed and
premises having drainage piping thereon must be connected to a public or
private sewer, except as provided in ROH Chapter 14.
(58)   Deleting Section 713.2. Section 713.2 is deleted.
(59)   Amending Section 713.3. Section 713.3 is amended to read:
713.3 Public Sewer. The rearrangement or subdivision of a lot into smaller
parcels will not be deemed adequate cause to permit the construction of a
private sewage disposal system.
(60)   Deleting Section 713.4. Section 713.4 is deleted.
(61)   Amending Section 713.5. Section 713.5 is amended to read:
713.5 Permit. No permit shall be issued for the installation, alteration, or
repair of a private sewage disposal system, or part thereof, on a lot for which
a connection with a public sewer is available. It is unlawful for any person to
use or connect to the public sewer system without first obtaining the written
approval of the Authority Having Jurisdiction.
(62)   Amending Section 713.7. Section 713.7 is amended to read:
713.7 Installation. The installation of building sewers receiving building
permits from the Authority Having Jurisdiction must comply with this code.
Where a building sewer is lawfully installed without a building permit by the
Authority Having Jurisdiction and regulated by ROH Chapter 14, the provisions
of this code, relating to building sewers, do not apply.
(63)   Adding Section 713.8. Section 713.8 is added to read:
713.8 Building Sewer Construction. Building sewer construction shall conform to
the requirements for main line sewers as set forth in the City and County of
Honolulu Wastewater System Design Standards, dated July 2017, and ROH Chapter
14, as amended, when either of the following conditions exists:
(1)   Where the Authority Having Jurisdiction requires such construction
because of the character or quantity of the sewage or industrial waste to be
discharged.
(2)   Where the sewer will be dedicated to the City and County of Honolulu.
(64)   Deleting Sections 714.1 through 714.3. Sections 714.1 through 714.3 are
deleted.
(65)   Amending Section 718.3. Section 718.3 is amended to read:
718.3 Protection from Damage. No building sewer or other drainage piping or
part thereof, which is constructed of materials other than those approved for
use under or within a building, may be installed within 5 feet (1.5 m) of any
part of a building or structure, nor less than 1 foot (305 mm) below the
surface of the ground. The provisions of this section include structures such
as porches and steps, whether covered or uncovered; breezeways; roofed porte
cocheres; roofed patios; carports; covered walkways; covered driveways; and
similar structures or appurtenances.
(66)   Amending Section 722.2. Section 722.2 is amended by adding the following
exception to read:
Exception: An abandoned cesspool is allowed to be used as an overflow receptor
for a sewage sump with pump discharge when approved by the Authority Having
Jurisdiction.
(67)   Amending Section 804.1. Section 804.1 is amended to read:
804.1 Standpipe Receptors. Plumbing fixtures or other receptors receiving the
discharge of indirect waste pipes may be approved and must be of such shape and
capacity as to prevent splashing or flooding. Where approved, such fixtures and
receptors must be located in a readily accessible location for inspection and
cleaning. No standpipe receptor for a clothes washer may extend more than 30
inches (762 mm) above its trap. No standpipe receptor for a clothes washer may
be less than 18 inches (457 mm) above its trap. No trap for a clothes washer
standpipe receptor may be installed below the floor. Stand pipe receptors must
be roughed in not less than six inches (152 mm) and not more than 18 inches
(457 mm) above the floor. No indirect waste receptor may be installed in a
toilet room, closet, cupboard, or storeroom, nor in a portion of a building not
in general use by the occupants thereof; except standpipes for clothes washers
may be permitted to be installed in toilet and bathroom areas where the clothes
washer is installed in the same room. Indirect drain receptors for air
conditioning condensate drain lines must be accessible without the use of tools
or equipment for inspection and cleaning and are allowed to be installed in
toilet or bathroom areas.
(68)   Amending Section 809.1. Section 809.1 is amended to read:
809.1 General. Drinking fountains may be permitted to be installed with
indirect waste. Outdoor drinking fountains located beyond 200 feet from the
nearest sanitary drainage system may be allowed to discharge into a dry well in
accordance with the dry well detail of the Department of Parks and Recreation.
(69)   Amending Section 814.5. Section 814.5 is amended to read:
814.5 Point of Discharge. Air-conditioning condensate waste pipes must connect
indirectly, except where permitted in Section 814.6, to the drainage system
through an air gap or air break to trapped and vented receptors, dry wells,
leach pits, or the tailpiece of plumbing fixtures. A condensate drain must be
trapped in accordance with the appliance manufacturer’s instructions or as
approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Dry wells shall have an inner
pipe diameter greater than or equal to the total excavated depth to the bottom
of fill.
(70)   Amending Section 903.1. Section 903.1 is amended by amending
subparagraph (2) to read:
(2)   ABS and PVC DWV piping installations shall be in accordance with the
“Firestop Protection” requirements of the Building Code. Except for a single-
family dwelling, materials exposed within ducts or plenums shall have a flame-
spread index of not more than 25 and a smoke-developed index of not more than
50 where tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. These tests shall comply
with all requirements of the standards to include the sample size, both for
width and length. Plastic pipe shall not be tested filled with water.
(71)   Deleting Section 908.2. Section 908.2 is deleted.
(72)   Deleting Section 911.0. Section 911.0 is deleted.
(73)   Amending Section 1201.1. Section 1201.1 is amended to read:
1201.1 Applicability. The regulations of this chapter shall govern the
installation of fuel gas piping in or in connection with a building, structure
or within the property lines of premises up to 5 pounds-force per square inch
(psi) (34 kPa) for natural gas and 10 psi (69 kPa) for undiluted propane, other
than service pipe.
(74)   Deleting Sections 1203.0 through 1203.4. Sections 1203.0 through 1203.4
are deleted.
(75)   Deleting Sections 1204.1 and 1204.2. Sections 1204.1 and 1204.2 are
deleted.
(76)   Amending Section 1204.3. Section 1204.3 is amended to read:
1204.3 Unlawful. It is unlawful for a gas supplier or person acting as a gas
supplier to furnish gas or to cause gas to be turned on before the gas system
has passed final inspection.
(77)   Amending Section 1208.1. Section 1208.1 is amended to read:
1208.1 Installation of Piping System. The Authority Having Jurisdiction may
require a piping plan before proceeding with installation. The piping plan must
show the proposed location of piping, the size of different branches, the
various load demands, and the location of the point of delivery. Gas meters may
not be located under a window, under interior or exterior stairways, or in
engine, boiler, heater, or electric meter rooms.
(78)   Amending Section 1210.2. Section 1210.2 is amended to read:
1210.2 Installation of Piping. Piping installed above ground shall be securely
supported and located where it will be protected from physical damage. All
exposed gas piping must be kept at least six inches (152 mm) above grade or
structure. Where passing through an exterior wall, the piping must be protected
against corrosion by coating or wrapping with an inert material approved for
such applications. The piping must be sealed around its circumference at the
point of the exterior penetration to prevent the entry of water, insects, and
rodents. Where piping is encased in a protective pipe sleeve, the annular
spaces between the gas piping and the sleeve and between the sleeve and the
wall opening must be sealed.
(79)   Amending Section 1319.4. Section 1319.4 is amended to read:
1319.4 Approval. In addition to requirements imposed by ROH Chapter 18, plans
for medical gas and vacuum systems must be stamped and signed by a Registered
Design Professional (mechanical or electrical). The Registered Design
Professional (mechanical or electrical) responsible for the design and
construction observation of the medical gas and vacuum system must, upon
project completion, provide a statement to the Authority Having Jurisdiction
indicating that they have personally verified that the as-built system complies
with the approved plans and other requirements of this code. Medical gas and
vacuum systems must be tested and inspected by a plumbing special inspector.
(80)   Deleting Chapter 14. Chapter 14 is deleted.
(81)   Amending Section1501.2. Section 1501.2 is amended to read:
1501.2 System Design. Alternate water source systems must be designed by a
Registered Design Professional (mechanical or civil) licensed to perform
building and site plumbing design work. Components, piping, and fittings used
in an alternate water source system must be specified in plans and construction
documents. The Registered Design Professionals (mechanical and/or civil) are
responsible for the design and observation of the alternate water source system
and must, upon project completion, provide a statement to the Authority Having
Jurisdiction indicating that they have personally verified that the as-built
system complies with the approved plans and the requirements of this code.
Alternate water source systems must be tested and inspected by a plumbing
special inspector.
Exception:
When a project is exempt from the licensing requirements of HRS Chapter 464,
the Registered Design Professional is not required for single-family dwelling
alternate water source systems where outlets, piping, and system components are
located on the exterior of the building, and there are no connections to the
house plumbing.
(82)   Amending Section 1501.7. Section 1501.7 is amended to read:
1501.7 Minimum Water Quality Requirements. The minimum water quality for
alternate water source systems shall meet the applicable water quality
requirements for the intended application as determined by the Health Officer.
(83)   Amending Section 1503.9.2. Section 1503.9.2 is amended to read:
1503.9.2 Gray Water Pipe and Fitting Materials. Aboveground and underground
building drainage and vent pipe and fittings for gray water systems must comply
with the requirements for aboveground and underground sanitary building
drainage and vent pipe and fittings in this code. These materials shall extend
not less than 5 feet (1.5 m) outside the building.
(84)   Amending Section 1505.1. Section 1505.1 is amended to read:
1505.1 General. The provisions of this section apply to the installation,
construction, alteration, and repair of reclaimed (recycled) water systems
intended to supply uses such as water closets, urinals, trap primers for floor
drains and floor sinks, aboveground and subsurface irrigation, and other uses
approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction.
(85)   Amending Section 1602.2. Section 1602.2 is amended to read:
1602.2 Plumbing Plan Submission. No permit for a rainwater catchment system
shall be issued until complete plumbing plans, with data satisfactory to the
Authority Having Jurisdiction, have been submitted and approved. Nonpotable
rainwater catchment systems must be stamped and signed by a Registered Design
Professional engineer (mechanical or civil), licensed to perform building and
site plumbing design work, respectively. The Registered Design Professional
engineer (mechanical or civil) is responsible for the design supervision and
construction observation of the nonpotable rainwater catchment systems and must
provide the Authority Having Jurisdiction with a statement indicating that the
as-built system complies with the approved plans and requirements of this code.
Nonpotable rainwater catchment systems must be tested and inspected by a
plumbing special inspector.
(Added by Ord. 22-25 )
CHAPTER 20: FIRE CODE OF THE CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU
Articles
   
1.   Adoption of the State Fire Code
   
2.   Life Safety Requirements for Existing Hotel Buildings and Existing
Business Buildings
   
3.   Examination and Approval of Plans by Fire Chief
   
4.   Fire and Life Safety Evaluation of Existing High Rise Residential
Buildings
   
5.   Requirements for Smoke Detectors in Existing Highrise Residential
Buildings
   
6.   Regulation of Fireworks
ARTICLE 1: ADOPTION OF THE STATE FIRE CODE
Section
   
20-1.1   Fire Code of the City and County of Honolulu
§ 20-1.1 Fire Code of the City and County of Honolulu.
   The State Fire Code, as adopted by the State of Hawai‘i (“State”) on January
20, 2023, pursuant to Chapter 132 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes (“HRS”), which
adopts, with modifications, the 2021 National Fire Protection Association
(“NFPA”) 1 Fire Code that is published and copyrighted by the NFPA, is adopted
by reference and made a part hereof, subject to the following amendments,
which, unless stated otherwise, are in the form of amendments to NFPA 1:
(1)   Amending Section 1.1.2. Section 1.1.2 is amended to read:
1.1.2 Title. This code shall be known and cited as the “Fire Code of the City
and County of Honolulu” and will be referred to herein as “this code.”
(2)   Amending Section 1.10. Section 1.10 is amended to read:
1.10 Board of Appeals. See Chapter 16 (“Building Code”), Article 1, Revised
Ordinances of Honolulu (“ROH”).
(3)   Amending Section 1.12.8. Section 1.12.8 is amended to read:
1.12.8 Permits, Licenses, and Fees. A permit or license shall be obtained from
the Honolulu Fire Department’s (“HFD”) Fire Prevention Bureau or designated
agency prior to engaging in the following activities, operations, practices, or
functions:
1.   Places of Assembly. To operate a place of assembly. For permit
requirements, see Section 20.1.1.1.
Annual Permit Fee: $200
2.   Tents and Canopies. For permit requirements, see Section 25.1.2.
Permit Fee: $200
3.   Flammable and Combustible Liquid Tank Installation. For permit
requirements, see Section 66.1.5.
One-time Permit Fee:
$150 for a tank capacity of 61 to 4,999 gallons
$200 for a tank capacity of 5,000 gallons or greater
4.   Liquefied Petroleum Gas (“LPG”) Container (“Tank”) Installation. For
permit requirements, refer to Section 69.1.2.
One-time Permit Fee:
$200 for a single container or the aggregate of interconnected containers of
125-gallon water capacity or more
5.   Licenses to inspect, test, and maintain the following fire protection
systems:
Fire Alarm Systems - Three-Year License Fee: $100
Portable Fire Extinguishers - Three-Year License Fee: $100
Private Fire Hydrants - Three-Year License Fee: $100
Water-Based Systems - Three-Year License Fee: $100
Other Fire Extinguishing Systems - Three-Year License Fee: $100
6.   Fireworks. For permits and license requirements, see ROH Chapter 20,
Article 6.
7.   Automatic Fire Extinguishing Systems for Commercial Cooking Equipment
Inspection Fee.
Initial Inspection Fee: $100
Reinspection Fee: $100
8.   Fire Alarm Systems Acceptance Test Inspection Fee. Inspection fees are as
follows:
1-100 devices or appliances:
Initial Fee: $100
Retest Fee: $200
101-250 devices or appliances:
Initial Fee: $250
Retest Fee: $250
More than 250 devices or appliances:
Initial Fee: $500
Retest Fee: $500
9.   Fire Plans Review Fee:
a.   When plans or other specifications are submitted to the fire department
per the building code, a plans review fee shall be paid at the time of
submittal. The fees collected are hereby deemed appropriated upon receipt and
may be expended for fire prevention activities relating to public education,
fire investigations, plans checking, permit processing, fire inspections, and
certifications.
b.   The Fire Plans Review Revolving Fund is established and created herewith
as a repository for such fees. The Fire Plans Review Fee shall be ten (10)
percent of the building permit fee payable to the City and County of Honolulu
prior to the issuance of the building permit.
EXCEPTION: Where an automatic fire sprinkler system is elected to be installed
in accordance with NFPA 13D, NFPA 13R, or NFPA 13, the Fire Plans Review Fee
shall be waived.
10.   Fireworks Public Display Inspection Fee. For permit requirements, see
Section 20-6.12.
Inspection Fee: $200
(4)   Amending Section 1.16.2.2. Section 1.16.2.2 is amended to read:
1.16.2.2 A copy of such order or final notice may be posted on the premises in
a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises, and the order or
notice may be disseminated in accordance with the following:
Mailed to the last known address of the owner, occupant, or registered agent.
(5)   Amending Section 1.16.4. Section 1.16.4 is amended to read:
1.16.4 Citations. Any person, firm, corporation, or entity who fails to comply
with the provisions of this code or carry out an order made pursuant to this
code or violates any condition attached to a permit, approval, or certificate
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(6)   Amending Section 1.16.4.4. Section 1.16.4.4 is amended to read:
1.16.4.4 Failure to Comply.  Each person, firm, corporation, or entity shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof
during which any violation of any provisions of this code is committed,
continued, or permitted. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person,
firm, corporation, or entity shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$1,000 or imprisonment of not more than one year or both such fine and
imprisonment.
(7)   Amending Section 4.1.3.2.2.5. Section 4.1.3.2.2.5 is amended by adding
Subsection 4.1.3.2.2.5.1 to read:
4.1.3.2.2.5.1 The Authority Having Jurisdiction (“AHJ”) may require signage to
be visible at the main entrance to the building and/or tenant space. Any
required signage shall be made with lettering on a contrasting background as
determined by the AHJ.
(8)   Amending Section 10.10.1. Section 10.10.1 is amended to read:
10.10.1 Open Burning Fires. Open burning shall be conducted in accordance with
this section and may be prohibited when the AHJ determines such fires are a
hazard.
10.10.1.1 Compliance. Open burning shall comply with the following:
1.   Fires for Cooking Food. Persons responsible for such fires not contained
within an appliance, such as an imu, shall notify the HFD’s Fire Communication
Center (“FCC”) 15 minutes prior to lighting such fires.
2.   Fires for Recreational, Decorative, or Ceremonial Purposes. Obtain written
permission from the property owner. Submit a letter to the AHJ for approval at
least 14 days prior to the event, noting the date, time, and location of the
fire. Persons responsible shall notify the HFD’s FCC 15 minutes prior to
lighting such fires.
3.   Fires to Abate a Fire Hazard. Obtain written permission from the property
owner. Submit a letter to the AHJ for approval at least 14 days prior to the
event, noting the date, time, and location of the fire. Persons responsible
shall notify the HFD’s FCC 15 minutes prior to lighting such fires.
4.   Fires for Prevention or Control of Disease or Pests. Obtain written
permission from the property owner. Submit a letter to the AHJ for approval at
least 14 days prior to the event, noting the date, time, and location of the
fire. Persons responsible shall notify the HFD’s FCC 15 minutes prior to
lighting such fires.
5.   Fires for Training of Fire Fighting Personnel. Fires for the training of
fire fighting personnel shall be in accordance with NFPA 1403 and conducted
only with the AHJ’s approval. Persons responsible shall notify the HFD’s FCC 15
minutes prior to lighting such fires.
6.   Fires for Disposal of Dangerous Materials. Submit a letter to the AHJ for
approval at least 14 days prior to the event, noting the date, time, and
location of the fire. Persons responsible shall notify the HFD’s FCC 15 minutes
prior to lighting such fires.
7.   Fires for Residential Bathing Purposes. Notify the HFD’s FCC at least 15
minutes prior to lighting such fires.
10.10.1.2 Responsibility. Fires for open burning allowed under Section 10.10.1
shall be the responsibility of the person igniting and maintaining the fire.
10.10.1.3 Incinerators. Private incineration is prohibited by State health
laws.
EXCEPTION: Closed incinerators approved by the State Department of Health shall
be in accordance with NFPA 82.
(9)   Amending Section 10.10.6.1. Section 10.10.6.1 is amended to read:
10.10.6.1 For other than one- and two-family dwellings, no hibachi, grill, or
other similar devices used for cooking, heating, or any other purpose shall be
used or kindled on any balcony, under any overhanging portion, or within ten
feet (three meters) of any structure without the AHJ’s approval.
(10)   Amending Section 10.10. Section 10.10 is amended by adding Subsection
10.10.11 to read:
10.10.11 Open-Flame Performances Before a Proximate Audience.
10.10.11.1 Open-flame performances before a proximate audience shall comply
with the following:
1.   Performances that use an open flame, such as, but not limited to, “fire
dancing” and “logo burns,” shall be held outdoors or within a building
protected with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section
20.1.5.3.
2.   Performances shall be in an area provided with at least 25 feet of
clearance to readily combustible materials.
3.   A minimum clearance of 25 feet shall be kept between the performance and
the audience at all times. This distance may be reduced, provided an AHJ-
approved noncombustible safety net is in place in accordance with Section
20.1.5.3.
a.   Fuel shall be stored in an approved container at least 25 feet away from
the performance and the audience. The quantity of fuel stored shall only
suffice for a single performance.
b.   Performers shall not throw any open-flame props over the audience.
4.   A fire extinguisher with a minimum 4-A: 80-BC rating shall be readily
available and within 30 feet of the performance. The fire extinguisher shall be
constantly attended by a competent adult trained in the use of portable fire
extinguishers.
5.   Fire props shall be adequately extinguished immediately after performances
by soaking it in a bucket of water or other approved method.
6.   Additional clearances and/or means of fire extinguishment shall be
provided if deemed necessary by the AHJ.
(11)   Amending Section 11.12.3.2.3. Section 11.12.3.2.3 is amended by adding
an exception to read:
EXCEPTION: One- and two-family dwellings shall require only one three-foot wide
access pathway from the eave to the ridge on each roof slope where the
photovoltaic arrays are located. The access pathway shall be located at a
structurally strong location of the building, such as a bearing wall.
(12)   Amending Section 11.12.3.2.4. Section 11.12.3.2.4 is amended by adding
an exception to read:
EXCEPTION: Photovoltaic arrays for one- and two-family dwellings shall be
located not less than 18 inches below the ridge.
(13)   Amending Section 12.6.9.1.1. Section 12.6.9.1.1 is amended to read:
12.6.9.1.1 Christmas tree placement within buildings shall comply with Table
12.6.9.1.1.
EXCEPTIONS:
1.   Natural-cut Christmas trees shall be allowed in assembly occupancies that
are protected throughout with an approved automatic fire sprinkler system that
is installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 13.
2.   Natural-cut Christmas trees shall be allowed in hotel occupancies that are
protected throughout with an approved automatic fire sprinkler system that is
installed in accordance with NFPA 13. An approved fire watch shall be provided
for the duration in which the Christmas trees remain in the hotel.
(14)   Amending Section 13.1.1. Section 13.1.1 is amended by adding Subsections
13.1.1.2 and 13.1.1.3 to read:
13.1.1.2 Halon and Clean Agent Systems. Condition of acceptance of halon and
clean agent systems shall be satisfactory passage of a final approval of an
installation test in accordance with nationally recognized standards and the
manufacturer’s instructions prior to final acceptance of the system. The test
shall be witnessed by the AHJ.
13.1.1.3 Nonwater-based Fire Extinguishing Systems. Upon completion of the
installation of a nonwater-based fire extinguishing system that is required by
this code, a satisfactory final approval of the system’s installation test
shall be made in accordance with nationally recognized standards and the
manufacturer’s instructions. Nonwater-based systems include, but are not
limited to, dry chemical and carbon dioxide extinguishing systems. The test
shall be witnessed by the AHJ.
(15)   Amending Section 13.1.5. Section 13.1.5 is amended by adding Subsection
13.1.5.2 to read:
13.1.5.2 Fire department hose connections serving standpipe and sprinkler
systems shall be located within 20 feet of a fire apparatus access road, not
less than 18 inches and not more than 4 feet above grade, or as approved by the
AHJ.
Each fire department connection shall be designated by a sign with contrasting
letters at least 1 inch (25.4 millimeters) in height.
If automatic sprinklers are also supplied by the fire department connection,
the sign or combination of signs shall indicate both designated services.
1.   For manual wet standpipe systems, the sign shall read as follows:
Manual Wet Standpipe __ PSI Top Most Outlet Pressure, FDC System Demand ___ GPM
@ __ PSI
2.   For manual dry standpipe systems, the sign shall read as follows:
Manual Dry Standpipe __ PSI Top Most Outlet Pressure, FDC System Demand ___ GPM
@ __ PSI
3.   For automatic wet standpipe systems that are combined with a sprinkler
system, the sign shall read as follows:
Automatic Wet Standpipe __ PSI Top Most Outlet Pressure, FDC System Demand GPM
@ __ PSI and Automatic Sprinkler
4.   For manual wet standpipe systems that are combined with a sprinkler
system, the sign shall read as follows:
Manual Wet Standpipe __ PSI Top Most Outlet Pressure, FDC System Demand ___ GPM
@ PSI and Automatic Sprinkler
5.   For all other standpipe systems, the signage shall be approved by the AHJ.
(16)   Amending Section 13.3.2.19.1. Section 13.3.2.19.1 is amended to read:
13.3.2.19.1 When required by the county building code, all new one- and two-
family dwellings shall be protected throughout by an approved automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with Section 13.3.2.19.2
(17)   Amending Section 13.3.2.25.2. Section 13.3.2.25.2 is amended to read:
13.3.2.25.2 Compliance shall be with an automatic fire sprinkler system
throughout the building or alternative fire prevention and fire safety systems
in accordance with the requirements of a building fire and life safety
evaluation as achieved by receiving an acceptable score on a building fire and
life safety evaluation pursuant to Ordinance 18-14. Existing high-rise
residential buildings not protected throughout by an automatic fire sprinkler
system shall be subject to building fire and life safety evaluations, which
shall consist of an assessment of building safety features and fire protection
systems in accordance with this code and the building code on a form prescribed
by the AHJ in accordance with Section 20-4.4. Existing high-rise residential
buildings that opt to install an automatic fire sprinkler system throughout the
building shall not be required to undergo the building fire and life safety
evaluation; provided that all buildings must continue to maintain an acceptable
score on their respective building fire and life safety evaluation or maintain
the codes and standards for automatic fire sprinkler systems that are current
and applicable at the time the building permit application is submitted for
approval. An acceptable score on the evaluation provides a minimum level of
fire and life safety to fire fighters and occupants that is approved by the
AHJ. A building fire and life safety evaluation shall be prepared by a licensed
design professional or a building’s authorized representative under the
supervision of a licensed design professional, be stamped with the licensed
design professional’s authorized seal or stamp, and authenticated as provided
under Hawaii Administrative Rules, Section 16-115-9. The licensed design
professional shall provide the scores by each category of the building fire and
life safety evaluation to the association of apartment owners of a condominium
or the housing cooperative housing corporation. A building fire and life safety
evaluation shall be conducted by no later than August 31, 2022, and the
licensed design professional shall submit a copy of the authenticated building
fire and life safety evaluation to the AHJ in accordance with Section 20-4.3.
Existing high-rise residential buildings must comply by receiving an acceptable
score on the building fire and life safety evaluation by no later than May 3,
2038, unless compliance is met with an automatic fire sprinkler system as
indicated in Table 8 of the building fire and life safety evaluation form. The
AHJ may grant an extension pursuant to Section 13.3.2.25.7 if automatic fire
sprinkler systems are used to achieve compliance. All buildings must continue
to maintain an acceptable score on their respective building fire and life
safety evaluation assessments or maintain an automatic sprinkler system that
complies with this chapter and the building code at the time of the evaluation.
For the purposes of this paragraph (17) “existing high-rise residential
building” means the same as “existing highrise residential building” as defined
in Section 20-5.1.
13.3.2.25.2.1 The association of apartment owners of a condominium or the
cooperative housing corporation of an existing high-rise residential building
may appeal the final building fire and life safety evaluation score, the
resulting fire safety requirements for the building, as assessed by the
licensed design professional, or the determination of the AHJ by filing a
written request for an appeal to the director or the head of the AHJ within 45
days of the date of the completed building fire and life safety evaluation or
the AHJ’s determination of the building’s fire and life safety requirements,
whichever is later. The request for an appeal shall include a statement of the
basis for appeal, supporting documentation, if any, and the relief requested.
The director or head of the AHJ shall render a decision on the appeal no later
than 30 calendar days from the receipt of the appeal. The AHJ shall submit an
annual report to the City Council on the appeals filed for existing high-rise
residential buildings and the disposition of the appeals.
13.3.2.25.2.2 Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph (17), which
establishes the life safety evaluation system and authorizes owners of existing
high-rise residential buildings to opt out of approved automatic sprinkler
systems through a life safety evaluation process, existing high-rise
residential buildings shall be protected throughout by an approved automatic
fire sprinkler system in accordance with this chapter and the building code.
Existing high-rise residential buildings that opt to install an automatic fire
sprinkler system throughout the building shall not be required to undergo a
building fire and life safety evaluation, but shall be required to apply for
and obtain a building permit through a State- licensed specialty contractor for
the automatic fire sprinkler system or select the option on the building fire
and life safety evaluation code assessment form, Table 8.
13.3.2.25.2.3 Notwithstanding any other provision of this paragraph (17), the
association of apartment owners of a condominium or the cooperative housing
corporation of an existing high-rise residential building 10 floors or higher
may opt out of the automatic fire sprinkler system requirement; provided that
the building receives an acceptable score on the building fire and life safety
evaluation, or alternative fire prevention and fire safety systems to obtain an
acceptable life safety evaluation score have been implemented. An association
of apartment owners of a condominium or a cooperative housing corporation that
has opted out of the automatic fire sprinkler system requirement shall provide
verifiable disclosure of its action to all current and future owners,
shareholders, and residents. Verifiable disclosure shall include real estate
sales disclosures as may be required by Hawaii real estate industry practices.
13.3.2.25.2.4 No later than May 3, 2030, each building owner shall meet with
unit owners or, in the case of an apartment building, with tenants, to discuss
a design plan, financing options, and implementation timelines to obtain an
acceptable life safety evaluation score by the required date. A statement
describing the building owner’s design plan and implementation timelines to
obtain an acceptable life safety evaluation score and the building owner’s
intent to comply with this paragraph (17) must be filed no later than May 3,
2030, with the AHJ for approval.
13.3.2.25.2.5 The AHJ shall review and respond to the written statement of the
owner’s intent to comply within 60 days of receipt of the statement of intent
to comply.
13.3.2.25.2.6 Subject to the exceptions in Section 13.3.2.25.2.7, the entire
building shall be required to be protected by:
a.   An approved automatic fire sprinkler system; or
b.   Alternative fire prevention and fire safety systems as approved by the AHJ
by May 3, 2038, except where an extension is approved by the AHJ as provided in
Section 13.3.2.25.2.7. A financial and design plan for existing high-rise
residential buildings that opt to install an automatic fire sprinkler system
must be filed with the AHJ for approval no later than May 3, 2030.
13.3.2.25.2.7 Compliance with the automatic fire sprinkler system throughout
the building or alternative fire prevention and fire safety systems provisions
of Section 13.3.2.25.2.2 shall be achieved as follows: Common areas for all
buildings shall be completed by May 3, 2038. An extension to no later than May
3, 2048 may be approved by the AHJ; provided that compliance using an automatic
fire sprinkler system in the common areas related to building egress path has
been achieved.
EXCEPTION: Existing high-rise residential buildings are exempted from the
automatic fire sprinkler system requirements in Section 13.3.2.25.2.2 if all
dwelling units have exterior access and a continuous egress path to exit the
building and have no full-length interior corridors.
EXCEPTION: Existing high-rise residential buildings less than 10 floors in
height can receive an acceptable score on the building fire and life safety
evaluation in lieu of the approved automatic sprinkler system requirements in
Section 13.3.2.25.2.2.
EXCEPTION: Existing high-rise residential buildings may be protected throughout
by an approved automatic fire sprinkler system per NFPA 13R when approved by
the AHJ.
EXCEPTION: Private balconies that have at least one long side that is 50
percent open are not required to have automatic fire sprinkler protection.
EXCEPTION: Elevator hoist ways and machine rooms are not required to have
automatic fire sprinkler protection.
EXCEPTION: Class II wet standpipe systems may be removed when buildings are
protected throughout by automatic fire sprinkler systems pursuant to Section
13.3.2.25.2.2.
EXCEPTION: Combined standpipe and automatic fire sprinkler systems using
existing standpipes shall be permitted to utilize pump sizing for the fire
sprinkler demand.
EXCEPTION: The time periods and deadlines for compliance set forth in Section
13.3.2.25.2 and Section 13.3.2.25.2.7 shall be paused, tolled, or suspended
where a building permit application, or other code application, for projects
that relate to those sections or are required for the building to achieve
compliance with the requirements of Section 13.3.2.25.2.2 for an automatic fire
sprinkler system throughout the building or alternative fire prevention and
fire safety systems, when the application is duly filed by a State-licensed
specialty contractor for the design, installation, or upgrade of such system,
and the review and issuance of the building permit or other code application
has not been completed by the reviewing agency within 90 days of such
submission to the reviewing agency. The period of time in excess of the 90-day
period following timely filing of a complete application, but before issuance
of the permit or approval of the application, shall constitute the period of
time in which the time period and deadline are paused, tolled, or suspended.
The reviewing agency shall process applications filed pursuant to Section
13.3.2.25.2 and Section 13.3.2.25.2.7 in a timely manner, provided that no
penalties shall be imposed upon those buildings whose applications have not
been processed by the reviewing agency before the deadlines to achieve
compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 13.3.2.25.2 and Section
13.3.2.25.2.7 and were submitted to the reviewing agency at least 90 days prior
to the respective deadline.
(18)   Amending Section 13.7.1.1. Section 13.7.1.1 is amended by adding
Subsection 13.7.1.1.1 to read:
13.7.1.1.1 When a fire alarm control unit is replaced, it shall be considered
as newly introduced equipment, as stated in 1.3.6.4, and shall comply with
requirements for new construction.
(19)   Amending Section 13.7.1.9.5. Section 13.7.1.9.5 is further amended to
read:
13.7.1.9.5 When approved by the AHJ and where permitted by Chapters 11 through
43 of NFPA 101, a positive alarm sequence shall be permitted, provided it is in
accordance with NFPA 72. The following additional requirements shall also
apply:
1.   An automatic fire sprinkler system installed in conformance with the
building code shall be provided throughout the building or facility.
2.   Written fire emergency procedures and an evacuation plan for the building
or facility shall be reviewed by the AHJ prior to approval testing. The
procedures and plan shall include, but not be limited to, immediate
notification to the fire department, the use of primary and secondary exits,
and the use of fire protection appliances for the building(s) or facility(ies).
3.   Trained personnel shall respond to emergencies on a 24-hour basis. The
staff shall be instructed in fire emergency procedures and the use and
operation of in-house fire appliances. Documentation of such training shall be
maintained and filed on the premises.
4.   Immediate notification to the fire department shall take place upon
activation of any fire alarm initiating device.
5.   If a fire alarm system’s initiating device is activated, acknowledgement
at the control unit by trained personnel shall be accomplished within 15
seconds in order to initiate the alarm investigation phase. If the signal is
not acknowledged within 15 seconds, all building or facility and remote signals
shall be activated immediately and automatically (general alarm).
6.   If a fire alarm system’s initiating device is activated, notification
devices in that zone shall be activated. The zone notification shall include
the floor of, the floor above, and the floor below the activated device. The
zone notification areas may be modified with the AHJ’s approval. This zone
notification shall be for a maximum of three minutes, during which trained
personnel shall initiate the alarm investigation phase, communicate their
findings immediately to the fire department, and reset the system if
appropriate. After three minutes or activation of any other initiating device
(s), the fire alarm system shall be activated immediately and automatically for
the entire building or facility (general alarm). At no time shall the fire
alarm system be silenced until verification of the alarm is accomplished.
7.   The fire alarm system shall provide a means to bypass the positive alarm
sequence and immediately activate the general alarm for the entire building or
facility.
8.   The AHJ shall conduct a test of the positive alarm sequence prior to
implementation.
9.   The AHJ may disapprove or rescind approval of the fire alarm system’s
positive alarm sequence if all of the abovementioned requirements are not met
and shall require the fire alarm system to be reprogrammed to meet a general
alarm notification at the owner’s expense.
(20)   Amending Section 13.7.3.2.1. Section 13.7.3.2.1 is amended to read:
13.7.3.2.1 Approval and Acceptance. The AHJ shall be notified prior to the
installation or alteration of equipment or wiring [72:10.20.2]. The
documentation requirements of 13.7.3.2.2 and 13.7.3.2.3 shall be required.
(21)   Amending Section 17.3.5.2.1.11. Section 17.3.5.2.1.11 is amended by
adding Subsection 17.3.5.2.1.11.6 to read:
17.3.5.2.1.11.6 Clearance of Brush or Vegetative Growth from Structures.
Persons owning, leasing, controlling, operating, or maintaining buildings or
structures in, upon, or adjoining hazardous fire areas and persons owning,
leasing, or controlling land adjacent to such buildings or structures shall at
all times:
1.   Maintain an effective firebreak by removing and clearing flammable
vegetation and combustible growth from areas within 30 feet of such buildings
or structures.
EXCEPTION: Single specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery, or similar plants
used as ground covers, provided they do not form a means of rapidly
transmitting fire from the native growth to any structure.
2.   Maintain additional fire protection or firebreak by removing brush,
flammable vegetation, and combustible growth located from 30 to 100 feet from
such buildings or structures when required by the AHJ because of hazardous
conditions causing a firebreak of only 30 feet, which is insufficient to
provide reasonable fire safety.
EXCEPTION: Grass and other vegetation located more than 30 feet from buildings
or structures and less than 18 inches in height above the ground need not be
removed where necessary to stabilize the soil and prevent erosion.
3.   Remove portions of trees which extend within ten feet of a chimney’s
outlet.
4.   Maintain trees adjacent to or overhanging a building free of deadwood.
5.   Maintain the structure’s roof free of leaves, needles, or other dead
vegetative growth.
(22)   Amending Section 18.2.3.1.3. Section 18.2.3.1.3 is amended to read:
18.2.3.1.3 The provisions of 18.2.3.1 through 18.2.3.2.2.1 shall be permitted
to be modified by the AHJ where any of the following conditions exists:
(1)   Not more than two one- and two-family dwellings protected by an approved
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 13.1
(2)   Not more than two existing one- and two-family dwellings
(3)   Private garages having an area not exceeding 400 ft2 (37 m2)
(4)   Carports having an area not exceeding 400 ft2 (37 m2)
(5)   Agricultural buildings having an area not exceeding 400 ft2 (37 m2)
(6)   Sheds and other detached buildings, not classified as a residential
occupancy, having an area not exceeding 400 ft2 (37 m2)
(23)   Amending Section 18.2.3.2.2.1. Section 18.2.3.2.2.1 is amended to read:
18.2.3.2.2.1 Automatic Sprinkler Systems. When buildings are protected
throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system that is installed in
accordance with NFPA 13, NFPA 13D, or NFPA 13R, an increase in distance in
Section 18.2.3.2.2 shall be permitted as set forth by the AHJ.
(24)   Amending Section 18.2.3.2. Section 18.2.3.2 is amended by adding
Subsection 18.2.3.2.3 to read:
18.2.3.2.3 Access for High-Piled Storage. When high-piled storage areas exceed
12,000 square feet, one or more access doors shall be provided in each 100
lineal feet, or major fraction thereof, of the exterior walls which face
required access roadways. Required access doors shall be a minimum of three
feet wide and six feet eight inches high. Roll-up doors shall not be allowed as
access doors, unless approved by the AHJ.
(25)   Amending Section 18.2.3.5.6.1. Section 18.2.3.5.6.1 is amended to read:
18.2.3.5.6.1 Fire department access roads shall not exceed 10 percent in grade.
EXCEPTION: Grades steeper than 10 percent as approved by the AHJ
(26)   Amending Section 18.4.5.1 and Subsection 18.4.5.1.1. Section 18.4.5.1
and Subsection 18.4.5.1.1 are amended to read:
18.4.5.1 One- and Two-Family Dwellings Not Exceeding 3,500 square feet (325.2
square meters).
18.4.5.1.1 The minimum fire flow and flow duration requirements for one- and
two-family dwellings having a fire flow area that does not exceed 3,500 ft2
(325.2 m2) shall be 1,000 gallons per minute (3,785 liters per minute) for one
hour.
(27)   Amending Section 18.5.2. Section 18.5.2 is amended by adding item (3) to
read:
(3)   When detached one- and two-family dwellings are protected throughout with
an approved automatic sprinkler system that is installed in accordance with
NFPA 13D, an increase in distance shall be permitted as set forth by the AHJ.
(28)   Amending Section 20.1.1.1. Section 20.1.1.1 is amended to read:
20.1.1.1 Permits and Plans. A permit is required for each place of assembly
with an occupant load capacity of 300 or more persons, such as restaurants,
nightclubs, and dancing and drinking establishments. The permit shall be posted
in a conspicuous location on the premises. At the time of applying for a
permit, the applicant shall submit to the AHJ two copies of the establishment’s
floor plan indicating the square footage (gross), seating arrangements (if more
than one seating configuration is used by the establishment), occupancy load,
aisle widths, exits and access ways to exits, and compliance with other fire
code requirements in accordance with Chapter 20 of this code. See also amended
Section 1.12.8.
(29)   Amending Section 20.1.5.10.4.1. Section 20.1.5.10.4.1 is amended to
read:
20.1.5.10.4.1 Any room or area constituting an assembly, regardless of seating
arrangements, shall have a permanent occupant load sign posted in a conspicuous
place near the main exit from the room. The occupant load shall be established
in accordance with the current building code.
(30)   Amending Section 25.1.2. Section 25.1.2 is amended by adding Subsection
25.1.2.1 to read:
25.1.2.1 Tents and Canopies. A permit is required to erect or operate a tent or
canopy having an area in excess of 2,100 square feet. At the time of
application, two copies of the plot plan shall be submitted to the AHJ
indicating distances to property lines, buildings, other tents and canopies,
parked vehicles, or internal combustion engines. Refer to amended Section
1.12.8.
EXCEPTION: Permits are not required for temporary tents or other coverings used
for private family parties or for camping for periods not to exceed 14
consecutive days.
(31)   Amending Section 50.4.4.3.1. Section 50.4.4.3.1 is amended to read:
50.4.4.3.1 In existing systems when changes in the cooking media, positioning,
operation and use, or replacement of cooking equipment, or changes in ownership
occur, the fire extinguishing system shall be made to comply with Sections
50.4.4.3 and 50.4.11.
(32)   Amending Section 50.4.10.2. Section 50.4.10.2 is amended by adding
Subsection 50.4.10.2.3 to read:
50.4.10.2.3 Acceptance Test. Prior to commencing initial cooking operations, a
satisfactory acceptance test of the system shall be made in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions. The acceptance test shall be of an approved method
and witnessed by the AHJ.
(33)   Amending Section 65.1.1. Section 65.1.1 is amended to read:
65.1.1 The storage, use, and handling of explosives, fireworks, and model
rocketry shall comply with the requirements of this chapter, NFPA standards
referenced within this chapter, Sections 60.1 through 60.4 of this code, and
applicable county laws and rules.
(34)   Amending Section 66.1.5. Section 66.1.5 is amended by adding Subsection
66.1.5.1 to read:
66.1.5.1 Permits and Plans. A permit is required to install or operate
equipment in connection with the storage, handling, use, or sale of flammable
or combustible liquids regulated under Chapter 66 of this code. Permits are not
transferable, and any change in use, occupancy, operation, ownership, vendor,
or capacity shall require a new permit.
At the time of application, two copies of the plot and cross-sectional plans
indicating distances from property lines, buildings, other fuel tanks located
on the premises, dispensers, emergency electrical shutoff, vent lines and
diameter, piping, location of fire extinguisher, and necessary signage and
placards shall be submitted to the AHJ.
Tank installations within the jurisdiction of the City shall be approved by the
City Department of Permitting and Planning (“OPP”) prior to submitting an
application for the HFD’s flammable and combustible liquid tank installation
permit.
(35)   Amending Section 69.1.1.3. Section 69.1.1.3 is amended by adding
Subsection 69.1.1.3.1 to read:
69.1.1.3.1 Records. Installers shall maintain a record of installations for
permits not required by Section 1.12.8, and such record shall be available for
inspection by the AHJ.
EXCEPTION: Installation of gas-burning appliances and replacement of portable
cylinders.
(36)   Amending Section 69.1.2. Section 69.1.2 is amended by amending
Subsection 69.1.2.1 to read:
69.1.2.1 Permits and Plans. A permit is required to install or dispense LP-Gas
or maintain an LP-Gas container (tank).
EXCEPTION: A permit is not required to install or maintain a portable container
or the aggregate of interconnected containers of less than a 125-gallon water
capacity. Permits shall not be transferable, and any change in use, occupancy,
operation, ownership, vendor, or capacity shall require a new permit.
Distributors shall not fill an LP-Gas container for which a permit is required,
unless a permit for installation has been issued for that location by the AHJ.
Where a single container or the aggregate of interconnected containers is of a
125-gallon water capacity or more, the installer shall submit plans to the AHJ.
LP-Gas installations requiring a permit shall have the permit on site and
available for inspection by the AHJ.
At the time of permit application, the installer shall submit to the AHJ two
copies of the plot and cross-sectional plans indicating distances from property
lines, buildings, other fuel tanks located on the premises, dispensers,
emergency electrical shutoff, vent lines and diameter piping, location of fire
extinguisher(s), and necessary signage and placards.
Container installations within the City’s jurisdiction shall be approved by the
OPP prior to submitting an application for the HFD’s LP-Gas tank installation
permit. For installations in State preservation-zoned areas, container
installations shall be reviewed by the State Department of Land and Natural
Resources. Refer to amended Section 1.12.8.
(37)   Amending Section 69.3.8.1.2. Section 69.3.8.1.2 is amended to read:
69.3.8.1.2 LP-Gas containers or systems that are installed within 10 feet (3
meters) of public vehicular thoroughfares shall be provided with a means of
vehicular barrier protection in accordance with Section 60.5.1.9.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 1, § 20-1.1) (Added by Ord. 15-45; Am. Ords. 17-14,
18-14, 19-4, 20-48, 21-3, 21-14, 21-31, 22-2, 25-4)
ARTICLE 2: LIFE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING HOTEL BUILDINGS AND EXISTING
BUSINESS BUILDINGS
Sections
   
20-2.1   General
   
20-2.2   Definitions
   
20-2.3   Requirements—Hotels
   
20-2.3A   Requirements—Existing business buildings
   
20-2.4   Permit required
   
20-2.5   Compliance
   
20-2.6   Appeals
   
20-2.7   Severability
   
20-2.8   Rules
§ 20-2.1 General.
(a)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide for a reasonable
degree of public safety by establishing minimum life safety requirements for
existing hotel buildings and existing business buildings.
(b)   Scope. This article shall apply to every existing hotel building and
every existing business building as defined in this article. A determination
that an existing building is “an existing business building” subject to this
article shall be made by the fire chief. Any appeal from the decision of the
fire chief may be submitted to the board of appeals for hearing and
determination as provided in
Chapter 16.
(Sec. 19A-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 2, § 20-2.1) (Am.
Ord. 01-53)
§ 20-2.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Annunciator. A unit containing two or more identified targets or indicator
lamps in which each target or lamp indicates the circuit, condition, and
location to be annunciated.
Building Code. Any of the following:
(1)   With respect to an existing hotel building, the provisions of
Chapter 16 that were in effect on the date of approval of Ordinance 83-58; or
(2)   With respect to an existing business building, the provisions of
Chapter 16 that are in effect on January 1, 2002.*
Building Official. Has the same meaning as defined in §
16-1.1.
Business Building. A building to which both of the following apply:
(1)   At least 50 percent of the building is classified as “group B — business”
occupancy by the building official pursuant to the building code; and
(2)   Has floors used for human occupancy located more than 75 feet above the
lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
Existing Business Building. A business building erected before January 1, 2002*
or one for which a legal building permit has been issued before that date.
Existing Hotel Building. A hotel building erected before the date of approval
of Ordinance 83-58 or one for which a legal building permit was issued before
that date.
Guest. A person whose principal place of residence is other than the dwelling
or lodging unit rented or hired out, or in instances involving the occupation
of timeshare units, by the person for sleeping purposes.
Guest Room. Any dwelling or lodging unit intended or designed to be rented, or
hired out to be occupied, for sleeping purposes by guests, and includes units
subject to HRS Chapter 514E (Time Sharing).
Hotel. Any building that has floors used for human occupancy located more than
75 feet above the highest grade and that contains dwelling or lodging units, or
both, 50 percent or more of which are guest rooms. A hotel license issued
pursuant to HRS § 445-92 shall be prima facie evidence that the building
licensed is a hotel subject to this article.
(Sec. 19A-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 2, § 20-2.2) (Am.
Ords. 01-53, 25-2)
Editor’s note:
   * “January 1, 2002” is substituted for “the effective date of Ordinance 01-
53.”
§ 20-2.3 Requirements—Hotels.
   For hotels subject to this article:
(1)   Automatic sprinkler systems. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
provided throughout the entire hotel. The installation of the system shall be
in conformance with the building code;
(2)   Smoke detectors. Smoke detectors shall be provided in every guest room,
interior exit corridor, mechanical equipment, electrical, transformer,
telephone equipment, elevator machine, or similar room. The installation of the
smoke detectors shall be in conformance with the building code. Any smoke
detector installed in an interior exit corridor shall be connected to an
annunciator;
(3)   Corridor doors. All doors opening into interior exit corridors shall be
in conformance with the building code, except that 1.75-inch bonded, solid-core
wood doors need not be replaced;
(4)   Exit stairwell doors. All stairwell doors, which are to be locked to
prevent entry from the stairwell side, shall be automatically unlocked without
unlatching when the fire alarm system activates or upon power failure;
(5)   Fire alarm systems. All fire alarm systems shall be designed to be heard
clearly within all habitable areas of the hotel and shall be connected to an
annunciator. The annunciator shall be located in the first floor lobby area or
other area approved by the fire chief;
(6)   Emergency power. Emergency power shall be provided for exit signs, exit
illumination, and fire alarm systems. Such emergency power shall be supplied by
a generator, or an approved battery or other approved source of energy;
(7)   Emergency plan. The management for each hotel shall establish and
maintain a written fire and life safety emergency plan, which is to be approved
by the fire chief. The fire chief shall develop written criteria and guidelines
upon which all plans shall be based;
(8)   Exiting plans and placards.
(A)   Exiting plans. Exiting plans that are to be approved by the fire chief
shall be posted on the room side of the entry door for each guest room.
(B)   Placards. Placards with exit instructions for elevators and stairwells
and other placards shall be posted in locations approved by the fire chief; and
(9)   Fire drills. The management for each hotel subject to this article shall
conduct fire drills for staff and employees at least once every 180 days. A
written record of each drill shall be maintained in the hotel management’s
office and made available to the fire department for review.
(Sec. 19A-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 2, § 20-2.3) (Am.
Ord. 01-53)
§ 20-2.3A Requirements—Existing business buildings.
   For an existing business building:
(1)   Automatic sprinkler system.
(A)   An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the entire
existing business building. The installation of the system shall be in
accordance with the building code.
(B)   This subsection shall not apply to a telecommunications building for
which the council approves a fire safety agreement* that includes the following
requirements:
(i)   All exit stairwells are automatically pressurized for smoke control when
the fire alarm system activates;
(ii)   Smoke seals are installed on all exit stairwell doors and exit stairwell
door frames;
(iii)   Smoke detectors are provided in all offices or other occupied spaces;
(iv)   All exit stairwells that service floors located more than 100 feet above
the lowest level of fire department vehicle access have a standpipe system;
(v)   The maximum travel distance to a fire extinguisher in the building is 50
feet; and
(vi)   Such other requirements for the protection of public safety.
(C)   For the purposes of this subsection, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Access Tandem. A switching system that:
(i)   Provides a traffic concentration and distribution function for interstate
telecommunications services originating from or terminating in the State; and
(ii)   Enables any person engaged for hire in providing interstate
telecommunications services to reach all local telecommunications users through
facilities connected to all central offices in the State.
Central Office. A switching unit having the necessary equipment and operating
arrangements for terminating or interconnecting access lines, toll lines, and
trunks.
Enhanced 911 Switch. A switch that permits a wire line telecommunications user
to call emergency services through a public safety answering point operated by
an authorized government entity that includes the ability to provide automatic
number identification to enable the public safety answering point to call the
wire line telecommunications user if the call is disconnected, and automatic
location identification for emergency service providers to identify the listed
address or geographic location of the wire line telecommunications user.
Interstate Telecommunications Services. Telecommunications services between a
point located in the State and a point located outside the State.
Telecommunications Building. Any existing business building with a central
office used by a telecommunications carrier to provide telecommunications
services, provided that the building contains:
(i)   An access tandem; or
(ii)   An enhanced 911 switch.
Telecommunications Carrier. Any person that owns, operates, manages, or
controls any facility used to furnish telecommunications services for profit to
the public, or to classes of users so as to be effectively available to the
public, engaged in the provision of services, such as voice, data, image,
graphics, and video services, that make use of all or part of the person’s
transmission facilities, switches, broadcast equipment, signaling, or control
devices.
Telecommunications Services. The offering of transmission between or among
points specified by a user, of information of the user’s choosing, including
voice, data, image, graphics, and video without change in the form or content
of the information, as sent and received, by means of electromagnetic
transmission, or other similarly effective means of transmission, with or
without benefit of any closed transmission medium; provided that the term does
not include the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
other programming service, regardless of whether subscriber interaction is
required for the selection of video programming or other programming service.
(D)   If a building ceases to be a telecommunications building, the building
owner or an authorized representative shall notify the fire chief in writing
within 60 days that the building is no longer a telecommunications building,
and shall submit with the notice a schedule for compliance with this
subsection. A building that ceases to be a telecommunications building shall
comply with this subsection within three years following the date the notice
and schedule for compliance with this subsection are received by the chief.
(2)   Smoke detectors. Smoke detectors shall be provided in every mechanical
equipment, electrical, transformer, telephone equipment, elevator, machine or
similar room, and in elevator lobbies. The installation of the smoke detectors
shall be in accordance with the building code. Smoke detectors shall be
connected to an automatic fire alarm system installed in accordance with the
fire code.
(3)   Corridor doors. All doors opening into interior exit corridors shall be
in accordance with the building code; except that 1.75-inch bonded, solid-core
wood doors need not be replaced.
(4)   Exit stairwell doors. All stairwell doors, which are to be locked to
prevent entry from the stairwell side, shall be automatically unlocked without
unlatching when the fire alarm system activates or upon power failure.
(5)   Fire alarm systems. When actuated, fire alarm-initiating devices shall
activate an alarm signal that is audible throughout the existing business
building or in designated portions of the building when approved by the fire
chief. The alarm signal shall be a distinctive sound, which is not used for any
purpose other than the fire alarm. Fire alarm-initiating devices shall be
connected to an annunciator panel which panel shall be located in the first
floor lobby area or other area approved by the fire chief.
(6)   Emergency power. Emergency power shall be provided for exit signs, exit
illuminations, and fire alarm systems. Such emergency power shall be supplied
by a generator or an approved battery or other approved source of energy.
(7)   Emergency plan. The management or owner of each existing business
building shall establish and maintain a written fire and life safety emergency
plan, which is to be reviewed by the fire chief and which shall be updated
annually. The fire chief shall develop written criteria and guidelines upon
which all plans shall be based.
(8)   Exiting plans and placards.
(A)   Exiting plans. Exiting plans that are to be reviewed by the fire chief
shall be posted on each floor at each elevator lobby.
(B)   Placards. Placards with exit instructions for elevators and stairwells
and other placards shall be posted in locations approved by the fire chief.
(9)   Fire drills. The management or owner of each existing business building
shall conduct fire drills for staff and employees at least once every 180 days.
A written record of each drill shall be maintained in the management office of
the building and made available to the fire chief for review.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 2, § 20-2.3A) (Added by Ord. 01-53; Am. Ord. 02-65)
Editor’s note:
   * A fire safety agreement is attached to Ord. 02-65 as “Exhibit A” and is on
file with the office of the city clerk.
§ 20-2.4 Permit required.
   A building permit shall be obtained whenever required by
Chapter 18.
(Sec. 19A-2.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 2, § 20-2.4)
§ 20-2.5 Compliance.
(a)   Authority. The fire chief is authorized to require compliance with this
article.
(b)   Examination and furnishing of list to owner or operator. The fire chief
shall examine each hotel and existing business building subject to this
article. Upon the completion thereof, the fire chief shall immediately furnish
to the owner or operator of the hotel or existing business building a written
list of items required to achieve compliance with this article.
(c)   Compliance schedule.
(1)   Sixty days. Each hotel or existing business building shall comply with
subsections (7), (8), and (9) of §
20-2.3 or
20-2.3A, as applicable, within 60 days after the receipt of the written list.
(2)   One year. The owner or an authorized representative of each hotel or
existing business building shall submit plans to the fire chief showing
intended methods of compliance with subsections (1) through (6) of §
20-2.3 or 20-2.3A, as applicable, within one year after receipt of the written
list.
(3)   Five years. Each hotel or existing business building shall comply with
subsections (1) through (6) of §
20-2.3 or
20-2.3A, as applicable, within five years after receipt of the written list.
(d)   Deviation and extension of time. Deviations or extensions of time shall
be allowed by the fire chief for good cause shown for a period not to exceed
two years.
(Sec. 19A-2.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 2, § 20-2.5) (Am.
Ord. 01-53)
§ 20-2.6 Appeals.
   Any appeal from the decision of the fire chief involving the denial of any
deviation or extension of time may be submitted to the board of appeals as
specified in the building code. The board may grant a deviation or extension of
time if it finds that the time period appealed from poses an undue hardship,
provided the total time of compliance shall not exceed seven years from the
receipt of the written list of items as specified in §
20-2.5.
(Sec. 19A-2.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 2, § 20-2.6)
§ 20-2.7 Severability.
   If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
article is declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article.
(Sec. 19A-2.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 2, § 20-2.7)
§ 20-2.8 Rules.
   Subject to HRS Chapter 91, the fire chief shall adopt rules having the force
and effect of law for the implementation, administration, and enforcement of
this article.
(Sec. 19A-2.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 2, § 20-2.8)
ARTICLE 3: EXAMINATION AND APPROVAL OF PLANS BY FIRE CHIEF
Sections
   
20-3.1   Submission of building plans for approval to fire chief
   
20-3.2   Approval or disapproval of plans
§ 20-3.1 Submission of building plans for approval to fire chief.
   The submission of building plans shall be pursuant to the requirements of
HRS § 132-9.
(Sec. 13-26.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 3, § 20-3.1) (Am.
Ords. 96-58, 02-47)
§ 20-3.2 Approval or disapproval of plans.
   The fire chief shall approve or disapprove plans and specifications within
30 calendar days after their receipt; otherwise, the plans and specifications
shall be approved. Whenever the fire chief finds that the building to be
constructed, or upon which alterations and additions are to be made, is for any
reason not reasonably safe from loss or damage to property or loss of life or
injury to persons by fire, the fire chief shall disapprove the plans and
specifications, and return them with a written statement setting forth the
reasons for the disapproval.
(Sec. 13-26.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 3, § 20-3.2) (Am.
Ord. 02-47)
ARTICLE 4: FIRE AND LIFE SAFETY EVALUATION OF EXISTING HIGHRISE RESIDENTIAL
BUILDINGS
Sections
   
20-4.1   Definitions
   
20-4.2   Requirement for building fire and life safety evaluations
   
20-4.3   Compliance
   
20-4.4   Building fire and life safety evaluation form
§ 20-4.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Building Code.  
Chapter 16.
Building Fire and Life Safety Evaluation. An assessment of building safety
features and fire protection systems providing a minimum level of fire and life
safety to occupants and firefighters that is approved by the AHJ and is
prescribed by the AHJ for assessing the safety features and fire protection
systems of an existing high-rise building.
Existing High-Rise Residential Building. Has the same meaning as “existing
highrise residential building” as defined in §
20-5.1.
(Added by Ord. 18-14; Am. Ord. 21-31)
§ 20-4.2 Requirement for building fire and life safety evaluations.
   Existing highrise residential buildings not protected throughout by an
automatic fire sprinkler system shall receive a building fire and life safety
evaluation in accordance with Section 13.3.2.26.2 on a form that is prescribed
by the AHJ.
(Added by Ord. 18-14; Am. Ord. 21-31)
§ 20-4.3 Compliance.
   (a)   A building fire and life safety evaluation code assessment shall be
prepared by a licensed design professional, or a building's authorized
representative under the supervision of a licensed design professional using
the building fire and life safety evaluation prescribed by the AHJ in
accordance with Section 13.3.2.26.2; provided that existing high-rise
residential buildings that opt to install an automatic fire sprinkler system
throughout the building shall not be required to undergo a building fire and
life safety evaluation for initial compliance. The AHJ may grant an extension
per Section 13.3.2.26.2.7 if automatic fire sprinkler systems in common areas
are used to achieve compliance. All buildings that are required to undergo a
building fire and life safety evaluation must continue to maintain an
acceptable score on their respective building fire and life safety evaluation.
(b)   The licensed design professional shall submit a copy of the authenticated
building fire and life safety evaluation to the AHJ within five business days
of its completion.
(Added by Ord. 18-14; Am. Ords. 19-4, 21-3, 21-31, 22-2)
§ 20-4.4 Building fire and life safety evaluation form.
   The AHJ shall prescribe the building fire and life safety evaluation form
for conducting building fire and life safety evaluations. No changes or
modifications shall be made to the building fire and life safety evaluation
form that is prescribed by the AHJ according to this article, or the procedures
and process of utilizing the building fire and life safety evaluation form in
assessing existing high-rise residential buildings, without the approval of the
council. The AHJ shall make the building fire and life safety evaluation
readily available to the public through all reasonable means, including but not
limited to, providing copies through the United States Postal Service or by
making electronic copies available for downloading from the AHJ’s website.
(Added by Ord. 18-14; Am. Ord. 21-31)
ARTICLE 5: REQUIREMENTS FOR SMOKE DETECTORS IN EXISTING HIGHRISE RESIDENTIAL
BUILDINGS
Sections
   
20-5.1   Definitions
   
20-5.2   Requirements for smoke detectors
   
20-5.3   Public awareness program
   
20-5.4   Compliance and penalties
   
20-5.5   Rules
§ 20-5.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Building Code.  
Chapter 16, which is in effect on the date of approval of this article.
Dwelling Unit. Any portion of an existing highrise residential building that
contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking,
and sanitation, as required by the building code, for not more than one family.
Existing Highrise Residential Building. Any building that has floors used for
human occupancy located more than 75 feet above the highest grade, contains
dwelling units, and that was erected before the date of approval of this
article, or one for which a legal building permit has been issued.
Smoke Detector. An independent, stand-alone approved device as defined in the
building code.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 5, § 20-5.1) (Added by Ord. 92-61)
§ 20-5.2 Requirements for smoke detectors.
(a)   Within one year from June 12, 1992,* every dwelling unit in all existing
highrise residential buildings shall be equipped with smoke detectors. The
installation of the smoke detectors shall be in conformance with § 1210(a) of
the building code.
(b)   By January 1, 1994, the fire chief shall give written notice to the owner
or owners of every dwelling unit in an existing highrise residential building
subject to this article.
The notice shall be sent in a form to be returned to the fire department with
the return postage prepaid, and shall contain:
(1)   The date of the notice;
(2)   A description of the requirements of this article;
(3)   Space for recipients to indicate whether they are already in compliance
with this article or that they intend to comply within the next 30 days; and
(4)   A statement that the premises shall be subject to inspection by the fire
department if the notice is not returned to the fire department within 30 days
from the date of notice.
Subsequent notices of compliance shall be mailed periodically and at the
discretion of the fire chief.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 5, § 20-5.2) (Added by Ord. 92-61)
Editor’s note:
   * “June 12, 1992” is substituted for “the effective date of this ordinance.”
§ 20-5.3 Public awareness program.
   The fire chief shall establish a public awareness campaign to familiarize
the general public with the requirements of this article. The fire chief shall
conduct the first public awareness campaign on June 12, 1992* and shall
emphasize the duty of the public to comply. Subsequent public awareness
campaigns shall be conducted on a regular basis and as determined by the fire
chief.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 5, § 20-5.3) (Added by Ord. 92-61)
Editor’s note:
   * “June 12, 1992” is substituted for “the effective date of this article.”
§ 20-5.4 Compliance and penalties.
   The fire chief is authorized to inspect all dwelling units within existing
highrise residential buildings for compliance with this article. Two weeks
before conducting any inspection, the fire chief shall give written notice of
the inspection to the occupants and to the owner or owners of every dwelling
unit in an existing highrise residential building. The fire chief shall enforce
compliance with §
20-5.2(a) in accordance with the procedures established in the fire code of the
City and County of Honolulu, and violators shall be subject to the fines and
penalties established therein.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 5, § 20-5.4) (Added by Ord. 92-61)
§ 20-5.5 Rules.
   The fire chief is authorized to adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 for
the implementation, administration, and enforcement of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 5, § 20-5.5) (Added by Ord. 92-61)
   20-28
ARTICLE 6: REGULATION OF FIREWORKS
Sections
   
20-6.1   Definitions
   
20-6.2   Prohibitions—Permitted uses
   
20-6.3   Exceptions
   
20-6.4   License to import, store, and sell display fireworks or firecrackers
   
20-6.5   Requirements of licensee
   
20-6.6   Fees—Use of revenues
   
20-6.7   Minors
   
20-6.8   Liability of parents or guardians
   
20-6.9   Penalty
   
20-6.10   Notice requirements
   
20-6.11   Forfeiture
   
20-6.12   Permit for display fireworks
   
20-6.13   Permit for firecrackers
   
20-6.14   Severability
§ 20-6.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Aerial Device. Any fireworks containing 130 milligrams or less of explosive
materials that produce an audible or visible effect and is designed to rise
into the air and explode or detonate in the air or to fly about above the
ground. Aerial devices classified as fireworks under UN0336 and UN0337 by the
United States Department of Transportation as set forth in CFR Title 49 include
firework items commonly known as bottle rockets, sky rockets, missile-type
rockets, helicopters, torpedoes, daygo bombs, Roman candles, flying pigs, and
jumping jacks that move about the ground farther than a circle with a radius of
12 feet as measured from the point where the item was placed and ignited,
aerial shells, and mines.
Articles Pyrotechnic. Pyrotechnic devices for professional use similar to
consumer fireworks in chemical composition and construction, but not intended
for consumer use that meet the weight limits for consumer fireworks, but are
not labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or UN0432 by the United
States Department of Transportation.
Consignee. A merchant to which goods are delivered in a consignment.
Consignment. A transaction, regardless of its form, in which a person delivers
goods to a merchant for the purpose of sale and:
(1)   The merchant:
(A)   Deals in goods of that kind under a name other than the name of the
person making delivery;
(B)   Is not an auctioneer; and
(C)   Is not generally known by its creditors to be substantially engaged in
selling the goods of others.
(2)   With respect to each delivery, the aggregate value of the goods is $1,000
or more at the time of delivery;
(3)   The goods are not consumer goods immediately before delivery; and
(4)   The transaction does not create a security interest that secures an
obligation.
Consumer Fireworks. Any fireworks designed primarily for retail sale to the
public during authorized dates and times, that produce visible or audible
effects by combustion, and that is designed to remain on or near the ground
and, while stationary or spinning rapidly on or near the ground, emit smoke, a
shower of colored sparks, whistling effects, flitter sparks, or balls of
colored sparks, and include combination items that contain one or more of these
effects. Consumer fireworks include firecrackers, snakes, sparklers, fountains,
and cylindrical or cone fountains that emit effects up to a height not greater
than 12 feet above the ground, illuminating torches, bamboo cannons, whistles,
toy smoke devices, wheels, and ground spinners that when ignited remain within
a circle with a radius of 12 feet as measured from the point where the item was
placed and ignited, novelty or trick items, combination items, paperless
firecrackers, and other fireworks of like construction that are designed to
produce the same or similar effects.
Display Fireworks. Includes: 1) any fireworks used for exhibition display by
producing visible or audible effects and classified as display fireworks or
contained in the regulations of the United States Department of Transportation
and designated as UN0333, UN0334, or UN0335, and includes salutes containing
more than 2 grains (130 milligrams) of explosive materials, aerial shells
containing more than 40 grams of pyrotechnic compositions, and other display
pieces that exceed the limits of explosive materials for classification as
“consumer fireworks”; 2) any fireworks or articles pyrotechnic used for movie
or television production activities; and 3) any fireworks or articles
pyrotechnic used for a theatrical production or sporting event. This term also
includes fused set pieces containing components, which together exceed 50
milligrams of salute power.
Firecracker. Single paper cylinders not exceeding 1.5 inches in length
excluding the fuse and 0.25 of an inch in diameter and containing a charge of
not more than 50 milligrams of pyrotechnic composition.
Fireworks. Any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or
combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation
including but not limited to aerial devices, articles pyrotechnic, or consumer
or display fireworks as defined by this article or contained in the regulations
of the United States Department of Transportation as set forth in CFR Title 49.
The term fireworks shall not include any explosives or pyrotechnics regulated
under HRS Chapter 396 or automotive safety flares, nor shall the term be
construed to include toy pistols, toy cannons, toy guns, party poppers, pop-
its, or other devices that contain 25/100ths of a grain or less of explosive
substance.
Import. To transport or attempt to transport fireworks into the city or to
cause fireworks to be transported into the city.
License. A formal authorization issued by the fire chief pursuant to this
chapter to engage in the specifically designated act or acts.
Permit. A formal authorization issued by the fire chief to engage in the
specifically designated act or acts.
Place of Entertainment. A theater, dinner theater, hall, coliseum, convention
center, arena, auditorium, stadium, concert hall, garden, outdoor space, or
other place of amusement at which theatrical productions, sporting events, or
other events are presented.
Pyrotechnic Composition or Pyrotechnic Contents. The combustible or explosive
component of fireworks.
Sporting Event. Those contests, games, or other events involving athletic or
physical skills that are shown to the public in a place of entertainment.
Theatrical Production. Live-staged dramatic productions, musical productions,
and concerts, which are shown to the public at a place of entertainment as
defined in this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.1) (Added by Ord. 10-25)
§ 20-6.2 Prohibitions—Permitted uses.
   Except as otherwise provided in this article:
(1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, use, explode, or cause to
explode any consumer fireworks within the city;
(2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, use, explode, or cause to
explode any aerial device, articles pyrotechnic, or display fireworks within
the city; and
(3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to import, store, sell, keep or offer
for sale, expose for sale any fireworks within the city.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.2) (Added by Ord. 10-25)
§ 20-6.3 Exceptions.
   The prohibitions in §
20-6.2 shall not apply to:
(1)   The import, storage, sale, and use by a person having obtained a license
or permit for display fireworks pursuant to §§
20-6.4 and
20-6.12;
(2)   The import, storage, sale, and use by a person having obtained a license
or permit for firecrackers pursuant to §§
20-6.4 and
20-6.13;
(3)   The use of flares, noisemakers, or signals for warning, pest control, or
illumination purposes by the police and fire departments, utility companies,
transportation agencies, and other governmental or private agencies or persons,
including agricultural operations, in connection with emergencies, their
duties, or business; or
(4)   The sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for signal,
commercial, or institutional purposes in athletics or sports.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.3) (Added by Ord. 10-25)
§ 20-6.4 License to import, store, and sell display fireworks or firecrackers.
(a)   License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to import, store,
offer to sell, sell, at wholesale or retail, for use in the city, any display
fireworks or firecrackers, unless such person shall first secure a license.
(b)   The licenses shall be issued by the fire chief and shall be
nontransferable. Licenses shall specify the date of issuance or effect and the
date of expiration, which shall be March 31 of each year. The application shall
be made on a form setting forth the date upon which the importations are to
begin, the address of the importer, and the name of the proprietor or, if a
partnership, the name of the partnership and the names of all partners or, if a
corporation, the name of the corporation and the names of its officers. If the
fire chief discovers at a later date that a licensee has been convicted of a
violation of this article, the licensee’s license shall be revoked and no new
license shall be issued to the licensee for two years.
(c)   Each storage, wholesaling, and retailing facility or site shall be
required to obtain a separate license. Any license issued pursuant to this
article may be revoked by the fire chief if the licensee violates this article
or if the licensee stores or handles the fireworks in such a manner as to
present an unreasonable safety hazard.
(d)   Display fireworks or firecrackers shall only be sold or transferred by a
seller to a person with a valid permit under §
20-6.12 or
20-6.13. No person with a valid permit under §
20-6.12 or
20-6.13 shall sell or transfer display fireworks or firecrackers to any other
person.
(e)   Any license issued pursuant to this article shall be prominently
displayed in public view at each licensed location.
(f)   Display fireworks or firecrackers shall only be imported and stored, if
necessary, in an amount sufficient for an anticipated three-month inventory;
provided that if a licensee provides display fireworks, firecrackers, or
articles pyrotechnic more than once a month, the licensee may import or store,
if necessary, sufficient display fireworks, firecrackers, or articles
pyrotechnic for a six-month inventory.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.4) (Added by Ord. 10-25)
§ 20-6.5 Requirements of licensee.
(a)   Any person who has obtained a license under §
20-6.4 and imports display fireworks or firecrackers into the city or
transports such items within the city shall:
(1)   Clearly designate the types of display fireworks or firecrackers in each
shipment on the bill of lading or shipping manifest with specificity;
(2)   Declare on the bill of lading or shipping manifest the gross weight of
display fireworks or firecrackers to be imported in each shipment and the
location of the storage facility, if applicable, in which the display fireworks
or firecrackers are to be stored;
(3)   Before shipment and when booking each shipment of display fireworks or
firecrackers notify the fire chief regarding whether the shipment will be
distributed from:
(A)   Pier to pier;
(B)   Pier to warehouse or storage facility; or
(C)   Pier to redistribution; and
(4)   When shipping is booked, the licensee shall notify the fire chief in
writing of the expected shipment’s landing date.
(b)   The fire chief may inspect any shipment declared on the shipping manifest
as fireworks or articles pyrotechnic.
(c)   The facility in which display fireworks or firecrackers are to be stored
shall have received approval 15 days before the shipment’s arrival from the
fire chief and meet all State and city fire and safety codes.
(d)   Any shipping company that receives fireworks that are imported into the
city shall notify the fire chief as to whether the shipment will be distributed
from:
(1)   Pier to pier;
(2)   Pier to warehouse or storage facility; or
(3)   Pier to redistribution.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.5) (Added by Ord. 10-25)
§ 20-6.6 Fees—Use of revenues.
   The fee for the license required under §
20-6.4 shall be $3,000 for importers, $2,000 for each wholesaler’s site, $1,000
for each storage site, and $500 for each retailer’s site for each year or
fraction of a year in which the licensee plans to conduct business and shall be
payable to the city. The license fees shall be used solely by the fire
department to pay for:
(1)   Expenses relating to the audit of fireworks, including the inspection of
inventory and storage facilities, maintenance of required records, and the
training of auditors;
(2)   Expenses relating to education regarding compliance with this article;
and
(3)   Expenses relating to the enforcement of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.6) (Added by Ord. 10-25)
§ 20-6.7 Minors.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, sell, or give any
display fireworks or firecrackers to minors, and for any minor to possess,
purchase, sell, or set off, ignite, or otherwise cause to explode any display
fireworks or firecrackers.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.7) (Added by Ord. 10-25)
§ 20-6.8 Liability of parents or guardians.
   The parents, guardian, and other persons having the custody or control of
any minor, who knowingly permit the minor to possess, purchase, or set off,
ignite, or otherwise cause to explode any fireworks or articles pyrotechnic,
shall be in violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties in
§
20-6.9.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.8) (Added by Ord. 10-25)
§ 20-6.9 Penalty.
(a)   Any person violating §
20-6.2(1) shall be sentenced to a fine of not less than $200 and not more than
$1,000 or by imprisonment of not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(b)   Any person violating this article, other than §
20-6.2(1) shall be sentenced to a fine of not less than $250 and not more than
$2,000 or by imprisonment of not more than one year, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(c)   In addition to the penalties provided in subsections (a) and (b), if the
person is licensed to sell fireworks, the court may, in addition to the
foregoing penalties, revoke or suspend such license. No license shall be issued
to any person whose license has been so revoked or suspended until the
expiration of two years after such revocation or suspension.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.9) (Added by Ord. 10-25)
§ 20-6.10 Notice requirements.
   Each licensed retail outlet shall post adequate notice that clearly cautions
each person purchasing display fireworks or firecrackers of the prohibitions,
liabilities, and penalties set forth in §§
20-6.7,
20-6.8 and
20-6.9.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.10) (Added by Ord. 10-25)
§ 20-6.11 Forfeiture.
   Any property used or intended for use in the commission of, attempt to
commit, or conspiracy to commit any violation of this article, or that
facilitated or assisted such activity, and any proceeds or other property
acquired or maintained with the proceeds from the violation of this article may
be subject to forfeiture pursuant to HRS Chapter 712A.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.11) (Added by Ord. 10-25)
§ 20-6.12 Permit for display fireworks.
(a)   Any person desiring to set off, ignite, or discharge display fireworks
for a display shall apply to, and obtain a permit from the fire chief not less
than 20 days before the date of the display.
(b)   The application shall state, among other things:
(1)   The name, age, and address of the applicant;
(2)   The name, age, and address of the person who will operate the display
fireworks, and verification that the person is a licensed pyrotechnic operator;
(3)   The time, date, and place of the use of the display fireworks;
(4)   The type and quantity of aerial devices, display fireworks, or articles
pyrotechnic to be used; and
(5)   The purpose or occasion for which the display fireworks will be
presented.
(c)   Liability coverage required.
(1)   In addition to any other requirements, an applicant for a display
fireworks permit must submit to the fire chief evidence of a general liability
insurance policy in an amount of not less than $1,000,000. A display fireworks
permit may not be issued without evidence of general liability insurance as
required by this section.
(2)   The general liability insurance policy shall cover bodily injury and
property damage caused by an occurrence involving the insured or the insured’s
servant, officer, agent, or employee in the use of display fireworks. The
policy must continue to be in full force and effect for not less than 10 days
after the date of the display.
(3)   Evidence of the liability insurance policy required by this section must
be in the form of a certificate of insurance issued by an insurer authorized to
do business in the State and countersigned by an insurance agent licensed in
the State of Hawaii.
The fire chief may require coverage in amounts larger than the minimum amounts
set forth in subdivision (1) above if the chief deems it necessary or desirable
in consideration of such factors as the location and scale of the display, the
type of fireworks to be used and the number of spectators expected.
(d)   The fire chief, pursuant to duly adopted rules, shall issue the permit
after being satisfied that the requirements of subsection (c) have been met,
the display will be handled by a pyrotechnic operator duly licensed by the
State, the display will not be hazardous to property, and the display will not
endanger human life. The permit shall authorize the holder to display aerial
devices, display fireworks, or articles pyrotechnic only at the place and
during the time set forth therein, and to acquire and possess the specified
aerial devices, display fireworks, or articles pyrotechnic between the date of
the issuance of the permit and the time during which the display of those
aerial devices, display fireworks, or articles pyrotechnic is authorized.
(e)   The fee for the permit to use display fireworks shall be $110.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.12) (Added by Ord. 10-25)
§ 20-6.13 Permit for firecrackers.
(a)   Any person desiring to set off, ignite, discharge, or otherwise cause to
explode firecrackers on New Year’s Eve, New Year’s Day, Fourth of July, Chinese
New Year’s Day, or for cultural uses, such as, but not limited to, births,
deaths, weddings, grand openings, blessings, anniversaries, and other cultural
uses shall apply to and obtain a permit from the fire chief.
(b)   The permit application shall be submitted to the fire chief not less than
10 days before the date of the use of the firecrackers, and shall state, among
other things:
(1)   The name, age, and address of the applicant;
(2)   The purpose of the event or celebration for which the permit is
requested; and
(3)   The date, time, and location of the use of the firecrackers.
(c)   No permit shall be allowed at any location where the fire chief deems
that use of the firecrackers will pose a threat to public health or safety.
(d)   The permit shall allow the use of firecrackers from 9:00 p.m. on New
Year’s Eve to 1:00 a.m. on New Year’s Day; from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on
Chinese New Year’s Day; or from 1:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. on the Fourth of July. A
permit for a cultural use shall allow use from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on the
day of the requested use.
(e)   Each permit shall allow the purchase and use of up to 5,000 individual
firecrackers.
(f)   The fee for the permit to use firecrackers shall be $25.
(g)   The permit shall be nontransferrable, and the permittee shall have the
permit available for inspection at the location where the firecrackers are to
be used.
(h)   The fire chief shall adopt rules for the administration and
implementation of the permit program.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.13) (Added by Ord. 10-25)
§ 20-6.14 Severability.
   If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
article is declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 6, §
20-6.14 ) (Added by Ord. 10-25)
TITLE VI: LAND USE
   Chapters
      
21.   LAND USE ORDINANCE
      
21A.   FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
      
22.   SUBDIVISION OF LAND
      
23.   STATE LAND USE CLASSIFICATION
      
24.   DEVELOPMENT PLANS
      
25.   SPECIAL MANAGEMENT AREA
      
26.   SHORELINE SETBACKS
      
27.   COMMUNITY FACILITIES DISTRICTS
      
28.   SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
      
29.   AFFORDABLE HOUSING REQUIREMENTS
      
30.   WATER MANAGEMENT
      
31.   COMMUNITY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
      
32.   AFFORDABLE RENTAL HOUSING
      
33.   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
      
33A.   IMPACT FEES FOR TRAFFIC AND ROADWAY IMPROVEMENTS IN EWA
CHAPTER 21: LAND USE ORDINANCE
The Permitted Use Table is located in Article 5,
Table 21-5.1
Article
   
1.   General Provisions
   
2.   Administration and Enforcement
   
2A.   Hosting Platforms
   
3.   Establishment of Zoning Districts and Zoning District Regulations
   
4.   General Development Standards
   
5.   Specific Use Development Standards
      
Table 21-5.1: Table of Permitted Uses
   
6.   Off-Street Parking and Loading
   
7.   Sign Regulations
   
8.   Optional Development Regulations
   
9.   Special District Regulations
   
10.   Definitions
   
Appendix 21-A: Key to Department Abbreviations Used in
Chapter 21 Appendices
   
Appendix 21-B: Zoning Ordinances
   
Appendix 21-C: Zoning Maps
   
Appendix 21-D: Resolutions—Plan Review Use Approvals
   
Appendix 21-E: Interim Control Ordinances
   
Appendix 21-F: Kakaako Special Design District
   
Appendix 21-G: List of Figures
   
Appendix 21-H: Amendments to Planned Development, Conditional Use Permit, and
Cluster Ordinances; and Resolutions Approving Planned Development-Apartment,
Planned Development-Resort, Interim Planned Development-Transit, and Planned
Development-Transit Projects
   
Appendix 21-I: Transit-Oriented Development Plan Resolutions
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections
   
21-1.10   Title
   
21-1.20   Purpose and intent
   
21-1.30   Administration
   
21-1.40   Appeals
   
21-1.50   Variances
   
21-1.60   Temporary uses
§ 21-1.10 Title.
   This chapter, inclusive of any amendments, shall be known as the land use
ordinance (LUO) of the City and County of Honolulu. This chapter may also be
referred to as the zoning ordinance and may, to the extent practicable, contain
other ordinances regulating the utilization of land pursuant to Charter § 6-
1504.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 1, § 21-1.10) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-1.20 Purpose and intent.
(a)   The purpose of the LUO is to regulate land use in a manner that will
encourage orderly development in accordance with adopted land use policies,
including the city’s general plan, development and sustainable communities
plans, and, as may be appropriate, adopted neighborhood plans, and to promote
and protect the public health, safety, and welfare by:
(1)   Minimizing adverse effects resulting from the inappropriate location,
use, or design of sites and structures;
(2)   Conserving the city’s natural, historic, and scenic resources and
encouraging design that enhances the physical form of the city; and
(3)   Assisting the public in identifying and understanding regulations
affecting the development and use of land.
(b)   It is the intention of the council that the LUO provide reasonable
development and design standards for the location, height, bulk, and size of
structures, yard areas, off-street parking facilities, and open spaces; and the
use of structures and land for agriculture, industry, business, residences, or
other purposes.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 1, § 21-1.20) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 17-40)
§ 21-1.30 Administration.
   The director shall administer the LUO.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 1, § 21-1.30) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-1.40 Appeals.
   Appeals from the actions of the director in the administration of the LUO
shall be to the zoning board of appeals as provided by Charter § 6-1516.
Appeals must be filed within 30 days after the mailing or service of the
director’s decision. For the purposes of this section:
(1)   For actions of the director that are not required to be served by
registered or certified mail, the date of mailing or service is the date on
which the director's action is placed into the United States Postal Service
mail.
(2)   For actions of the director that are served by registered or certified
mail, the date of mailing or service is the date on which the registered or
certified mail is received, as indicated by the return receipt for the mailing
or other records of the United States Postal Service.
(3)   For actions of the director that are served by physical delivery to a
person or a person's residence, place of employment, or usual place of
business, the date of service is the date of delivery, as established by an
acknowledgment of service signed by the person taking delivery of the
director's action or a sworn declaration made by the person responsible for
effecting the service of the director's action by physical delivery.
(4)   For actions of the director that are served by physical posting of a copy
of the action on the property where the violation has occurred, the date of the
service is the date of posting, as established by a sworn declaration made by
the person responsible for effecting the service of the director's action by
physical posting.
(5)   For actions of the director that are served by publication, the date of
service is the date on which the last required publication is made.
(6)   For actions of the director that are delivered by facsimile, email, or
other means of electronic transmission, the date of service is the date on
which the action is transmitted to the correct email address, facsimile number,
or other electronic address for the person served, as established by a
facsimile receipt, email receipt, email response that acknowledges receipt of
the email, or other reasonable proof of the successful transmission of
electronic delivery to the addressee.
(7)   For persons who submit a written request to receive notice of a
director’s action concerning a particular project, property, or applicant prior
to the director’s action being issued, the date of service will be determined
in accordance with subdivisions (1) through (6).
(8)   For persons who submit a written request to receive notice of a
director’s action concerning a particular project, property, or applicant after
the director’s action has been issued, the date of service is the earlier of
date on which the director’s action was served in accordance with subdivisions
(1) through (6), or the date on which the director’s action was served on the
person requesting notice of the director’s action in accordance with
subdivisions (1) through (6).
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 1, § 21-1.40) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 22-7)
§ 21-1.50 Variances.
   Petitions for varying the application of the LUO shall be determined
pursuant to Charter §§ 6-1516 and 6-1517, including the application of the
provisions relating to signs.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 1, § 21-1.50) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-1.60 Temporary uses.
   Uses and structures of a temporary nature shall not be governed by this
chapter, unless the director determines that significant impacts upon the
surrounding area warrant review and, when necessary, the imposition of
conditions on the use or structure. Conditions shall be based on impacts upon
the surrounding area, and may cover hours of operation, duration of the
activity, and general manner of operation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 1, § 21-1.60) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
ARTICLE 2: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sections
   
21-2.10   Purpose
   
21-2.20   Administrative procedures
   
21-2.30   Application procedures
   
21-2.40   Permits
   
21-2.40-1   Minor permits
   
21-2.40-2   Major permits
   
21-2.50   Multipermit process
   
21-2.60   Rules governing director’s failure to act within specified time
period
   
21-2.70   Review of planning commission or council, or both
   
21-2.80   Conditional zoning—Agreements
   
21-2.90   Conditional use permit—Purpose and intent
   
21-2.90-1   Application requirements
   
21-2.90-2   General requirements
   
21-2.100   Existing uses
   
21-2.110   Exceptions
   
21-2.110-1   Cluster housing, agricultural, and country clusters
   
21-2.110-2   Planned development-resort, planned development-apartment, planned
development-transit, and interim planned development-transit projects
   
21-2.120   Plan review uses—Purpose and intent
   
21-2.120-1   Applicability
   
21-2.120-2   General provisions
   
21-2.120-3   Application requirements
   
21-2.130   Waiver of requirements
   
21-2.140   Zoning adjustments
   
21-2.140-1   Specific circumstances
   
21-2.140-2   Criteria
   
21-2.150   Violation
   
21-2.150-1   Criminal prosecution
   
21-2.150-2   Administrative enforcement
   
21-2.150-3   Depository of fees and civil penalties relating to bed and
breakfast homes or transient vacation units
§ 21-2.10 Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to set forth the procedures for processing
permit applications and to ensure compliance with this chapter. Concurrent
application and processing are encouraged for projects that require multiple
permits.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.10) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-2.20 Administrative procedures.
(a)   No permit required by this chapter shall be granted or application
accepted for any use, structure, or project on any zoning lot in conflict with
a proposed zone change, including the establishment of or an amendment to any
special district, between the time the proposal is initiated by the director or
the council and the time the proposal is withdrawn, approved, or denied by the
council. This provision shall not apply for a period of more than one year
after the date of initiation of the proposal.
(b)   If a permit required by this chapter requires a public hearing, no
request for postponement of the hearing shall be allowed after notice has been
published; however, the applicant may withdraw the permit application.
(c)   In the event a permit required by this chapter is denied, or in the event
the applicant withdraws the permit application, one year shall elapse before
the permit application is resubmitted in the same or substantially the same
form; provided that if the denial or withdrawal was the result of
infrastructure inadequacies and these inadequacies are subsequently corrected,
then the director may accept a new application before the lapse of the one-year
period.
(d)   The director shall notify an applicant in writing whether an application
for a permit required by this chapter is complete or incomplete within 10
working days after its receipt by the director. If the application is
incomplete the notice shall inform the applicant of the specific requirements
necessary to complete the application. An application shall not be accepted by
the director unless it is complete.
(e)   Applications previously approved by ordinance shall continue to be
regulated by that ordinance, except that:
(1)   The director may administratively modify cluster housing and planned
development-housing projects that were originally approved by ordinance; and
(2)   All modifications shall be processed in accordance with current site
design standards and application procedures.
(f)   Applications previously approved, other than by an ordinance, shall
continue as approved; provided that any reference to an approving body shall be
construed as the approving body contained in the applicable regulation of this
chapter.
(g)   Nothing contained in this chapter prevents the strengthening or
restoration to a safe condition of any building, or any part of any building,
declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public
safety, upon order of such official.
(h)   The department monitors compliance with and enforces this chapter only.
Accordingly, the issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter does not
constitute the department’s confirmation that the applicant has complied with
any other applicable laws.
(i)   In addition to the requirements stated in this chapter for the issuance
of any permit, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to observe and
comply with all other applicable federal, State, and city laws, ordinances, and
rules.
(j)   All references in this chapter to a government agency or department means
the government agency or department specifically identified or its successor.
(k)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the director may
administratively authorize minor alterations, additions, or modifications to
any approved permit required by this chapter; provided that the minor
modification request:
(A)   Is reasonable and consistent with the intent of the respective permit;
(B)   Does not significantly increase the intensity or scope of the use; and
(C)   Does not create adverse land use impacts to the surrounding neighborhood.
(2)   Subdivision (1) does not apply to:
(A)   Zone changes; and
(B)   Council approvals pursuant to §§
21-2.110-2 (Planned development) and
21-2.120 et seq. (Plan review uses), except to the extent that minor
modifications are permitted by the express language of the council’s approving
resolution.
(3)   Major alterations, additions, or modifications, and other alterations,
additions, or modifications excepted by subdivision (2), will be processed
under the provisions for the applicable permit or approval.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.20) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 10-19,
17-40)
§ 21-2.30 Application procedures.
(a)   The application procedures specified in this section shall be followed in
the administration of this chapter. As used in this section, “applicant”
includes but is not limited to any governmental agency or entity.
(b)   Application fees are not refundable and shall be required as specified in
Chapter 6, Article 41.
(c)   See
Figure 21-2.1 for permit application processing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.30) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
Figure 21-2.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-195.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-197.png]
(Added by Ord. 17-54)
§ 21-2.40 Permits.
   There shall be two categories of permits authorized by this chapter: minor
and major. Sections
21-2.40-1 and
21-2.40-2 describe the review and processing of applications for permits and
approvals within these two categories.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.40) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-2.40-1 Minor permits.
(a)   Specific permits. The minor permit category consists of the following
permits and approvals:
(1)   Zoning adjustment;
(2)   Waiver;
(3)   Existing use permit;
(4)   Conditional use permit (minor); and
(5)   Special district permit (minor).
(b)   Preapplication procedures. Before submitting an application for a minor
permit for the following uses:
(1)   Communication tower or communication support structure in the P-2, AG-1,
or AG-2 zoning districts;
(2)   Small or medium meeting facility;
(3)   Child or adult daycare;
(4)   K-12 school; or
(5)   Minor hotel with up to 180 dwelling or lodging units, or both, in the
BMX-3 zoning district;
the applicant shall first present the project to the neighborhood board of the
district where the project will be located or, if no neighborhood board exists,
an appropriate community association. The applicant shall provide written
notice of the presentation to owners of all properties adjoining the proposed
project. The requirements of this subsection will be deemed satisfied if the
applicant makes a written request to present the project to the neighborhood
board or community association and:
(A)   The neighborhood board or community association fails to provide the
applicant with an opportunity to present the project at a meeting held within
60 days after the date of the written request; or
(B)   The neighborhood board or community association provides the applicant
with written notice that it has no objection to the project or that no
presentation of the project is necessary.
(c)   Application and processing. An applicant seeking a minor permit shall
submit the appropriate application to the director for processing. Once the
director has accepted an application for a conditional use permit (minor)
involving a meeting facility, child daycare, adult daycare, K-12 school, or
minor hotel in the BMX-3 zoning district, the director shall notify adjoining
property owners and the appropriate neighborhood board or community association
of receipt of the application. The director shall ask adjoining property owners
whether they wish to have a public hearing on the proposed project, and whether
they have any concerns about potentially adverse external effects of the
proposed project on the immediate neighborhood. If, in the judgment of the
director, there is sufficient cause to hold a public hearing, the director
shall hold a public hearing, which may be held within the area, no earlier than
45 days after acceptance of the completed application; and the application will
thereafter be subject to § 21-2.40-2(c)(2), (3), (4), and (6), and subsection
(d). If the director determines that a public hearing is not necessary, within
45 days after the director’s acceptance of the completed application, the
director shall either:
(1)   Approve the application as submitted;
(2)   Approve the application with modifications or conditions, or both; or
(3)   Deny the application and provide the applicant with a written explanation
for the denial;
provided that if an applicant substantially amends an application after its
acceptance by the director, the director will have up to 45 days after the date
of such amendment to act on the application as provided in this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.40-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 03-37,
13-10, 17-40, 25-2)
§ 21-2.40-2 Major permits.
(a)   Specific permits. The major permit category consists of the following
permits and approvals:
(1)   Zone change;
(2)   Establishment of or amendment to special districts;
(3)   Plan review use;
(4)   Conditional use permit (major);
(5)   Special district permit (major);
(6)   Planned development-housing; and
(7)   Downtown heights in excess of 350 feet.
(b)   Preapplication procedures.
(1)   Before the applicant submits an application for a major permit, the
department will hold a preapplication meeting with the applicant to conduct an
informal review of the project, unless such a meeting is determined to be
unnecessary. A project manager may be assigned by the department, and potential
issues shall be discussed with the applicant.
(2)   Before submitting an application for a major permit, the applicant shall
first present the project to the neighborhood board of the district where the
project will be located or, if no neighborhood board exists, an appropriate
community association. The applicant shall provide written notice of the
presentation to owners of all properties adjoining the proposed project. The
requirements of this subdivision shall be deemed satisfied if the applicant
makes a written request to present the project to the neighborhood board or
community association and:
(A)   The neighborhood board or community association fails to provide the
applicant with an opportunity to present the project at a meeting held within
60 days after the date of the written request; or
(B)   The neighborhood board or community association provides the applicant
with written notice that it has no objection to the project or that no
presentation of the project is necessary.
(c)   Application and processing.
(1)   An applicant for a major permit shall submit the appropriate application
to the department for processing. If the applicant has presented the project to
the appropriate neighborhood board or community association pursuant to
subsection (b)(2), the application shall be accompanied by a description of all
issues or causes of concern relating to the proposed project that were
identified during the presentation and a statement describing any measures
taken by the applicant to mitigate the issues or concerns.
(2)   An applicant for a major permit that does not require the approval of the
council shall be required to erect a “notice of pending permit” sign on the
affected lots, subject to the following:
(A)   The sign shall be 9 square feet in area;
(B)   One sign shall be posted along each street frontage of the lot, may be
posted in a required yard, and shall not be obstructed from view by the general
public;
(C)   The sign shall contain the following:
(i)   The words “Notice of pending land use permit application for (the name of
the permit type)”;
(ii)   A summary description of the nature of the request covered by the
application;
(iii)   The name of the applicant or agent, and the address and phone number
where the applicant or agent may be contacted; and
(iv)   The date, time, and place of the public hearing to be held by the
director;
(D)   The sign shall be erected no less than 14 days before the public hearing
date, and shall be removed no more than seven days after the public hearing has
been closed;
(E)   Failure to comply with the requirements of this subdivision may result in
the denial of the affected permit application; and
(F)   The sign shall be considered and treated as a “public sign” as provided
under §
21-7.20.
(3)   An applicant for a major permit shall make a good faith effort to notify
all owners of property within 300 feet of the affected property’s boundaries of
the applicant’s proposed use of the property as follows.
(A)   The notification shall be sent within 10 working days after the
director’s acceptance of a completed application.
(B)   The notification shall be sent by regular mail.
(C)   The department shall make available to the applicant a list of all
properties and owners located within 300 feet of the affected property.
(D)   The applicant shall submit an affidavit confirming that the notification
requirements have been met.
(E)   The notification may be made to the respective homeowners board or
association of an affected condominium property regime or cooperative housing
corporation in lieu of individual owners.
The failure of any person to receive a notice pursuant to this subsection shall
not affect the validity of any permit issued under this chapter.
(4)   The director shall submit a written request for comments and
recommendations on the application to pertinent governmental agencies. The
agencies shall submit their comments and recommendations in writing to the
director within 45 days after receipt of the request.
(5)   If the application is for a special district permit (major) or any major
permit regarding downtown heights in excess of 350 feet, the director shall
submit the application to the design advisory committee for comment and review.
The design advisory committee shall submit its comments and recommendations in
writing to the director within 45 days after its receipt of the application.
(6)   If the application is for any major permit that does not require the
approval of the council, the director shall hold a public hearing no earlier
than 45 days after the director’s acceptance of the completed application.
Within 90 days after the director’s acceptance of the completed application,
the director shall either:
(A)   Approve the application as submitted;
(B)   Approve the application with modifications or conditions, or both; or
(C)   Deny the application and provide the applicant with a written explanation
for the denial.
provided that if an applicant substantially amends an application after
acceptance by the director, the director shall have up to 90 days after the
date of such amendment to act on the application as provided in this
subsection.
(7)   If the application is for a plan review use, the director shall, within
90 days after the director’s acceptance of a completed application, submit a
report to the council, which shall process the application according to §
21-2.70. Provided that if an applicant substantially amends an application
after acceptance by the director, the director shall have up to 90 days after
the date of the amendment to act on the application as provided in this
subsection.
(8)   If the application is for either:
(A)   The establishment of or amendment to a special district; or
(B)   A zone change;
The director shall, within 90 days of the director’s acceptance of a completed
application, either:
(i)   deny the application and provide the applicant with a written explanation
for the denial; or (ii) submit a report and a proposed ordinance to the
planning commission, which shall process the application according to §
21-2.70. If, however, an applicant substantially amends an application after
acceptance by the director, the director shall have up to 90 days after the
date of such amendment to act on the application as provided in this
subsection.
(d)   Exception when special management area use permit required. When an
application for a major permit requires a special management area use permit,
the director may extend the deadlines for acting on the application imposed by
this section; provided that any extension shall not extend beyond 10 days after
the council has acted on the special management area use permit.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.40-2) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-2.50 Multipermit process.
   When a proposed project requires more than one approval to be lawfully
completed, the applicant may apply for all approvals concurrently according to
the procedures provided in this section.
(a)   The applicant shall submit a one-stop permit application package (OSP) to
the director for processing. The OSP shall consist of:
(1)   A completed OSP master application form;
(2)   All information required for the individual permits or approvals that the
applicant is seeking; and
(3)   Other information as may be required by the director.
(b)   Upon acceptance of the completed OSP, the director shall designate a
project manager from within the department to coordinate the review and
processing of the individual permit or approval applications comprising the
OSP. The project manager shall act as the primary contact person between the
director and the applicant concerning the proposed project.
(c)   The individual permit or approval applications that comprise the OSP must
comply with and shall be processed by the department in accordance with all
applicable requirements of this chapter, subject to subsection (d).
(d)   The department will process the OSP within the time provided in this
article for the individual permit or approval application contained in the OSP
that has the longest processing time.
(e)   In the event the OSP contains:
(1)   One or more permit or approval applications that require council
approval; and
(2)   One or more permit or approval applications that require only the
director’s approval;
the director may approve those applications requiring only the director’s
approval subject to the condition that all other applications requiring council
approval are duly approved by the council.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.50) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-2.60 Rules governing director’s failure to act within specified time
period.
(a)   Subject to subsections (b) and (c), the director may, in accordance with
HRS Chapter 91, adopt rules having the force and effect of law providing that
if the director fails to act on applications for a minor permit; a major permit
requiring only the director’s approval; or those portions of a one-stop permit
application package (OSP) that require only the director’s approval, within the
time periods specified in §§
21-2.40-1(c),
21-2.40-2(c)(6) and (d), and
21-2.50(d), respectively, the applicable permit requiring only the director’s
approval shall be deemed approved to the extent that the proposal complies with
all applicable laws, regulations, and rules, subject to the following
conditions.
(1)   The use or development authorized by the permit shall be in general
conformance with the project, as shown on plans or drawings, on file with the
department, which shall be deemed the approved plans for the project. Any
modification to the project or plans shall be subject to the prior review and
approval of the director. Major modifications shall require a new permit.
(2)   Approval of the permit does not constitute compliance with any other land
use ordinance or other governmental requirements, including but limited to
building permit approval, which are subject to separate review and approval.
The applicant shall be responsible for insuring that the plans for the project
approved under the permit comply with all applicable land use ordinance and
other governmental provisions and requirements.
(3)   The director may impose additional conditions, modify existing
conditions, or delete conditions deemed satisfied, upon a finding that
circumstances related to the approved project have significantly changed so as
to warrant a modification to the conditions of the approval.
(4)   In the event of the noncompliance with any of the conditions of approval,
the director may:
(A)   Terminate any uses or development authorized by the permit;
(B)   Halt their operation until all conditions are met;
(C)   Declare the permit void; or
(D)   Seek civil enforcement.
(b)   The authority granted to the director pursuant to subsection (a) shall be
subject to the following conditions.
(1)   The director may adopt the rules only if required to do so by State law,
and then only to the extent required by State law. Any rule that exceeds the
requirements of State law shall be void. Any rule shall cease to be of any
force and effect upon the repeal or judicial voidance of the State law
requiring the adoption of the rule.
(2)   The rules shall not permit any extension of the time periods specified by
this chapter for the director’s action, except as follows:
(A)   An extension mandated by State law;
(B)   An extension required to comply with §
21-2.40-2(d); and
(C)   Upon the prior request of the applicant, one extension of up to 15 days
for a minor permit, or up to 30 days for a major permit, provided that an
extension permitted under this paragraph shall not be combined with an
extension permitted under paragraph (B).
(c)   Except to the extent provided by rules adopted pursuant to this section,
the failure of the director to act within the specified time periods shall not
be deemed an approval of any permit or application.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.60) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 10-19)
§ 21-2.70 Review of planning commission or council, or both.
(a)   Plan review use. When the application is for approval of a plan review
use, the council shall, within 60 days of receipt of the director’s report,
hold a public hearing and either:
(1)   Approve the application, in whole or in part, with or without conditions
or modifications, by resolution; or
(2)   Deny the application.
If the council does not act on the application as provided in this subsection
within such 60-day period, the application shall be deemed denied. The
applicant may request, and the council may approve, an extension of time if the
request is made in writing and approved before the requested effective date of
the extension.
(b)   Special districts, other amendments to the land use ordinance, and zone
changes. When the application or proposal is for: the establishment of or
amendment to a special district; other amendment to the land use ordinance; or
a zone change (in this subsection collectively referred to as “zoning ordinance
proposals”):
(1)   (A)   Other than council-initiated. The planning commission shall hold a
public hearing within 45 days of receipt of the director’s report and proposed
ordinance. Within 30 days of the close of the public hearing, the planning
commission shall transmit through the mayor to the council the director’s
report and proposed ordinance with its recommendations. The mayor shall
transmit the director’s report, proposed ordinance, and planning commission
recommendations to the council within 30 days of receipt of the same from the
planning commission.
(B)   Council-initiated. Planning commission processing and mayoral
transmission of zoning ordinance proposals initiated by the council pursuant to
Charter § 6-1513 and
Chapter 2, Article 24, including revisions or amendments to this chapter or
ordinances designating and redesignating land to one or more zoning districts
specified in this chapter, shall be governed by
Chapter 2, Article 24.
(C)   A proposed ordinance prepared by the director as an alternative to a
council-initiated zoning ordinance proposal shall be initiated by the director
and shall be processed in accordance with paragraph (A) above.
(2)   Any person may bring a civil action to enforce any time limit established
by this subsection. The failure to meet any time limit established by this
subsection shall not render the affected proposal void, and the council may act
on the proposed ordinance after receipt thereof; and
(3)   (A)   The council shall hold a public hearing and may act by approving
the ordinance as submitted or with modifications, or by denying it.
(B)   For zoning ordinance proposals other than council-initiated proposals, if
the council does not take final action within 90 days after receipt of the
proposed ordinance from the planning commission, it shall be deemed denied. The
applicant may request, and the council may approve, an extension of time if the
request is made in writing and approved before the requested effective date of
the extension.
(C)   For zoning ordinance proposals initiated by the council pursuant to
Charter § 6-1513 and
Chapter 2, Article 24, if the council does not take final action before the
automatic filing of the bill for the proposal pursuant to §
1-2.4, the proposal shall be deemed denied; provided however, that the council
may extend the time for consideration of the proposal one time only by
introduction of a new bill for the proposal before the automatic filing of the
original bill. The new bill shall be identical to the then-current form of the
original bill. If the council does not take final action before the automatic
filing of the new bill, the proposal shall be deemed denied. If more than one
new bill is introduced before the automatic filing of the original bill, the
proposal shall be deemed denied if the council does not take final action
before the automatic filing of the first new bill.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.70) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 08-19,
10-19)
§ 21-2.80 Conditional zoning—Agreements.
   Before the enactment of an ordinance for a zone change, the council may
impose conditions on the applicant’s use of the property. The fulfillment of
these conditions shall be a prerequisite to the adoption of the ordinance or
any applicable part of it.
(a)   The conditions to be imposed must have already been performed before
council action on the zone change, or be enforceable by the city to ensure
performance after council action. The conditions shall be fulfilled within the
time limitation set by the council or, if no time limitation is set, within a
reasonable time.
(b)   The conditions shall be imposed only if the council finds them necessary
to prevent circumstances that may be adverse to the public health, safety, and
welfare.
(c)   The conditions shall be reasonably conceived to fulfill needs directly
emanating from the land use proposed in the following respects:
(1)   Protection of the public from the potentially deleterious effects of the
proposed use; or
(2)   Fulfillment of the need for public service demands created by the
proposed use.
(d)   Changes or alterations of conditions shall be processed in the same
manner as the zone change.
(e)   The conditions shall be set forth in a unilateral agreement running in
favor of the council, acting by and through its chair. No ordinance with
conditions shall be effective until the agreement, properly executed, has been
recorded with the bureau of conveyances or the land court of the State of
Hawaii, or both, as appropriate, so that the conditions imposed by the
agreement shall run with the land and shall bind and give notice to all
subsequent grantees, assignees, mortgagees, lienors, and any other person who
claims an interest in the property. The agreement shall be properly executed
and delivered to the city before council action on the ordinance with
conditions; provided that the council may grant reasonable extension in cases
of practical difficulty. The agreement shall not restrict the power of the
council to rezone with or without conditions. The agreement shall be
enforceable by the city, by appropriate action at law or suit in equity,
against the parties and their heirs, successors, and assigns.
(1)   Declarants, or the declarant’s heirs, successors, or assigns, shall
prepare and submit to the director an annual report detailing the status of
compliance with each condition associated with the agreement, which shall
include supporting documentation as appropriate, including but not limited to
copies of construction and building permits, copies of deeds and restrictive
covenants, financial records, phasing plans, build-out summaries, site plans,
master plans, or other relevant information verifying compliance. Failure on
the part of the declarant, or the declarant’s heirs, successors, or assigns, to
fulfill this requirement shall be grounds for establishing a violation of this
subsection.
(2)   When the conditions of an agreement have been fully performed and none of
the conditions are of a continuing nature, the director may fully release the
declarant, or the declarant’s heirs, successors, or assigns, from the
agreement. The director may also execute and record a partial release from the
conditions of an agreement upon the successful performance of any specific
condition that is not of a continuing nature. Any required fees associated with
a release shall be the responsibility of the declarant, or the declarant’s
heirs, successors, or assigns.
(3)   The director shall prepare and submit to the council an annual report
summarizing the status of compliance with conditions associated with
outstanding agreements. This report shall also include a list of agreements for
which a full or partial release has been executed by the director for that
year, which shall include at a minimum the liber and page or land court
document number of the recorded release.
(f)   Failure to fulfill any conditions to the zone change within the specified
time limitations may be grounds for the enactment of ordinances making further
zone changes upon initiation by the proper parties in accordance with the
Charter.
(g)   The council may require a bond, in a form acceptable to the council, or a
cash deposit from the property owner or contract purchaser in an amount that
will assure compliance with the conditions imposed. The bond shall be posted at
the same time the agreement containing the conditions is recorded with the
bureau of conveyances or land court of the State of Hawaii, or both, as
appropriate.
(h)   For the enactment of an ordinance for a zone change where conditions are
to be imposed on the applicant’s use of the property, and there are pre-
existing applicable conditions associated with an earlier ordinance for a zone
change, the pre-existing conditions, in whole or in part, may be repealed by
the new ordinance for a zone change or incorporated into the new unilateral
agreement.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.80) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-2.90 Conditional use permit—Purpose and intent.
(a)   The purpose of this section is to establish a procedure for permitting
certain uses in some zoning districts if certain minimum standards and
conditions detailed in
Article 5 are met.
(b)   The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed use meets all pertinent
standards. The director is further empowered to condition the conditional use
permit to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses and structures. When a
standard from
Article 5 differs from the standard for the zoning district, the standard from
Article 5 shall apply.
(c)   Certain uses may be permitted as principal uses or principal uses with
conditions in some zoning districts, but shall be conditional uses in other
zoning districts.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.90) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-2.90-1 Application requirements.
(a)   A developer, owner, or lessee may file an application for a conditional
use permit with the director; provided that the conditional use sought is
permitted in the particular district.
(b)   The application shall be accompanied by a plan, drawn to scale, showing
the actual dimensions and shape of the lot, the sizes and locations on the lot
of any existing and proposed structures, and the existing and proposed uses of
structures and open areas. The director may request additional information
relating to topography, access, surrounding land uses, and other matters as may
reasonably be required in the circumstances of the case. The application shall
not be accepted until the information is provided.
(c)   The application will be processed in accordance with this article,
subject to the following:
(1)   When the application is for a conditional use permit (minor) for a
meeting facility, adult or child daycare, or K-12 school, the director has the
discretion to hold a public hearing on the application upon a determination
that there is sufficient justification for a public hearing;
(2)   If the director holds a public hearing as described in this section, the
deadline for the director’s action on the application will be extended from 45
to 90 days from acceptance of the completed application; and
(3)   If the determination is made to hold a public hearing as provided in this
section, the applicant shall make a good faith effort to notify all owners of
property within 300 feet of the affected property’s boundaries of the date,
time, and place of the public hearing for the applicant’s proposed use of the
property as follows:
(A)   The notification must be sent within 10 working days of the director’s
written decision notifying the applicant of the date, time, and place that the
public hearing will be held;
(B)   The notification will be sent by regular mail;
(C)   The department shall make available to the applicant a list of all
properties and owners located within 300 feet of the affected property;
(D)   The applicant shall submit an affidavit confirming that the notification
requirements have been met; and
(E)   The notification may be made to the respective homeowners board or
association of an affected condominium property regime or cooperative housing
corporation in lieu of individual owners.
The failure of any person to receive a notice pursuant to this subsection will
not affect the validity of any permit issued under this chapter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.90-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 03-37,
10-19, 25-2)
§ 21-2.90-2 General requirements.
(a)   The director may allow a conditional use on a finding that the proposed
use satisfies the following criteria:
(1)   The proposed use is permitted as a conditional use in the underlying
zoning district and conforms to the requirements of this chapter;
(2)   The site is suitable for the proposed use considering size, shape,
location, topography, infrastructure, and natural features;
(3)   The proposed use will not alter the character of the surrounding area in
a manner substantially limiting, impairing, or precluding the use of
surrounding properties for the principal uses permitted in the underlying
zoning district; and
(4)   The use at its proposed location will provide a service or facility which
will contribute to the general welfare of the community-at-large or surrounding
neighborhood.
(b)   In addition to the general or specific standards set forth in this
chapter concerning the proposed use, which shall be considered minimum
requirements with respect to the permit, additional requirements, conditions,
and safeguards may be added by the director as required for the protection of
the public interest in the specific case.
(c)   The director may grant conditional use permits by modifying application
of the sign regulations; district regulations relating to yards, landscaping,
and lot dimensions; and parking requirements for uses that have an unusual
peak-hour parking demand. No modification shall be made, unless the proposed
conditional use otherwise meets the requirements of subsections (a) and (b). At
no time may the director modify the minimum standards for a specific
conditional use.
(d)   In determining whether the proposed conditional use meets the
requirements of subsections (a) and (b), the director will, where applicable,
consider traffic flow and control; access to and circulation within the
property; off-street parking and loading; sewerage; drainage and flooding;
refuse and service areas; utilities; screening and buffering; signs; setbacks;
yards and other open spaces; lot dimensions; height, bulk, and location of
structures; location of all proposed uses; hours and manner of operation; and
noise, lights, dust, odor, and fumes.
(e)   Notwithstanding the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) relating to
minimum development standards, in the apartment, apartment mixed-use, and
business mixed-use zoning districts, the director may grant a conditional use
permit for large group living, as defined in this chapter, which may modify
district regulations within the limits and subject to the standards established
for this conditional use in
Article 5.
(f)   For certain conditional use permits, the director may require all or a
portion of the site to be dedicated for a minimum of 10 years to active
agricultural use. If the active agricultural use ceases before the expiration
of the minimum period of dedication, the director may nullify the dedication
upon a determination that the permit is revoked or rescinded.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.90-2) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 01-12,
02-63, 03-37, 25-2)
§ 21-2.100 Existing uses.
(a)   The purpose of this section is to recognize the hardship imposed on uses
that were legally established, but now fall under the procedures and standards
of the following permits: cluster housing; country cluster; agricultural
cluster; or conditional use. Subject to the director’s approval, the existing
use procedure is an option to nonconforming status for qualifying uses. In the
event of destruction, uses may be continued and structures may be rebuilt under
the approved existing use plan; provided that such restoration is permitted by
the building code and flood hazard regulations and is started within two years.
(b)   Existing use approval is subject to the following.
(1)   The existing uses and associated structures do not substantially limit,
impair, or preclude the use of surrounding properties for the principal uses
permitted in the underlying district. This assessment may include impacts on
traffic flow and control; off-street parking and loading; sewerage; drainage
and flooding; refuse and service areas; utilities; screening and buffering;
signs; yards and other open spaces; lot dimensions; height, bulk, and location
of structures; hours and manner of operation; and noise, lights, dust, odor,
and fumes.
(2)   Existing uses and structures shall meet the applicable zoning
requirements at the time the uses and structures were approved. Existing uses
and structures are not required to meet the current underlying district
regulations, nor the minimum development standards of this chapter; provided
that existing uses involving dwelling units, other than those associated with a
plantation community subdivision, must conform to the requirements relating to
minimum land area and maximum number of units specified in §
21-8.50-2 for cluster housing, in §
21-3.60-2 for country clusters, and in §
21-3.50-2 for agricultural clusters, whichever applies. For purposes of this
subsection, a plantation community subdivision may include housing, and
community or agricultural support buildings, as provided under HRS § 205-4.5(a)
(12).
(3)   When granting existing use approval, the director may impose conditions
consistent with the purposes of this section and the permit that would
otherwise be required.
(4)   Developments existing on the site shall be considered as an approved plan
after review by the director.
(5)   Minor alterations, additions, or modifications may be approved by the
director; provided the proposal is consistent with the intent of the permit
otherwise required by this chapter, and does not create adverse land use
impacts on the surrounding neighborhood. Major alterations, additions, or
modifications shall be processed under the applicable permit.
(6)   Any previous variance, conditional use permit, or similar actions granted
for the particular use shall continue in effect until superseded.
(7)   An existing use application shall be processed in accordance with §
21-2.40-1.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.100) (Added by Ords. 99-12; Am. Ord. 10-19)
§ 21-2.110 Exceptions.
   The procedures described in §§
21-2.110-1 and
21-2.110-2 are exceptions to the major or minor permit process, as provided in
those respective sections.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.110) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-2.110-1 Cluster housing, agricultural, and country clusters.
(a)   Before the submission of a cluster housing, agricultural cluster, or
country cluster application, the applicant may undergo a 21-day conceptual
review of the project by submitting a preliminary site plan drawn to scale
showing the approximate location and dimensions of all proposed structures,
roadways, common open areas, and recreational facilities. The preliminary site
plan shall include a conceptual landscaping plan, with existing contours at
vertical intervals of 5 feet where the slope is greater than 10 percent and not
more than 2 feet where the slope is less than 10 percent. Any areas designated
for grading shall be indicated and approximate amounts of cut or fill shown.
(b)   This review shall indicate the director’s comments on the basic project
concept, the number and general location of all dwelling units and other
structures, the location of all common areas, and the preliminary landscape
plan.
(c)   Either after the 21-day conceptual review or as a first action, the
applicant may proceed with detailed plans and drawings for the project in
compliance with the application requirements listed in §
21-8.50-10. Within 60 days after acceptance of a completed application, the
director shall approve as submitted, approve with modifications or conditions,
or deny with reasons for denial sent in writing to the applicant. During this
60-day period, the director shall solicit comments on the project from
appropriate agencies. Agencies shall submit comments on the project within 45
days after receipt of the director’s request.
(d)   If the development requires a special management area use permit, the
time limit may be extended by the director, for a period not to exceed 10
working days after the council has taken action on the special management area
use permit by the council.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.110-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-2.110-2 Planned development-resort, planned development-apartment, planned
development- transit, and interim planned development-transit projects.
(a)   Applications for approval of planned development-resort (PD-R) and
planned development-apartment (PD-A) projects in the Waikiki special district,
applications for approval of planned development-transit (PD-T) projects in a
TOD special district, and interim planned development-transit (IPD-T) projects
shall be processed by the department in accordance with this section.
(b)   Preapplication procedures. Before the submission of an application, the
applicant shall:
(1)   For PD-T and IPD-T projects, attend a preapplication meeting with the
department to conduct an informal review of the project, unless the department
determines that a meeting is not necessary. The applicant shall be prepared to
discuss how the project will accomplish the goals and objectives of §
21-9.100-6 and the approved neighborhood TOD plan for the affected area; and
(2)   For all planned-development projects, present the proposal to the
neighborhood board for the district in which the project will be located.
Notice of the presentation, or the applicant’s good faith efforts to make a
presentation, must be given to all owners of properties adjoining the proposed
project.
(c)   For all planned-development projects, upon acceptance of the completed
application by the director, the director shall notify the council of the
acceptance, and provide the council with the date of the director’s acceptance
of the application and a brief description of the proposal contained in the
application. The director shall hold a public hearing on the conceptual plan
for the project no less than 21 nor more than 60 calendar days after the date
on which the completed application is accepted, unless the 60-day period is
waived by the applicant. The public hearing may be held jointly and
concurrently with any other hearing required for the same project. No less than
15 days prior to the public hearing, the director shall give written notice of
the public hearing to the neighborhood board for the district in which the
project will be located.
For PD-T and IPD-T projects, a complete application must demonstrate how the
project achieves consistency with the approved neighborhood TOD plan for the
affected area.
(d)   For PD-R and PD-A projects only, the conceptual plan for the project must
also be presented to the design advisory committee for its appropriate
recommendations prior to transmittal of the application to the council for a
conceptual plan review and approval.
(e)   Upon conclusion of the public hearing and (except for PD-T and IPD-
T projects) design advisory committee review, and not more than 80 days after
acceptance of the application, unless the applicant waives the 80-day period,
the director shall submit a report and recommendation to the council.
(f)   The council shall approve the conceptual plan for the project, in whole
or in part, with or without conditions or modifications, by resolution, or
shall disapprove the conceptual plan. The council may disapprove the conceptual
plan by resolution, but if the council does not take final action within 60
days after its receipt of the application, the application will be deemed
denied. The applicant may request, and the council may approve, an extension of
time if the request is made in writing, prior to the requested effective date
of the extension. An application for council approval of a conceptual plan for
a PD-R, PD-A, PD-T, or IPD-T project may be processed concurrently with
development plan amendments under
Chapter 24, special management area use permits under
Chapter 25, and zoning district changes.
(g)   If the council approves the conceptual plan for the project, the
application, as approved in concept by the council, will continue to be
processed for further detailed review and final action by the director.
(1)   The director shall present the detailed plan for the project to the
design advisory committee for its recommendation, except in the case of PD-
T and IPD-T projects.
(2)   Within 45 days after council approval, the director shall approve the
application in whole or in part, with or without conditions or modifications,
or deny the application, with reasons for final action set in writing to the
applicant.
(3)   The applicant may request in writing to the director an extension of time
as may be necessary for good cause.
(h)   A final approval by the director will be considered a major special
district permit for the project, notwithstanding that the application has been
processed in accordance with this section and not §
21-2.40-2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.110-2) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 11-
30, 14-10, 17-54, 22-29 )
§ 21-2.120 Plan review uses—Purpose and intent.
(a)   The purpose of this section is to establish a review and approval
mechanism for uses of a permanent and institutional nature which, because of
characteristics fundamental to the nature of the use, provide essential
community services but could also have a major adverse impact on surrounding
land uses.
(b)   It is the intent that the design and siting of structures and
landscaping, screening, and buffering for these uses be master planned so as to
minimize any objectionable aspects of the use or the potential incompatibility
with other uses permitted in the zoning district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.120) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-2.120-1 Applicability.
(a)   Plan review use (PRU) approval is required for the following public and
private uses:
(1)   Hospitals;
(2)   Prisons;
(3)   Airports;
(4)   Colleges and universities (except vocational schools);
(5)   Large meeting facilities subject to subsection (c);
(6)   Those golf courses described in subsection (d); and
(7)   Zoos.
(b)   This section applies to all of the uses in subsection (a), in all zoning
districts and special districts.
(c)   A large meeting facility may not be approved as a plan review use in the
preservation, agricultural, country, residential, apartment, apartment mixed-
use, or industrial zoning districts.
(d)   Golf courses.
(1)   If, following rezoning of land planned for golf course use to P-
2 preservation zoning district, either:
(A)   A grading permit has not been issued for the golf course within two years
of the rezoning; or
(B)   A grading permit that was issued within two years of the rezoning has
expired due to suspension or abandonment of work, or is revoked, then PRU
approval is required for the golf course.
(2)   Golf courses are permitted as a plan review use in the P-2 and resort
zoning districts only when consistent with the city’s development plans. Golf
courses in the P-2 and resort zoning districts will be deemed consistent with
the development plans only when situated on lands designated for preservation,
parks and recreation, or golf courses on the development plan land use maps.
(3)   Uses accessory to a golf course must be designed and scaled to meet only
the requirements of the members, guests, or users of the facility.
(4)   In addition to the general provisions of §
21-2.120-2, PRU approval of requests for golf courses may be based on the
additional criteria enumerated in § 21-5.70-8(a).
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.120-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-2.120-2 General provisions.
(a)   A proposed master plan spanning at least five years shall be submitted by
the applicant for a PRU and shall be accompanied by review and comment from all
applicable city, State, and federal planning and development agencies. The
application and proposed master plan shall encompass the entire lot or the
entirety of all lots for which the PRU is applied.
(b)   The master plan shall be approved by council resolution. The approved
master plan shall apply to the entire lot or the entirety of all lots for which
the PRU is approved. No uses or structures, other than the uses and structures
in the approved master plan, shall be permitted on the lot or lots. The master
plan may consist of both existing and future development. Future development in
the plan shall indicate general height and bulk concepts, land expansion,
landscaping, setbacks, and buffering of adjacent parcels.
(c)   Density, height, and yards shall be determined by taking into
consideration the surrounding land use, adopted land use policy, and applicable
zoning regulations.
(d)   Parking, loading, and sign requirements shall be specified in the
approval of the master plan.
(e)   The director shall approve drawings before building permits are issued,
in accordance with the approved master plan. Amendments to the plan, other than
those of minor impact, shall require council approval; the director may approve
minor amendments to the plan.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.120-2) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-2.120-3 Application requirements.
(a)   An applicant for a PRU shall submit to the director an application,
accompanied by:
(1)   A location map showing the development in relation to the surrounding
area;
(2)   A site plan drawn to scale showing:
(A)   Property lines and easements with dimensions and area;
(B)   Location, size, spacing, setbacks, and dimensions of all existing and
proposed buildings, structures, improvements, and utilities;
(C)   The building elevations, sections, and floor plan and site sections to
clearly define the character of the development;
(D)   Topographic information showing existing features and conditions, and
proposed grading;
(E)   Landscaping plans showing open spaces, planting, and trees;
(F)   Existing streets showing access to the project, proposed roads, and
parking layout with dimensions; and
(G)   Shoreline, shoreline setback lines, stream, and other setback lines.
(3)   Information regarding land use designations, surrounding land uses, and
development schedules;
(4)   Information on the following:
(A)   The manner in which the plan makes adequate provision for public
services, provides adequate control over vehicular traffic, and furthers the
amenities of light and air;
(B)   The relationship, beneficial and adverse, of the proposed development to
the neighborhood in which it is established;
(C)   Confirmation from applicable public agencies that sewer, water and
drainage facilities are or will be available and adequate, before the
construction of the proposed development;
(D)   Project justification; and
(E)   Existing and projected number of employees, teachers, students,
residents, or patients, as appropriate.
   (F)   Planned hours of operation.
(b)   No application for an amendment to an existing PRU, or for a new PRU to
supersede an existing PRU, shall be accepted by the director if:
(1)   The application, if approved, would result in a master plan spanning a
period that extends beyond the term of the master plan approved by the existing
PRU; and
(2)   One or more conditions of the existing PRU that are due to be performed
(other than conditions of a continuing nature whose performance is current)
have not been fully performed.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.120-3) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-2.130 Waiver of requirements.
(a)   A waiver of the strict application of the development or design standards
of this chapter may be granted by the director for the following:
(1)   Public or public/private uses and structures, communication towers,
communication support structures, and small, medium, or large utility
installations; provided that wind energy generation facilities are not eligible
for a waiver under this section;
(2)   To permit the creation of zoning lots designated for landscaping and open
space purposes that do not meet minimum zoning lot area or dimensions;
(3)   To permit the replacement of existing improvements on private property
when the improvements are rendered nonconforming through the exercise of
government’s power of eminent domain on or after October 22, 1986, which for
the purposes of this subdivision may also include requirements under
Chapter 14, Article 6, or the establishment of street setback lines;
(4)   To permit the retrofitting of improvements when the retrofitting is
required to comply with federal mandates, including but not limited to the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) or the National Environmental Protection
Act (NEPA); provided that the improvements could not otherwise be made without
conflicting with this chapter; and
(5)   In the residential, apartment, and apartment mixed-use zoning districts,
when a zoning lot is subject to a street setback line, the director may reduce
the front or rear yard requirement by up to 30 percent; provided that the
following conditions are satisfied:
(A)   The zoning lot does not meet applicable minimum development standards for
lot area, lot width, or lot depth, either in its current configuration or after
the street setback is taken; and
(B)   The appropriate agency or agencies concur in the reduction.
(b)   The granting of the waiver shall not, under the circumstances and
conditions applied in the particular case, adversely affect the health or
safety of persons, and shall not be materially detrimental to the public
welfare nor injurious to nearby property improvements. The burden of proof in
showing the reasonableness of the proposed waiver shall be on the applicant
seeking it.
(c)   This provision shall not be applicable to uses that fall under §
21-2.120.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.130) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 03-37,
25-2)
§ 21-2.140 Zoning adjustments.
   The purpose and intent of this section is to permit minor zoning adjustments
where practical difficulties or results inconsistent with the general purpose
of this chapter would occur from its strict literal interpretation. The
adjustment review process provides a mechanism by which regulations may be
modified to provide flexibility for unusual situations and to allow for
alternative ways to meet the purposes of this chapter, while continuing to
provide certainty and efficient processing for land use applications.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.140) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-2.140-1 Specific circumstances.
   The director may approve an adjustment from the requirements of this chapter
under the following circumstances.
(a)   Carports and garages.
(1)   When located in a residential zoning district, a one-car or two-car
carport or garage may encroach into required front or side yards, including
those in special districts, only under the following conditions:
(A)   No other viable alternative site exists relative to the location of an
existing dwelling (including additions), legally constructed prior to October
22, 1986, or to the topography of the zoning lot; and
(B)   The landowner shall authenticate the nonconformity of the existing
dwelling, carport, or garage, if necessary.
Any carport or garage covered by this subsection must not be converted to or be
used for a use other than a carport or garage.
(2)   The maximum horizontal dimensions for the carport or garage generally
must not exceed 20 feet by 20 feet; provided that the dimensions may be
reasonably increased to accommodate an existing retaining wall or similar
condition.
(b)   Energy-saving rooftop designs. Rooftop designs that incorporate energy-
saving features, including but not limited to vented ceilings or louvered
skylights, may extend above the height limit or height setback of the
underlying zoning district by not more than 5 feet; provided that:
(1)   The building is not a single-unit, two-unit, or duplex-unit dwelling; and
(2)   The proposal is subject to design review. The roofing treatment must be
attractive, give deference to surrounding design, and be an integral part of
the design scheme of the building.
(c)   Flag lot access width. Where unusual terrain or existing development does
not allow the required access drive, the director may:
(1)   Adjust the minimum access width to no less than 10 feet; and
(2)   Allow more than dual access to an access drive; provided that the
following criteria are met:
(A)   The appropriate government agencies do not object to the proposal;
(B)   No more than three flag stems or access drives are located adjacent to
one another, the access drives do not serve more than five dwelling units, and
the combined access drive pavement width does not exceed 32 feet; and
(C)   If more than dual access to a flag stem or access drive is proposed, the
design results in one common driveway and one curb cut to serve all lots
adjoining the flag stems.
(d)   Grade irregularities. Where unusual natural deviations occur in grade,
the director may adjust the building height envelope to permit reasonable
building design. An adjustment may be made only in accordance with the intent
of the pertinent district regulations (see
Figure 21-2.2).
Figure 21-2.2
Zoning Adjustment: Grade Irregularities
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-199.png]
(e)   Lanai enclosures. Lanais that are a part of buildings constructed on or
before October 22, 1986, that have reached the maximum permitted floor area,
may be enclosed if they meet all of the following criteria:
(1)   The enclosure meets a unified design scheme approved by either the
condominium association or the building owner, whichever is applicable;
(2)   Other lanais in the building have been similarly enclosed; and
(3)   Lanais that have already been enclosed have been done so legally.
(f)   Loading requirements—low-rise multi-unit dwellings. The director may
adjust or waive the loading requirement for low-rise multi-unit dwellings;
provided that:
(1)   The project consists of more than one building;
(2)   Buildings do not exceed three stories; and
(3)   There is sufficient uncovered parking and aisle or turnaround space to
accommodate occasional use for loading.
(g)   Off-street parking and loading requirements upon change in use.
(1)   Change in use on zoning lot with conforming parking and loading.
Notwithstanding
Article 6, if there is a change in use on a zoning lot, with no increase in
floor area, which would otherwise require the addition of no more than three
parking spaces or no more than one loading space, then the director may adjust
the number of additional parking or loading spaces required, subject to the
following conditions:
(A)   There are no reasonable means of providing the additional parking or
loading spaces that would otherwise be required, including but not limited to
joint use of parking facilities and remote parking facilities;
(B)   There was no previous change in use on the zoning lot to a use with
higher parking or loading standards during the five-year period immediately
preceding the change in use;
(C)   There was no previous grant of an adjustment from parking and loading
requirements on the zoning lot pursuant to this subdivision; and
(D)   The parking and loading will thereafter be deemed to be nonconforming.
(2)   Change in use on zoning lot with nonconforming parking and loading.
Notwithstanding §
21-4.110(e)(1), if there is a change in use on a zoning lot, with no increase
in floor area, which would otherwise require the addition of no more than three
parking spaces or no more than one loading space, nonconforming parking and
loading may be continued, with no additional parking or loading spaces being
required; subject to the following conditions:
(A)   There are no reasonable means of providing the additional parking or
loading spaces that would otherwise be required, including but not limited to
joint use of parking facilities and remote parking facilities;
(B)   There was no previous change in use on the zoning lot to a use with a
higher parking or loading standard during the five-year period immediately
preceding the change in use; and
(C)   There was no previous grant of an adjustment from parking and loading
requirements on the zoning lot pursuant to this subdivision or subdivision (1).
(h)   Rebuilding or expansion of a nonconforming ohana unit. Nonconforming
ohana units may be altered, enlarged, repaired, or rebuilt; provided that all
of the following conditions are satisfied:
(1)   The ohana unit is a nonconforming structure or dwelling unit. An ohana
unit will be deemed nonconforming when the building permit for an ohana unit
was issued, and any of the following circumstances apply:
(A)   The ohana unit is occupied by persons who are not related by blood,
marriage, or adoption to the family residing in the primary dwelling, and the
building permit for the ohana unit was issued before September 10, 1992;
(B)   A declaration of condominium property regime or declaration of horizontal
property regime was filed with either the State of Hawaii bureau of conveyances
or the State of Hawaii land court, or both, as appropriate, on or before
December 31, 1988; or
(C)   The ohana unit was legally established, but is no longer allowed pursuant
to § 21-5.50- 3(c)(4);
(2)   The building area of the ohana unit in combination with the building area
of the primary dwelling does not exceed the current maximum building area
development standard for the underlying zoning district;
(3)   The ohana unit complies with all other development standards for the
underlying zoning district, including off-street parking standards; and
(4)   Unless the ohana unit was lawfully established before December 31, 1988,
the owners shall comply with § 21-5.50-3(c)(3) prior to the issuance of any
building permit.
(i)   Accessory receive only antenna height. Accessory receive only antennas
may exceed the applicable zoning district height limit, subject to the
following conditions:
(1)   The zoning lot is not located in a residential zoning district where
utility lines are predominantly located underground;
(2)   The applicant shall provide evidence to the director that adequate
reception by the accessory receive only antenna, for the purposes for which the
accessory receive only antenna is designed, cannot be provided anywhere on the
zoning lot at or below the applicable zoning district height limit, and the
accessory receive only antenna must not extend above a height greater than what
is shown by the evidence provided to the director to be necessary to provide
adequate reception; provided that in no case may the accessory receive only
antenna extend more than 10 feet above the applicable zoning district height
limit; and
(3)   An accessory receive only antenna may be placed on top of an existing
structure that is nonconforming in height; provided that the accessory receive
only antenna must not extend above the height of the structure by more than 10
feet.
(j)   Residential height. The director may adjust the second plane of the
building height envelope up to a maximum of 35 feet, subject to the following
conditions:
(1)   The slope of the lot is greater than 40 percent;
(2)   There is no reasonable development alternative without an increase in the
height envelope; and
(3)   The zoning lot must be limited to dwelling use.
(k)   Retaining walls. The director may adjust the maximum height of a
retaining wall upon finding that additional height is necessary because of
safety, topography, subdivision design, or lot arrangement; provided that the
aesthetic impact of the wall would not be adverse to the neighborhood and
community as viewed from any street. The director may impose reasonable
conditions when granting this additional height, such as material used, color,
landscaping, terracing, setbacks, and offsets, as may be necessary to maintain
the general character of the area.
(l)   Rooftop height exemption. Rooftop structures that principally house
elevator machinery and air conditioning equipment may extend above the
applicable zoning district height limit for structures or portions of
structures; provided that all of the following conditions are satisfied:
(1)   If the elevator cab opens on the roof, machinery must not be placed above
the elevator housing;
(2)   The highest point of the rooftop structures must not exceed 5 feet above
the highest point of the equipment structures. Rooftop structures principally
housing elevator machinery or air conditioning equipment that were installed
under a building permit issued before February 9, 1993, will be permitted even
if they exceed the 18-foot limit of § 21-4.60(c)(1) so long as they do not
exceed 5 feet above the highest point of the equipment structure;
(3)   If the building is located in a special district, the special district
requirements will prevail;
(4)   The proposed rooftop structures will be subject to design review. The
design must be attractive, give deference to surrounding design, and be an
integral part of the design scheme of the building; and
(5)   Areas proposed to be covered by the rooftop structure will not be counted
as floor area; provided that they are not used for any purpose other than for
covering rooftop machinery. Areas used for purposes other than reasonable
aesthetic treatment will be counted as floor area.
(m)   Sign master plan. A sign master plan is a voluntary, optional alternative
to the strict sign regulations of this chapter, intended to encourage some
flexibility in order to achieve good design (including compatibility and
creativity), consistency, continuity, and administrative efficiency in the
utilization of signs within eligible sites. Under this alternative, and subject
to this subsection, the director may approve a sign master plan that permits
the exceptions to the sign regulations of this chapter set forth in subdivision
(2).
(1)   Eligibility. Developments with three or more principal uses on a zoning
lot, other than single-unit, two-unit, or duplex-unit dwellings, are eligible
for consideration of a zoning adjustment for a sign master plan. An applicant
must have the authority to impose the sign master plan on all developments on
the zoning lot.
(2)   Flexibility. The following exceptions to the sign regulations of this
chapter may be permitted pursuant to an approved sign master plan.
(A)   Physical characteristics. The maximum number of permitted signs, sign
area, and the height and physical dimensions of individual signs, may be
modified; provided that:
(i)   No sign may exceed any applicable standard relating to height or
dimension by more than 20 percent;
(ii)   The total permitted sign area for signs that are part of a sign master
plan may not be increased by more than 20 percent beyond the total sign area
permitted by the underlying sign regulations for the site; and
(iii)   The total number of signs that are part of a sign master plan may not
exceed 20 percent of the total number of signs permitted by the underlying sign
regulations for the site; provided that when computation of the maximum number
of permitted signs results in a fractional number, the number of allowable
signs will be the next highest whole number.
(B)   Sign types. The types of business signs permitted for ground floor
establishments may include hanging, marquee fascia, projecting, roof, and wall
signs.
(i)   When marquee fascia signs are used, the signs may be displayed above the
face of the marquee; provided that the signs must not exceed a height of more
than 36 inches above the marquee face.
(ii)   When wall signs are used, signs displayed as individual lettering placed
against a building wall are encouraged.
(C)   Sign illumination.
(i)   Where direct illumination is not otherwise permitted by the underlying
sign regulations for the site, sign copy or graphic elements of business or
identification signs for ground floor establishments may be directly
illuminated; provided that any remaining sign area must be completely opaque
and not illuminated.
(ii)   Signs for second floor establishments may be indirectly illuminated.
(D)   Sign location. An appropriate, consistent pattern for the placement of
regulated signs within the project site must be approved in the sign master
plan; provided that all signs must be located on the building containing the
identified establishment, and no ground sign may be located within a required
yard except as may be permitted by this chapter.
(E)   The standards and requirements for directional signs, information signs,
and parking lot traffic control signs may be established by the director, as
appropriate.
(3)   Sign master plan approvals. The director may approve a sign master plan
only upon a finding that, in addition to the criteria set forth in §
21-2.140-2, the following criteria have been satisfied:
(A)   The proposed sign master plan will accomplish the intent of this
subsection;
(B)   The size and placement of each sign will be proportional to and visually
balanced with the building facade of the side of the building on which the sign
is located;
(C)   All signs regulated by this chapter and maintained on the site will
feature the consistent application of not less than one of the following design
elements: materials, letter style, color, shape, or theme; and
(D)   Except as may be adjusted by the sign master plan, all signs regulated by
this chapter and maintained on the site must conform to this chapter.
The director may impose appropriate conditions and additional controls on the
approval of a sign master plan.
(4)   Implementation.
(A)   The director shall maintain a copy of the approved sign master plan for
each project to facilitate the expedited processing of sign permits for that
project. The director shall review each sign permit application for an
individual sign within an affected project for its conformity to the approved
sign master plan. Upon determining that the sign permit application conforms to
the approved sign master plan, the director shall issue the sign permit for the
sign.
(B)   Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, no sign may be maintained
on a site subject to an approved sign master plan unless the sign conforms to
the sign master plan. If a site has existing signs that will not conform to the
approved sign master plan, the master plan must specify a reasonable time
period, as approved by the director, for conversion of all existing signs to
the design scheme set forth in the approved master plan; provided that in no
event may the time period for full conformance exceed one year after the date
the sign master plan is approved.
(n)   Conversion of accessory structures. An existing, legally established
accessory structure constructed before September 14, 2015*, in the country or
residential district may be converted to an accessory dwelling unit and allowed
to exceed the maximum floor area established by § 21-5.50-3(a), or be exempted
from the off-street parking requirement established by §
21-6.20(a) and contained in
Table 21-6.1, subject to the following conditions:
(1)   The director shall find that viable constraints do not allow the
reduction of the floor area of the existing accessory structure; and
(2)   The director shall find that no feasible alternative off-street parking
site exists due to the placement of the structure on, or the topography of, the
zoning lot.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.140-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 99-
63, 03-37, 06-15, 09-5, 10-19, 15-41, 17-40, 20-41, 25-2)
Editor’s note:
   * “September 14, 2015” is substituted for “the effective date of this
ordinance.”
§ 21-2.140-2 Criteria.
(a)   A zoning adjustment shall be approved on a finding that the following
criteria have been met:
(1)   Approving the adjustment will meet the purpose and intent of the
regulation to be modified;
(2)   The proposal will not significantly detract from the livability or
appearance of the area, and is consistent with the desired character of the
area;
(3)   If more than one adjustment is being requested, the cumulative effect of
the adjustments results in a project that is still consistent with the overall
purpose and intent of the zoning district; and
(4)   Any impacts resulting from the adjustment are mitigated to the extent
practical.
(b)   An applicant may request a zoning adjustment under the specific
circumstances described in §
21-2.140-1. The adjustment request shall be filed with the department with
supporting materials describing the requested adjustment and documenting the
manner in which the proposed project qualifies for the adjustment and meets the
criteria specified in subsection (a). A request for an adjustment shall be
approved by the director on a finding that all criteria for the adjustment are
satisfied.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.140-2) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-2.150 Violation.
   Any approval or permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall comply with all
applicable requirements of this chapter. Failure to comply with conditions
imposed as part of any approval or permit, including variances from this
chapter, shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.150) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-2.150-1 Criminal prosecution.
(a)   Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be sentenced as
follows:
(1)   For a first offense, by a fine not exceeding $1,000 and either:
(A)   Thirty-two hours of community service, as authorized by and defined in
HRS § 706-605(1)(d); or
(B)   Forty-eight hours of imprisonment;
(2)   For a second conviction that occurs within five years of any prior
conviction for violation of this chapter, by a fine not exceeding $1,000 and
either:
(A)   Sixty-four hours of community service, as authorized by and defined in
HRS § 706-605(1)(d); or
(B)   Ninety-six hours of imprisonment; and
(3)   For a subsequent conviction that occurs within five years of any two
prior convictions under this chapter, by a fine of not less than $500 but not
exceeding $1,000 and either:
(A)   Not less than 64 hours but not exceeding 140 hours of community service
as authorized by and defined in HRS§ 706-605(1)(d); or
(B)   Not less than 96 hours but not exceeding 30 days’ imprisonment.
(b)   After a conviction for a first violation under this chapter, each further
day of violation shall constitute a separate offense if the violation is a
continuance of the subject of the first conviction.
(c)   The imposition of a fine under this section shall be controlled by the
Hawaii Penal Code relating to fines, HRS §§ 706-640 through 706-645.
(d)   The city may maintain an action for an injunction to restrain any
violation of this chapter and may take any other lawful action to prevent or
remedy any violation.
(e)   Any authorized personnel may arrest, without warrant, alleged violators
by issuing a summons or citation in accordance with the procedure specified in
this section. Nothing in this section shall be construed as barring such
authorized personnel from initiating prosecution by penal summons, by
complaint, by warrant or such other judicial process as is permitted by statute
or rule of court.
(f)   Any authorized personnel making an arrest for a violation of this chapter
may take the name and address of the alleged violator and shall issue to the
alleged violator a written summons or citation, notifying the alleged violator
to answer at a place and at a time provided in the summons or citation.
(g)   There shall be provided for use by authorized personnel a form of summons
or citation for use in citing violators of this chapter that does not mandate
the physical arrest of such violators. The form and content of such summons or
citation shall be as adopted or prescribed by the administrative judge of the
district court and shall be printed on a form commensurate with the form of
other summons or citations used in modern methods of arrest, so designed to
include all necessary information to make it valid under the laws and
regulations of the State of Hawaii and the City and County of Honolulu.
(h)   In every case when a citation is issued, the original of the citation
shall be given to the violator; provided that the administrative judge of the
district court may prescribe giving the violator a carbon copy of the citation
and provide for the disposition of the original and any other copies.
(i)   Every citation shall be consecutively numbered and each carbon copy shall
bear the number of its respective original.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.150-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-2.150-2 Administrative enforcement.
(a)   Enforcement authority. In lieu of or in addition to seeking criminal
enforcement pursuant to §
21-2.150-1, the director may seek enforcement against any person violating this
chapter, rules adopted by the director to administer this chapter, and the
conditions of any permits or approvals granted under this chapter by issuing a
written notice of violation and notice of order pursuant to this section.
(b)   Liability. If the director determines that more than one person is liable
for a violation, the director may issue one enforcement notice to all
responsible persons or separate enforcement notices to persons or groups of
persons that are responsible for the violation. Each person will be
independently liable for the full extent of the violation and responsible for
complying with the enforcement notice.
(c)   Service of enforcement notices issued by the director.
(1)   The director may serve an enforcement notice issued pursuant to this
section by registered or certified mail, with return receipt requested,
addressed to the last known address of each violator identified in the
enforcement action, or by delivering a copy of the enforcement notice to the
violator in person.
(2)   The director also may serve an enforcement notice issued pursuant to this
section by leaving a copy of the enforcement notice at the violator's
residence, place of employment, or usual place of business, or by physically
posting a copy of the enforcement notice in a prominent location on the
property in a conspicuous manner that is likely to be discovered; provided that
due diligence was used in attempting to serve the person personally or by
registered or certified mail.
(3)   If the director is not able to serve the enforcement notice by any of the
methods described in subdivisions (1) and (2), the director may serve the
enforcement notice on one or more violators by publishing a copy of the order
once each week for two consecutive weeks in a daily or weekly publication that
is in general circulation within the city.
Where one or more violators identified in an enforcement notice have the same
mailing address, place of residence, place of employment, or usual place of
business, the delivery of one copy of the enforcement notice to that place
shall be effective service upon all violators named in the enforcement notice
that may be served at the place the enforcement notice has been delivered.
(d)   Contents of the notice of violation. In addition to any other information
or requirements deemed appropriate by the director, the notice of violation
must include the following information:
(1)    Date of the notice of violation;
(2)    The name of the person noticed;
(3)   The address or location of the violation;
(4)    The specific ordinance, rule, or condition that has been violated;
(5)    A concise description of the violation;
(6)   A statement of the actions that are necessary to correct the violation;
(7)   A requirement that the violator correct the violation by a specified
date;
(8)   A statement of the penalties that will be imposed if the violation is not
corrected by the deadline for correction established pursuant to subdivision
(7); and
(9)   A requirement that the violator send a written notice to the director
reporting the correction of the violation when the violator believes the
violation has been corrected.
(e)   Contents of the notice of order. If the violation is not corrected by the
date specified in the notice of violation, the director may issue a notice of
order imposing penalties for failure to correct a violation.
(1)   In addition to any other information or requirements deemed appropriate
by the director, the notice of order must include a copy of the applicable
notice of violation issued by the director for the violation.
(2)    The notice of order may require the person to do any or all of the
following:
(A)   Cease and desist from the violation;
(B)   Correct the violation at the person's own expense before a date specified
in the order;
(C)   Pay a civil fine not to exceed $5,000 in the manner, at the place, and
before the date specified in the order; and
(D)   Pay a civil fine not to exceed $5,000 per day for each day in which the
violation persists beyond the date specified in paragraph (C), in the manner
and at the time and place specified in the order.
(3)   Notwithstanding the civil fines specified in subdivision (2)(C) and (D),
if the violation is a violation of any provision of this chapter relating to
the requirements for transient vacation units or bed and breakfast homes, then,
in addition to the requirements in subdivision (2)(A) and (B), the order may
require a person to do any or all of the following:
(A)   Pay a civil fine not to exceed $10,000 in the manner, at the place, and
before the date specified in the order; and
(B)   Pay a civil fine not to exceed $10,000 per day for each day in which the
violation persists beyond the date specified in paragraph (A) in the manner and
at the time and place specified in the order.
(4)   Notwithstanding the civil fines specified in subdivision (2)(C) and (D),
if the violation involves the construction or conversion of a structure in
violation of §
21-3.70-1(c)(3), relating to large dwelling units, then, in addition to the
requirements in subdivision (2)(A) and (B), the order may require a person to
do any or all of the following:
(A)   Pay a civil fine not to exceed $25,000 in the manner, at the place, and
before the date specified in the order; and
(B)   Pay a civil fine not to exceed $10,000 per day for each day in which the
violation persists beyond the date specified in paragraph (A) in the manner and
at the time and place specified in the order.
(5)   The order must advise the person that the order will become final 30 days
after the date of its mailing or delivery. The order must also advise that the
director’s action may be appealed to the zoning board of appeals.
(f)   Effect of the notice of order—right to appeal. The provisions of the
notice of order issued by the director under this section will become final 30
days after the date of the mailing or delivery of the order. The person may
appeal the notice of order to the zoning board of appeals as provided in
Charter § 6-1516 and §
21-1.40; provided that an appeal to the zoning board of appeals will not stay
any provision of the notice of order.
(g)   Judicial enforcement of the notice of order. The director may institute a
civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction for the enforcement of any
order issued pursuant to this section. Where the civil action has been
instituted to enforce the civil fine imposed by said order, the director need
only show that the notice of violation and order were served, that a civil fine
was imposed, the amount of the civil fine imposed and that the fine imposed has
not been paid.
(h)   Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, in addition to daily
civil fines, the director may impose a fine in an amount equal to the total sum
received by the owner, operator, or proprietor of a bed and breakfast home or
transient vacation unit from any impermissible rental activity during the
period in which the owner, operator, or proprietor was subject to daily fines.
(i)   Nothing in this section shall preclude the director from seeking any
other remedy available by law.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.150-2) (Am. Ords. 17-40, 19-18, 22-7, 24-13,
25-2)
§ 21-2.150-3 Depository of fees and civil penalties relating to bed and
breakfast homes or transient vacation units.
   Notwithstanding any other ordinance to the contrary, payments of fees and
civil penalties relating to bed and breakfast homes or transient vacation units
shall be deposited into a special account of the general fund, to be
appropriately named by the department of budget and fiscal services, and used
by the department of planning and permitting for expenses related to the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter relating to bed and breakfast
homes and transient vacation units.
(Added by Ord. 19-18)
ARTICLE 2A: HOSTING PLATFORMS
Sections
   
21-2A.10   Booking services
   
21-2A.20   Registration
   
21-2A.30   Reporting
   
21-2A.40   Penalties
§ 21-2A.10 Booking services.
(a)   It is unlawful for a person acting as, or on behalf of, a hosting
platform to provide and collect, or receive a fee for, booking services in
connection with any bed and breakfast home or transient vacation unit located
within the city if such bed and breakfast home or transient vacation unit is
not lawfully registered, permitted, or otherwise allowed as a bed and breakfast
home or transient vacation unit pursuant to this chapter at the time the bed
and breakfast home or transient vacation unit is booked. A hosting platform
shall exercise reasonable care to confirm that a bed and breakfast home or
transient vacation unit located within the city is lawfully registered,
permitted, or otherwise allowed as a bed and breakfast home or transient
vacation unit prior to providing, and collecting or receiving a fee for,
booking services.
(b)   Hosting platforms shall not collect or receive a fee, directly or
indirectly through an agent or intermediary, for facilitating or providing
services ancillary to a bed and breakfast home or transient vacation unit in
the city that is not lawfully registered, permitted, or otherwise allowed
pursuant to this chapter, including but not limited to insurance, concierge
services, catering, restaurant bookings, tours, guide services, entertainment,
cleaning, property management, or maintenance of the residential property or
unit.
(c)   Booking services provided by hosting platforms for hotel units or
timeshare units must include an identifying tax map key number for the property
on which the hotel unit or timeshare unit is located.
(Added by Ord. 19-18; Am. Ord. 22-7)
§ 21-2A.20 Registration.
(a)   It is unlawful for any hosting platform to provide booking services to
owners or operators of bed and breakfast homes or transient vacation units
located within the city without first registering with the department. In order
to register, a hosting platform shall provide a hosting platform registration
statement to the director, in a form prescribed by the director, pay a
registration fee of $100, and agree in writing:
(1)   To obtain written consent from all owners or operators of bed and
breakfast homes or transient vacation units located within the city for the
disclosure of the information required under §
21-2A.30; and
(2)   To furnish such information to the city in accordance with §
21-2A.30.
(b)   A hosting platform may cancel its registration under this section by
delivering written notice of cancellation to the director. The director may
cancel a hosting platform's registration under this section for cause,
including any violation of this article, by delivering written notice of
cancellation to the hosting platform no later than 90 days prior to the
effective date of cancellation. Nothing in this section relieves the owner or
operator of a bed and breakfast home or transient vacation unit located within
the city from the requirements set forth in §
21-5.730.
(Added by Ord. 19-18)
§ 21-2A.30 Reporting.
(a)   Subject to applicable laws, all hosting platforms registered pursuant to
§
21-2A.20 shall report to the director on a monthly basis, on the date and in
the electronic format specified by the director, for each bed and breakfast
home and transient vacation unit located within the city for which the hosting
platform provided booking services in the preceding month. The report must
include:
(1)   The names of the persons responsible for each listing;
   (2)    The address of each listing;
(3)   The transient accommodations tax identification number of the owner or
operator of the bed and breakfast home or transient vacation unit;
   (4)    The length of stay for each listing; and
(5)   The price paid for each stay.
(b)   The director may disclose such information to the appropriate State or
city officials to ensure compliance with this article, State tax laws, and
county tax ordinances, and any applicable land use laws and ordinances.
(Added by Ord. 19-18)
§ 21-2A.40 Penalties.
   If the director determines that a hosting platform is violating any
provision of this article, notwithstanding the civil fines specified in §§ 21-
2.150-2(e)(2)(C) and 21-2.150-2(e)(2)(D), the violator is subject to a civil
fine of not less than $1,000 and not more than $10,000 for each day that the
violation continues.
(Added by Ord. 19-18; Am. Ord. 22-7)
ARTICLE 3: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sections
   
21-3.10   Zoning district classifications and map designations
   
21-3.20   Zoning precinct classifications and map designations
   
21-3.30   Zoning maps and interpretations
   
21-3.40   Preservation districts—Purpose and intent
   
21-3.40-1   Preservation uses and development standards
   
21-3.50   Agricultural districts—Purpose and intent
   
21-3.50-1   Agricultural clusters
   
21-3.50-2   Agricultural cluster—Site standards
   
21-3.50-3   Agricultural cluster—Application requirements
   
21-3.50-4   Agricultural uses and development standards
   
21-3.60   Country district—Purpose and intent
   
21-3.60-1   Country clusters
   
21-3.60-2   Country cluster—Site standards
   
21-3.60-3   Country cluster—Application requirements
   
21-3.60-4   Country uses and development standards
   
21-3.70   Residential zoning districts—Purpose and intent
   
21-3.70-1   Residential uses and development standards
   
21-3.80   Apartment zoning districts—Purpose and intent
   
21-3.80-1   Apartment district uses and development standards
   
21-3.90   Apartment mixed-use districts—Purpose and intent
   
21-3.90-1   Apartment mixed-use district uses and development standards
   
21-3.100   Resort zoning district—Purpose and intent
   
21-3.100-1   Resort uses and development standards
   
21-3.110   Business districts—Purpose and intent
   
21-3.110-1   Business uses and development standards
   
21-3.120   Business mixed-use districts—Purpose and intent
   
21-3.120-1   BMX-4 business mixed-use special height controls
   
21-3.120-2   Business mixed-use district uses and development standards
   
21-3.130   Industrial zoning districts—Purpose and intent
   
21-3.130-1   Industrial uses and development standards
   
21-3.140   Industrial-commercial mixed-use district—Purpose and intent
   
21-3.140-1   Industrial-commercial mixed-use district uses and development
standards
Figures
   
21-3.1   Height Setbacks (P-2, Agricultural and Country Districts)
   
21-3.2   Heights on Sloping Lots (Country District)
   
21-3.3   A-2, A-3, AMX-2, AMX-3 District Height Setback
   
21-3.4   Resort District Height Setback
   
21-3.5   Transitional Heights (Business, BMX, IMX and All Industrial Districts)
   
21-3.6   Front Yards (B-2, BMX-3, BMX-4, IMX and All Industrial Districts)
   
21-3.7   Street Setbacks (B-2, BMX-3, I-2, I-3 and IMX Districts)
   
21-3.8   Front Yard BMX-4 District
   
21-3.9   65-Degree Angle Height Limit (BMX-4 District)
   
21-3.10   Height Measurement in Residential Districts
Tables
   
21-3.1   P-2, Agricultural and Country Districts Development Standards
   
21-3.2   Residential Zoning District Development Standards
   
21-3.3   Apartment and Apartment Mixed-Use Zoning District Development
Standards
   
21-3.4   Resort, Business and Business Mixed-Use Zoning District Development
Standards
   
21-3.5   Industrial and Industrial Mixed-Use Districts Development Standards
§ 21-3.10 Zoning district classifications and map designations.
   To carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter, the following
zoning districts are established:
Title Map Designation
Title                           Map Designation
Preservation                     
   Restricted                P-1
   Military and federal      F-1
   General                   P-2
Agricultural
   Restricted                AG-1
   General                   AG-2
Country                         C
                                R-20
                                R-10
Residential                     R-7.5
                                R-5
                                R-3.5
Apartment
   Low-density               A-1
   Medium-density            A-2
   High-density              A-3
Apartment Mixed-Use
   Low-density               AMX-1
   Medium-density            AMX-2
   High-density              AMX-3
Resort                          Resort
Business
   Neighborhood              B-1
   Community                 B-2
Business Mixed-Use
   Community                 BMX-3
   Central                   BMX-4
Industrial
   Limited                   I-1
   Intensive                 I-2
   Waterfront                I-3
Industrial-Commercial Mixed-Use IMX-1
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.10) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-3.20 Zoning precinct classifications and map designations.
   To carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter, the following
zoning precincts are established:
 
Title                    Map Designation
Waikiki Special District  
Apartment                Apartment precinct
Apartment mixed-use      Apartment mixed-use subprecinct
Resort mixed-use         Resort mixed-use precinct
Public                   Public precinct
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.20) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 17-40)
§ 21-3.30 Zoning maps and interpretations.
(a)   The director shall prepare zoning maps for the city. These maps shall be
numbered and titled as listed below and, on adoption by ordinance, they shall
be cited and referred to as follows:
Zoning Map No. Area
Zoning Map No. Area
1              Hawaii Kai
2              Kahala—Kuliouou
3              Moiliili—Kaimuki
4              Nuuanu—McCully
5              Kalihi—Nuuanu
6              Red Hill—Fort Shafter
7              Halawa—Pearl City
8              Waipahu
9              Waipio (Crestview)
10             Waipio (Mililani)
11             Wahiawa—Whitmore
12             Ewa Beach—Iroquois Point
13             Makakilo
14             Barber’s Point—Kahe—Nanakuli
15             Lualualei—Makaha
16             Makua—Kaena
17             Mokuleia—Waialua—Haleiwa
18             Kawailoa—Waialee
19             Kahuku—Laie
20             Hauula—Punaluu—Kaaawa
21             Kualoa—Waiahole—Kahaluu
22             Heeia—Kaneohe—Maunawili
23             Kailua—Lanikai—Keolu
24             Waimanalo
 
Upon adoption, the zoning designations shown on the map shall be the zoning
classification of all parcels on the map and shall supersede any previous
zoning classification. The zoning maps may also contain height limits for
certain identified parcels of land or land areas; when there is a difference
between height limits specified in this chapter and heights shown on the zoning
maps, the maps shall prevail.
(b)   Whenever uncertainty exists about the boundary lines of a district, the
following rules shall apply.
(1)   When a discrepancy exists between a district boundary shown on the
adopted zoning map and that which is described in the text of an ordinance
establishing the boundary, the text of the ordinance shall be the final
authority.
(2)   Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1), district boundaries that appear to
follow centerlines of streets, easements, railroad rights-of-way, waterways,
and similar features shall be construed as following such centerlines.
(3)   Where district boundaries appear to follow street, lot, property, or
other lines of similar nature, they shall be construed as following those
lines; provided that in the event of closure of a street or alley by the city,
where the district boundary is indicated as other than the centerline of such
street or alley, it shall be construed as having been at the centerline.
(4)   Where district boundaries appear parallel or perpendicular to, or appear
as extensions of centerlines, property lines or other features, they shall be
so construed.
(5)   Where district boundaries do not appear to follow centerlines, street,
lot, property, or other lines of similar nature or do not appear to be
extensions of such lines or are not described within any ordinance, the
location of these boundaries shall be determined by a measurement of distances
shown on the adopted zoning map according to its scale.
(6)   Where the street layout on the ground varies from the street layout on
the adopted zoning map, or other circumstances not covered by any of the above
situations, the director shall determine the location of the boundary in
question in accordance with the intent of the zoning ordinance.
(7)   Where district boundaries are along the ocean, the boundary shall be
construed to follow the shoreline as confirmed by the State surveyor.
(c)   Lands unclassified by the adopted zoning map and for which none of the
rules of interpretation are applicable shall be construed as being within the
P-2 general preservation district until otherwise rezoned.
(d)   The director shall preserve the adopted zoning maps and shall maintain
them in current form. The director shall see that the maps are updated as soon
as practicable after the effective date of any ordinance adopting an amendment,
and the ordinance number of each amendment shall be noted on the map. No person
shall make any change to the adopted zoning map except by authorization of the
director, in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in this
chapter.
(e)   The director may adjust boundary lines of a district or precinct under
the following conditions:
(1)   The change does not result in an increase or decrease in any zoning
district affecting more than 5 percent or one acre of any zoning lot, whichever
is less;
(2)   The resulting boundary adjustment is in conformance with the general plan
and development plan; and
(3)   The resulting boundary adjustment does not confer more than a 5 percent
net increase in development potential, as measured by the number of dwelling
units or floor area, as permitted by the applicable zoning districts.
The director shall notify in writing the property owners affected by the
boundary line adjustment.
(f)   The director may adjust boundary lines of a district or precinct to
coincide with a State land use commission boundary interpretation, when the
interpretation results in an increase in the more restrictive State land use
district. In determining the appropriate district or precinct, the director
shall take into account surrounding zoning and the intent of the affected State
land use district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.30) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-3.40 Preservation districts—Purpose and intent.
(a)   The purpose of the preservation districts is to preserve and manage major
open space and recreation lands, and lands of scenic and other natural resource
value.
(b)   It is intended that all lands within a State-designated conservation
district be zoned P-1 restricted preservation district.
(c)   The purpose of creating the F-1 military and federal preservation
district is to identify areas in military or federal government use, and to
permit the full range of military or federal government activities.
(d)   Should lands be removed from either the State-designated conservation
district or from federal jurisdiction, all uses, structures, and development
standards shall be as specified for the P-2 general preservation district.
(e)   It is also the intent that lands designated urban by the State, but well-
suited to the functions of providing visual relief and contrast to the city’s
built environment, or serving as outdoor space for the public’s use and
enjoyment, be zoned P-2 general preservation district. Areas unsuitable for
other uses because of topographical considerations related to public health,
safety, and welfare concerns shall also be placed in this district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.40) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-3.40-1 Preservation uses and development standards.
(a)   Within the P-1 restricted preservation district, all uses, structures,
and development standards shall be governed by the appropriate State agencies.
(b)   Within an F-1 military and federal preservation district, all military
and federal uses and structures shall be permitted.
(c)   Within the P-2 general preservation district, permitted uses and
structures shall be as enumerated in
Table 21-5.1.
(d)   Within the P-2 general preservation district, development standards shall
be as enumerated in
Table 21-3.1.
(e)   Additional development standards.
(1)   Height. The maximum height may be increased from 15 to 25 feet if height
setbacks are provided.
(2)   Height setbacks. Any portion of a structure exceeding 15 feet shall be
set back from every side and rear buildable area boundary line 1 foot for each
2 feet of additional height above 15 feet (see
Figure 21-3.1).
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.40-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-3.50 Agricultural districts—Purpose and intent.
(a)   The purpose of the agricultural zoning districts is to maintain a strong
agricultural economic base, to prevent unnecessary conflicts among incompatible
uses, to minimize the cost of providing public improvements and services, and
to manage the rate and location of physical development consistent with the
city’s adopted land use policies. To promote the viability and economic
feasibility of an existing agricultural operation, accessory agricultural uses
and secondary supporting uses may be permitted on the same site as an adjunct
to agricultural uses. The accessory agricultural uses and secondary supporting
uses must be compatible with the onsite agricultural operation and surrounding
land uses, and the onsite agricultural operation must be in existence prior to
the issuance of any land use permit or building permit for the accessory
agricultural use or secondary supporting use.
(b)   The intent of the AG-1 restricted agricultural zoning district is to
conserve and protect important agricultural lands for the performance of
agricultural functions by permitting only those uses that perpetuate the
retention of these lands in the production of food, feed, forage, fiber crops,
and horticultural plants. Only accessory agricultural uses and secondary
supporting uses that meet the above intent will be permitted in this zoning
district.
(c)   The following guidelines shall be used to identify lands that may be
considered for the AG-1 restricted agricultural district:
(1)   Lands that are within the State-designated agricultural district and
designated agricultural by adopted city land use policies;
(2)   Lands that are predominantly classified as prime or unique under the
agricultural lands of importance to the State system; and
(3)   Lands where a substantial number of parcels are more than 5 acres in
size.
(d)   The intent of the AG-2 general agricultural district is to conserve and
protect agricultural activities on smaller parcels of land.
(e)   The following guidelines shall be used to identify lands that may be
considered for the AG-2 general agricultural district:
(1)   Lands that are in the state-designated agricultural or urban district and
designated agricultural by adopted city land use policies;
(2)   Lands that are predominantly classified as other under the agricultural
lands of importance to the State of Hawaii system; and
(3)   Lands that are used or are suitable for agricultural purposes and where a
substantial number of parcels are less than 5 acres in size.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.50) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 02-63,
25-2)
§ 21-3.50-1 Agricultural clusters.
   To promote economy of services and utilities, and the most efficient use of
the remainder area for agricultural pursuits, agricultural clusters shall be
permitted in any agricultural district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.50-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-3.50-2 Agricultural cluster—Site standards.
(a)   The minimum land area required for an AG-1 zoning district agricultural
cluster is 15 contiguous acres. The minimum land area required for an AG-
2 zoning district agricultural cluster is 6 contiguous acres.
(b)   The maximum number of farm dwellings in an AG-1 zoning district
agricultural cluster may not exceed one unit per 5 acres. The maximum number of
farm dwellings in an AG-2 zoning district agricultural cluster may not exceed
one unit per 2 acres.
(c)   Within agricultural clusters, single-unit, two-unit, duplex-unit, and
multi-unit dwellings are permitted. Multi-unit dwellings may not exceed four
dwelling units in any structure.
(d)   Within an agricultural cluster, all principal, accessory, and conditional
uses and structures permitted within the AG-1 restricted agricultural zoning
district and AG-2 general agricultural zoning district are permitted, subject
to the minimum standards and conditions specified in this chapter for these
uses.
(e)   Within an agricultural cluster, each dwelling may be sited on a lot not
to exceed 5,000 square feet. For structures with more than one dwelling unit,
the maximum lot size is a multiple of 5,000 square feet per dwelling.
(f)   Height and yards are the same as permitted in AG-1 and AG-2 zoning
districts.
(g)   Parking, loading, and sign requirements are as specified in the approval
of the agricultural cluster plan.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.50-2) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-3.50-3 Agricultural cluster—Application requirements.
(a)   The application shall be accompanied by:
(1)   Project name;
(2)   A location map showing the project in relation to the surrounding area;
(3)   (A)   An analysis of agricultural use of the proposed cluster, based on
projected sales prices and terms, marketability, soils analysis, availability
of water, consideration of climate, rainfall, and other factors related to
agricultural productivity, sufficient to demonstrate that agricultural use will
constitute the primary activity undertaken on the land; and
(B)   The director shall refer the proposal for review and commentary of this
analysis to the State department of agriculture or appropriate soil and water
conservation district.
(4)   A site plan showing:
(A)   Metes and bounds of the site, prepared and certified by a registered
engineer or surveyor, including any deed restrictions;
(B)   Total area of project, and if applicable, lot layout and approximate
dimensions, lot number of each lot, area of each lot, proposed use of each lot,
and total number of lots;
(C)   Locations, names, dimensions, approximate gradients, and radius of curves
of existing and proposed streets within and adjacent to the project;
approximate location and area dimensions of existing and proposed easements;
existing and proposed drainage facilities; existing and proposed utilities,
including sewers, water, electric, telephone, and refuse;
(D)   Location, size, spacing, setbacks, and dimensions of all existing and
proposed structures and improvements, including the number and type of dwelling
units;
(E)   The shoreline, shoreline setback lines, beach access, and stream and
other setback lines, when applicable;
(F)   Location with notations, and the sizes of all parcels of land, including
streets, improvements, facilities, and easements, proposed to be dedicated to
the city, or whether the streets, improvements, facilities, and easements are
to be private; and
(G)   Finished condition to be achieved by proposed grading shown by contours,
cross-sections, spot elevations or other means, and estimated quantities of cut
and fill. Elevations shall be marked on such contours based on city data.
(5)   Verification by the board of water supply of the availability of
sufficient agricultural quality water to support agricultural use, whether the
water is to be supplied by the board or another water supplier;
(6)   Draft covenants, leases, agreements of sale, mortgages and other
instruments of conveyance requiring lot purchasers to maintain land in
agricultural use in conformity with federal, State, and city laws and
regulations, enforceable by the city and either by the applicant, lessee or
owner, or an association composed of all lot owners, and indicating applicable
laws and penalties for violation thereof. All subsequent sales of property,
lease, and rental agreements shall include these restrictions;
(7)   Notice of all restrictions contained in laws and regulations to be
provided to all prospective subdivision lot purchasers, in the sales agreement,
deeds, covenants, and other instruments of conveyance;
(8)   Notice that building permit applications shall include an agricultural
plan for farm dwellings, indicating how feasible agricultural use on the lots
will be carried out within a period not to exceed five years, to be provided in
the sales agreements, deeds, covenants, and other instruments of conveyance;
(9)   Other information and documentation as may be required by the director to
review and ensure feasible agricultural use within the agricultural cluster in
conformity with applicable federal, State, and city laws and regulations; and
(10)   Proposals for maintenance and conservation of all common elements.
(b)   All agricultural clusters shall be processed in accordance with §
21-2.110-1.
(c)   The director shall approve, modify, or deny the agricultural cluster
application based on whether the application meets the intent of the
agricultural district, the intent of agricultural clusters, and the applicant’s
compliance with requirements of other government agencies.
(d)   The director shall approve final drawings before issuance of building
permits in accordance with the approved agricultural cluster plan. Before
approval of the agricultural cluster plan final drawings by the director,
certified deed covenants or condominium property regime documents, or both,
binding any lessees or buyers to the conditions of approval imposed by the
director shall be submitted to the department.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.50-3) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-3.50-4 Agricultural uses and development standards.
(a)   Within the agricultural districts, permitted uses and structures shall be
as enumerated in
Table 21-5.1.
(b)   Within the agricultural districts, development standards shall be as
enumerated in
Table 21-3.1.
(c)   Additional development standards.
(1)   Height. The maximum height may be increased from 15 to 25 feet if height
setbacks are provided.
(2)   Height setbacks. Any portion of a structure exceeding 15 feet must be set
back from every front, side, and rear buildable area boundary line 1 foot for
each 2 feet of additional height above 15 feet (see
Figure 21-3.1).
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.50-4) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 17-40)
§ 21-3.60 Country district—Purpose and intent.
(a)   The purpose of the country district is to recognize and provide for areas
with limited potential for agricultural activities, but for that the open space
or rural quality of agricultural lands is desired. The district is intended to
provide for some agricultural uses, low density residential development, and
some supporting services and uses.
(b)   It is the intent that basic public services and facilities be available
to support the district, but that the full range of urban services at urban
standards need not be provided. Typically, the country district would be
applied to areas outside the primary and secondary urban centers, that are
identified by city-adopted land use policies.
(c)   The following guidelines shall be used to identify lands that may be
considered for this district:
(1)   Lands that are within the State-designated urban district and designated
either agricultural or residential by adopted city land use policies;
(2)   Lands that are not predominately classified as prime, unique, or other
under the agricultural lands of importance to the State system;
(3)   Lands where a substantial number of existing parcels are less than 2
acres in size; and
(4)   Lands where existing public facility capacities preclude more intense
development.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.60) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-3.60-1 Country clusters.
   To promote economy of services and utilities and to encourage the retention
of large tracts of open space or agricultural lands that contribute to rural
character, country clusters shall be permitted in any country district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.60-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-3.60-2 Country cluster—Site standards.
(a)   The minimum land area required for a country cluster is 3 contiguous
acres.
(b)   The maximum number of dwelling units in a country cluster may not exceed
one per 1 acre.
(c)   Within country clusters, single-unit, two-unit, duplex-unit, and multi-
unit dwellings are permitted. Multi- unit dwellings may not exceed four
dwelling units in any structure.
(d)   Within a country cluster, all principal, accessory, and conditional uses
and structures permitted within the country zoning district and all country
zoning district development standards apply, except for those relating to yards
and lot dimensions. Conditional uses will be subject to the standards in
Article 4.
(e)   The minimum size of a lot of record for dwellings is 5,000 square feet.
The following development standards apply to dwelling lots:
(1)   Front yards must be a minimum of 10 feet; and
(2)   Side and rear yards must be a minimum of 5 feet.
(f)   Parking, loading, and sign requirements must be specified in the approval
of the country cluster plan.
(g)   All other underlying zoning district development standards apply.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.60-2) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-3.60-3 Country cluster—Application requirements.
(a)   The application shall be accompanied by:
(1)   A project name;
(2)   A location map showing the project in relation to the surrounding area,
and the location of all major community facilities within a 0.5-mile radius of
the project;
(3)   A prose description of the project, including objectives of the cluster,
unique site conditions, and development schedule;
(4)   A site plan showing:
(A)   Metes and bounds of the site, prepared and certified by a registered
engineer or surveyor, including any deed restrictions;
(B)   Total area of project, and if applicable, lot layout and approximate
dimensions, lot number of each lot, area of each lot, proposed use of each lot,
and total number of lots;
(C)   Locations, names, dimensions, approximate gradients, and radius of curves
of existing and proposed streets within and adjacent to the project;
approximate location and area dimensions of existing and proposed easements;
existing and proposed drainage facilities; and existing and proposed utilities,
including sewers, water, electric, telephone, and refuse;
(D)   Approximate location and general description of any historical or
significant landmarks or other natural features, trees with a trunk diameter of
6 inches or more at 5 feet above ground, and an indication of the proposed
retention or disposition of such features;
(E)   Location, size, spacing, setbacks, and dimensions of all existing and
proposed structures and improvements, including the number and type of dwelling
units;
(F)   The shoreline, shoreline setback lines, beach access, and stream and
other setback lines, when applicable; and
(G)   Location with notations, and the sizes of all parcels of land, including
streets, improvements, facilities, and easements proposed to be dedicated to
the city; or whether the streets, improvements, facilities, and easements are
to be private;
(5)   Other information and documentation as may be required by the director to
review and ensure that the proposed project is in conformity with applicable
federal, State, and city laws and regulations; and
(6)   Proposals for maintenance and conservation of all common elements.
(b)   Country clusters shall be processed in accordance with §
21-2.110-1.
(c)   The director shall approve, modify, or deny the country cluster
application based on whether the application meets the intent of the country
district, the intent of the country cluster provision, and the applicant’s
compliance with requirements of other government agencies.
(d)   The director shall approve final drawings before issuance of building
permits in accordance with the approved site plan. Before approval of the
country cluster final drawings by the director, certified deed covenants or
condominium property regime documents binding any lessees or buyers to the
conditions of approval imposed by the director shall be submitted to the
department.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.60-3) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-3.60-4 Country uses and development standards.
(a)   Within the country district, permitted uses and structures shall be in
accordance with
Table 21-5.1.
(b)   Within the country district, development standards shall be in accordance
with
Table 21-3.1.
(c)   Additional development standards.
(1)   Height. The maximum height may be increased from 15 to 25 feet if height
setbacks are provided.
(2)   Height setbacks. Any portion of a structure exceeding 15 feet shall be
set back from every side and rear buildable area boundary line 1 foot for each
2 feet of additional height above 15 feet (see
Figure 21-3.1).
(3)   Structures on lots with a slope of 15 percent or more shall be governed
by a maximum building envelope running parallel to grade at 30 feet in height
measured vertically; and that intersects vertical front, rear and side yard
planes, each 20 feet in height set at the respective buildable area boundary
line. These intersections shall each be made at an angle of 60 degrees measured
from the top of the respective yard plane (see
Figure 21-3.2).
Table 21-3.1
P-2, Agricultural, and Country Districts Development Standards
Development Standard District
                     P-2 AG-1 AG-2 Country
Table 21-3.1
P-2, Agricultural, and Country Districts Development Standards
Development Standard  District
                      P-2          AG-1         AG-2          Country
                                                3 for major
Minimum lot area                                animal
(acres)               5            5            raising, 2    1
                                                for all other
                                                uses
Minimum lot width and 200          150          150           100
depth (feet)
Yards   Front         30           15           15            15
(feet): Side and rear 15           10           10            10
Maximum building area
(percent of zoning    5            102          102           252
lot)
Maximum height        15-25        15-253       15-253        15-30
(feet)1
Height setbacks       per §       per §       per §        per §
                      21-3.40-1(e) 21-3.50-4(c) 21-3.50-4(c)  21-3.60-4(c)
1   Heights above the minima of the given range may require height
setbacks or may be subject to other requirements. See the appropriate
section for the zoning district for additional development standards
concerning height.
2   For nonagricultural structures.
3   Fifteen feet for nonagricultural structures and dwellings; up to 25
feet are permitted if height setbacks are provided.
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.60-4) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-3.70 Residential zoning districts—Purpose and intent.
(a)   The purpose of the residential zoning districts is to allow for a range
of residential densities. The primary use is for dwellings. Other types of
dwellings may also be allowed, including zero lot line and cluster
arrangements. Non-dwelling uses that support and complement residential
neighborhood activities are also permitted.
(b)   The intent of the R-20 and R-10 zoning districts is to provide areas for
large lot developments. These areas would be located typically at the outskirts
of urban development, and may be applied as a transitional district between
preservation, agricultural, or country zoning districts, and urban zoning
districts. They would also be applied to lands where residential use is
desirable but some development constraints are present.
(c)   The intent of the R-7.5, R-5, and R-3.5 zoning districts is to provide
areas for urban residential development. These districts would be applied
extensively throughout the city.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.70) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-3.70-1 Residential uses and development standards.
(a)   Within the residential zoning districts, permitted uses and structures
are as set forth in
Table 21-5.1.
(b)   Within the residential zoning districts, development standards are as set
forth in
Table 21-3.2.
(c)   Additional development standards.
(1)   Maximum height. The maximum height of structures is determined by the
building envelope created as the result of the intersection of two planes. The
first plane is measured horizontally across the parcel at 25 feet above the
high point of the buildable area boundary line. The second plane runs parallel
to grade, as described in §
21-4.60(b), measured at a height of 30 feet. If the two planes do not
intersect, then the building envelope is determined by the first plane (see
Figure 21-3.10).
(2)   Height setbacks.
(A)   Any portion of a structure exceeding 15 feet must be set back from every
side and rear buildable area boundary line 1 foot for each 2 feet of additional
height over 15 feet (see
Figure 21-3.10); and
(B)   Any portion of a structure exceeding 20 feet must be set back from the
front buildable area boundary line 1 foot for every 2 feet of additional height
over 20 feet.
(3)   Except for cluster housing and planned development housing developed
pursuant to § 21-8.50, for zoning lots with dwelling units:
(A)   The maximum density is a floor area ratio of 0.7.
(B)   The number of wet bars in each dwelling unit may not exceed one.
(C)   The number of laundry rooms in each dwelling unit may not exceed one.
(D)   The number of bathrooms in each dwelling unit may not exceed the
following:
 
Zoning lot size (square Number of bathrooms per dwelling unit may not exceed:
fee)                    One dwelling unit on zoning Two or more dwelling units
                        lot                         on zoning lot
Up to 6,999             4                           2
7,000 to 9,999          6                           3
10,000 and up           8                           4
 
If the dwelling unit is an accessory dwelling unit, this paragraph should not
be construed to waive any requirement under § 21-5.50-3(a).
(E)   The conversion or alteration of a wet bar, laundry room, or bathroom is
prohibited unless the conversion or alteration is specifically allowed under a
valid building permit.
(F)   The conversion of a portion of a structure that is excluded from the
calculation of floor area pursuant to §
21-10.1 to a portion of the structure that is included in the calculation of
floor area is prohibited unless the conversion is allowed under a valid
building permit and complies with the applicable standards of this subdivision.
(G)   For dwelling units constructed pursuant to building permits applied for
after May 1, 2019, the impervious surface area of a zoning lot may not exceed
75 percent of the total zoning lot area.
(H)   If the floor area ratio exceeds 0.6, the following additional standards
apply:
(i)   Side and rear yards.
(aa)   In the R-3.5 zoning district, side and rear yards must be at least 8
feet; and
(bb)   In the R-5, R-7.5, R-10, and R-20 zoning districts, side and rear yards
must be at least 11 feet.
(ii)   Each unit in the dwelling must be owner-occupied, and the occupant shall
deliver to the department evidence of a real property tax home exemption for
the subject property prior to issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy.
(iii)   Subsequent inspections.
(aa)   Upon the completion of construction and the determination by the
department that the dwelling unit complies with all applicable codes and other
laws, conforms to the plans and requirements of the applicable building permit,
and is in a condition that is safe and suitable for occupancy, the department
may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy that is effective for a period
of two years after issuance;
(bb)   During the two-year period that a temporary certificate of occupancy is
in effect, the department may, with reasonable notice to the holder of the
building permit, conduct periodic inspections of the dwelling unit to confirm
that it is in the same structural form as when the temporary certificate of
occupancy was issued; and
(cc)   At the end of the two-year period that a temporary certificate of
occupancy is in effect, the department may, upon final inspection, issue a
certificate of occupancy for the dwelling unit and close the building permit.
(Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 19-3, 20-43, 25-2)
Table 21-3.2
Residential Zoning District Development Standards
Development Standard District
                     R-3.5 R-5 R-7.5 R-10 R-20
Table 21-3.2
Residential Zoning District Development Standards
Development Standard     District
                         R-3.5 R-5          R-7.5         R-10          R-20
             Single-unit
             dwelling,   3,500 5,000        7,500         10,000        20,000
Minimum lot  and other
area (square uses
feet)        Two-unit    7,000 7,500        14,000        15,000        25,000
             dwelling
             Duplex-unit 3,500 3,750        7,000         7,500         12,500
             dwelling
                                                          65 for
                                            35 per        single-unit,
Minimum lot width and    30 per duplex-unit duplex-unit   two-unit, and
depth (feet)             dwelling, 50 for   dwelling, 65  duplex-unit   100
                         other uses         for other     dwellings,
                                            uses          100 for other
                                                          uses
             Front       10 for single-unit, two-unit, and duplex-unit
                         dwellings, 30 for other uses
Yards                                                     5 for single-unit,
(feet):      Side and    5 for single-unit, two-unit, and two-unit, and
             rear        duplex-unit dwellings1, 15 for   duplex-unit
                         other uses                       dwellings1, 15 for
                                                          other uses
Maximum building area    50% of the zoning lot
Maximum height (feet)2   25-30
Height setbacks          per §
                         21-3.70-1(c)
1   For duplex-unit dwelling zoning lots, 5 feet for any portion of any
structure not located on the common property line; the required side yard is
zero feet for that portion of the lot containing the common wall.
2   Heights above the minima of the given range may require height setbacks or
may be subject to other requirements. See the appropriate section for the
zoning district for additional development standards concerning height.
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.70-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 15-41,
25-2)
§ 21-3.80 Apartment zoning districts—Purpose and intent.
(a)   The purpose of the apartment zoning districts is to allow for a range of
apartment densities and a variety of living environments. The predominant uses
include multi-unit dwellings, such as common wall housing, walkup apartments,
and high-rise apartments. Uses and activities that complement apartment use are
permitted, including limited social services.
(b)   The intent of the A-1 low density apartment zoning district is to provide
areas for low density, multi-unit dwellings. It may be applied as a buffer
between residential zoning districts and other more intense, noncompatible
districts, and would be applicable throughout the city.
(c)   The intent of the A-2 medium density apartment zoning district is to
provide areas for medium density, multi-unit dwellings. It is intended
primarily for concentrated urban areas where public services are centrally
located and infrastructure capacities are adequate.
(d)   The intent of the A-3 high density apartment zoning district is to
provide areas for high density, high-rise, multi-unit dwellings. It is intended
for central urban core areas where public services and large infrastructure
capacities are present.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.80) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-3.80-1 Apartment district uses and development standards.
(Within the apartment districts, permitted uses and structures are as set forth
in
Table 21-5.1.
(b)   Within the apartment districts, development standards are as set forth in
Table 21-3.3.
(c)   Additional development standards.
(1)   Except for necessary access drives and walkways, all yards must be
landscaped.
(2)   Height setbacks. In the A-2 and A-3 districts, for any portion of a
structure over 40 feet in height, additional side and rear setbacks must be
provided as follows:
(A)   For each 10 feet of additional height or portion thereof, an additional
1-foot setback must be provided; and
(B)   The additional setback pursuant to paragraph (A) must be a continuous
plane from the top of the structure to the height of 40 feet above grade (see
Figure 21-3.3).
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.80-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 20-41)
§ 21-3.90 Apartment mixed-use districts—Purpose and intent.
   The purpose of the apartment mixed-use districts is to allow some commercial
uses in apartment neighborhoods. The additional commercial uses shall be
permitted under varying intensities and are intended to support the daily and
weekly commercial service needs of the neighborhood, conserve transportation
energy by lessening automobile dependency, create more diverse neighborhoods,
and optimize the use of both land and available urban services and facilities.
Mixing may occur horizontally and vertically, but controls are established to
maintain the character of these neighborhoods primarily as apartment
neighborhoods.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.90) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-3.90-1 Apartment mixed-use district uses and development standards.
(a)   Within the apartment mixed-use districts, all uses and structures are as
set forth in
Table 21-5.1.
(b)   Within the apartment mixed-use districts, development standards are as
set forth in
Table 21-3.3.
(c)   Additional development standards.
(1)    Except for necessary access drives and walkways, all yards must be
landscaped.
(2)   Height setbacks. In the AMX-2 and AMX-3 districts, for any portion of a
structure over 40 feet in height, additional side and rear setbacks must be
provided as follows:
(A)   For each 10 feet of additional height or portion thereof, an additional
1-foot setback must be provided; and
(B)   The additional setback must be a continuous plane from the top of the
structure to the height of 40 feet above grade (see
Figure 21-3.3).
(3)    Commercial use density and location.
(A)   The floor area of any use marked with a superscript1 under
Table 21-5.1 , either occurring as a single use on a zoning lot or in
combination with other uses, must not exceed the FAR as provided under
Table 21-3.3, and such floor area will be counted as part of the total FAR
allowed.
(B)   Where commercial uses are integrated with dwelling uses, pedestrian
access to the dwellings must be physically, mechanically, or technologically
independent from other uses and must be designed to enhance privacy for
residents and their guests. No floor above the ground floor may be used for
both dwelling and commercial purposes.
Table 21-3.3
Apartment and Apartment Mixed-Use Zoning District Development Standards
Development Standard District
                     A-1 A-2 A-3 AMX-1 AMX-2 AMX-3
Table 21-3.3
Apartment and Apartment Mixed-Use Zoning District Development Standards
Development      District
Standard         A-1    A-2       A-3       AMX-1       AMX-2       AMX-3
Minimum lot area 7,500  10,000    15,000    7,5002      10,0002     15,0002
(square feet)1
Minimum lot
width and depth  70     70        70        70          70          70
(feet)1
Yards   Front    10     10        10        10          10          10
(feet): Side and 54  or 54  or 10 54  or 10 54  or 10   54  or 10   54  or 10
        rear3    10
Maximum                                     0.3 see §  0.4 see §  0.6 see §
commercial use   n/a                        21-3.90-1   21-3.90-1   21-3.90-1
density (FAR)                               (c)         (c)         (c)
                 Lot area (sq. ft.)         Requirement
Maximum building Less than 7,500            60% of zoning lot
area             7,500-20,000               50% of zoning lot
                 Over 20,000                40% of zoning lot
Maximum height   30     per zoning map      30          per zoning map
(feet)5
Height setbacks  none   per §              none        per §
                        21-3.80-1(c)                    21-3.90-1(c)
Maximum density  Lot area (sq.    FAR calculation
(FAR) for A-     ft.)
1 and AMX-       Less than 10,000 FAR = (.00003 x lot area) + 0.3
1 zoning         10,000 - 40,000  FAR = (.00001 x lot area) + 0.5
districts based
on zoning lot    Over 40,000      FAR = 0.9
size
Maximum density  Lot area (sq.    FAR calculation
(FAR) for A-     ft.)
2 and AMX-       Less than 10,000 FAR = (.00009 x lot area) + 0.4
2 zoning         10,000 - 40,000  FAR = (.00002 x lot area) + 1.1
districts based
on zoning lot    Over 40,000      FAR = 1.9
size
Maximum density  Lot area (sq.    FAR calculation
(FAR) for A-     ft.)
3 and AMX-       Less than 10,000 FAR = (.00014 x lot area) + 0.6
3 zoning         10,000 - 20,000  FAR = (.00004 x lot area) + 1.6
districts based  20,000 - 40,000  FAR = (.00002 x lot area) + 2.0
on zoning lot    Over 40,000      FAR = 2.8
size
1   There is no minimum lot area, width, or depth for remote parking
facilities.
2   There is no minimum lot area for remote parking facilities.
3   Five feet for single-unit, two-unit, and duplex-unit dwellings and 10 feet
for other uses.
4   For duplex-unit dwelling zoning lots, 5 feet for any portion of any
structure not located on the common property line; the required side yard is
zero feet for that portion of the lot containing the common wall.
5   Heights for single-unit and two-unit dwellings must comply with residential
height and height setback requirements.
n/a = Not applicable
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.90-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 17-55,
20-41, 25-2)
§ 21-3.100 Resort zoning district—Purpose and intent.
   The purpose of the resort zoning district is to provide areas for visitor-
oriented destination centers. Primary uses are lodging units and hotels and
multi-unit dwellings. Retail and business uses that service visitors are also
permitted. This zoning district is intended primarily to serve the visitor
population, and should promote a Hawaiian sense of place.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.100) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-3.100-1 Resort uses and development standards.
(a)   Within the resort district, permitted uses and structures shall be as
enumerated in
Table 21-5.1.
(b)   Within the resort district, development standards shall be as enumerated
in
Table 21-3.4.
(c)   Additional development standards.
(1)   Except for necessary access drives and walkways, all front yards shall be
landscaped. Within 10 feet of the property line, side and rear yards shall be
maintained in landscaping, except for necessary access drives and walkways.
(2)   Optional yard siting. Parking lots and garages may extend to side and
rear property lines; provided that the following requirements are met:
(A)   An area or areas of open space equivalent to the area to be used for
parking or accessory use structures are provided elsewhere on the zoning lot.
This open space shall be maintained in landscaping, except for drives or
walkways necessary for access to adjacent streets. Parking may overhang the
open space up to 3 feet if wheel stops are installed. A minimum of 50 percent
of the open space shall be contiguous to the street frontage abutting the
zoning lot;
(B)   Any parking floor in the 10 feet adjacent to the property line shall not
be more than 4 feet above existing grade; and
(C)   Landscaping required under §
21-4.70 is provided and maintained.
(3)   Height setbacks. For any portion of a structure over 30 feet in height,
additional side and rear setbacks shall be provided; for each 10 feet of
additional height or portion thereof, an additional 1-foot setback shall be
provided. The additional setback shall be a continuous plane from the top of
the structure to the height of 30 feet above grade (see
Figure 21-3.4).
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.100-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-3.110 Business districts—Purpose and intent.
(a)   The purpose of the business districts is to set aside areas for
commercial and business activities to meet and support the economic growth of
the city. The districts provide for the buying and selling of goods and
services, the transportation and distribution of commodities, and other
complementary economic activities. Other uses that are supportive of or
compatible with business activities are also permitted. These districts help to
ensure a favorable business climate and support the economic and social well-
being of city residents.
(b)   The intent of the B-1 neighborhood business district is to provide
relatively small areas that serve the daily retail and other business needs of
the surrounding population. It is intended that this district be generally
applied to areas within or adjacent to urban residential areas, along local and
collector streets, but not along major travel routes or on a large scale basis.
It would also be applied to rural and urban fringe town centers that may or may
not be located along major travel routes.
(c)   The intent of the B-2 community business district is to provide areas for
community-wide business establishments, serving several neighborhoods, and
offering a wider range of uses than is permitted in the B-1 district. The
intent is to apply this district to areas conveniently accessible by vehicular
and pedestrian modes and served by adequate public facilities. Typically, this
district would be applied to lots along major streets and in centrally located
areas in urban and urban fringe areas.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.110) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-3.110-1 Business uses and development standards.
(a)   Within the business districts, permitted uses and structures shall be as
enumerated in
Table 21-5.1.
(b)   Within the business districts, development standards shall be as
enumerated in
Table 21-3.4.
(c)   Additional development standards.
(1)   Except for necessary access drives and walkways, all yards must be
landscaped.
(2)   B-1 District transitional height setback. Where a zoning lot adjoins a
zoning lot in a residential district, the residential district height setbacks
will be applicable at the buildable area boundary line of the adjoining side of
the B-1 zoning lot (see
Figure 21-3.5).
(3)   B-2 District height setbacks. Within the B-2 district, any portion of a
structure over 40 feet in height must have additional height setbacks as
follows:
(A)   For each 10 feet of additional height or portion thereof, an additional
1-foot setback must be provided; and
(B)   The additional setback must be a continuous plane from the top of the
structure to the height of 40 feet above grade (see
Figure 21-3.3).
(4)   B-2 District transitional height setback.
(A)   Where a zoning lot adjoins a zoning lot in a residential, A-1 or AMX-
1 district, the residential district height setback will be applicable at the
buildable area boundary line of the adjoining side of the B-2 zoning lot (see
Figure 21-3.5).
(B)   Where a zoning lot adjoins a zoning lot in an A-2, A-3, AMX-2, AMX-3, or
resort district, no portion of a structure may exceed 40 feet in height along
the buildable area boundary line on the adjoining side of the B-2 zoning lot,
provided that additional height will be permitted if the additional height is
set back 1 foot from the buildable area boundary line for each 10 feet in
height or fraction thereof. This setback must be a continuous plane from the
top of the structure to the beginning of the additional height (see
Figure 21-3.5).
(5)   Open space bonus. Within the B-2 district:
(A)   For each square foot of public open space provided, 5 square feet of
floor area may be added, exclusive of required yards;
(B)   For each square foot of arcade area provided, 3 square feet of floor area
may be added, exclusive of required yards; and
(C)   Maximum density with open space bonuses cannot exceed the FAR as provided
under
Table 21-3.4.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.110-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 17-55)
§ 21-3.120 Business mixed-use districts—Purpose and intent.
(a)   The purpose of the business mixed-use districts is to recognize that
certain areas of the city have historically been mixtures of commercial and
residential uses, occurring vertically and horizontally, and to encourage the
continuance and strengthening of this pattern. It is the intent to provide
residences in very close proximity to employment and retail opportunities,
provide innovative and stimulating living environments, and reduce overall
neighborhood energy consumption.
(b)   The intent of the BMX-3 community business mixed-use districts is to
provide areas for both commercial and residential uses outside of the central
business mixed-use district, and at a lower intensity than the central business
mixed-use district. Typically, this district would be applied to areas along
major thoroughfares adjacent to B-2, BMX-4, A-3, AMX-2, and AMX-3 zoning
districts. It is also intended that it be applied to areas where the existing
land use pattern is already a mixture of commercial and residential uses,
occurring horizontally or vertically, or both.
(c)   The intent of the BMX-4 central business mixed-use district is to set
apart that portion of Honolulu that forms the city’s center for financial,
office and governmental activities, and housing. It is intended for the
downtown area and not intended for general application. It provides the highest
land use intensity for commerce, business, and housing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.120) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-3.120-1 BMX-4 business mixed-use special height controls.
(a)   Any development that is proposed to exceed a height limit of 350 feet
shall comply with the following.
(1)   Minimum project size. The minimum project size shall be 35,000 square
feet.
(2)   Site plan. The request for additional height shall include a proposed
site plan, that shall include the location and height of building towers, and
shall take into consideration adjacent uses and structures. Specifically, the
following principles shall be reflected in the site plan, and the applicant
shall demonstrate how these principles are being met:
(A)   Building towers shall not significantly obstruct or intrude on adopted
public views;
(B)   Proposed open spaces shall complement and relate to adjacent open spaces;
(C)   Ground level parking lots and structures should not front streets. Where
this is not possible, canopy and vertical form trees, hedges, and other
landscaping elements shall be provided to visually screen them; and
(D)   The additional tower height shall not unreasonably block the provision of
light and air to other buildings and public open spaces, nor obliterate direct
exposure to the sun in any given 24-hour period.
(3)   Public open space. A minimum of 35 percent of the lot area shall be
devoted to public open space in accordance with
Table 21-3.4.
(4)   Public views. The additional tower height shall not significantly intrude
on any adopted public views, including the view of the central business
district from the Punchbowl lookouts.
(5)   Pedestrian orientation. Project design at the ground level shall reflect
a strong pedestrian orientation, especially fronting streets. Contributing
elements include but are not limited to:
(A)   Arcades, with at least one-half of the arcade perimeter open or devoted
to entrances and show windows;
(B)   Public open spaces, with provisions for shade, seating areas,
landscaping, water features, and outdoor sculptures;
(C)   Outdoor dining areas;
(D)   Interesting paving design and finishes; and
(E)   Building materials, finishes, and details that are human-scaled,
nonglaring, and not harsh.
(6)   Wind analysis. The request for additional height shall include a wind
study of the effects of towers over 350 feet, particularly anticipated impacts
at the ground level. Where adverse impacts are anticipated, mitigative measures
shall be included in the proposal.
(7)   Historic resources. Any development that includes sites or structures on
or eligible for inclusion on the national or State register of historic places,
or on the Oahu register of historic places shall be evaluated as to the
feasibility and appropriateness of retaining the site or structure. For every
square foot of building area of a site or structure on or eligible for
inclusion on the national or State register of historic places, or on the Oahu
register of historic places, 10 square feet of additional floor area may be
permitted above 350 feet of building height. This bonus shall be available even
if the minimum open space requirements for subdivision (3) are not met.
(8)   FAA clearance. The request for additional height must include a statement
from the Federal Aviation Administration that the proposed building heights
will not interfere with the operation of the Daniel K. Inouye International
Airport.
(9)   Maximum density. The maximum density as set forth in
Table 21-3.4 shall not be exceeded.
(10)   For purposes of this section, an “adopted public view” is a view that
has been recognized as significant or otherwise worthy of protection by an
adopted ordinance, including
Article 9.
(b)   Applications to exceed a height limit of 350 feet shall be processed
pursuant to the requirements for major permits (special district), as set forth
in §
21-2.40-2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.120-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-3.120-2 Business mixed-use district uses and development standards.
(a)   Within the business mixed-use districts, permitted uses and structures
shall be as enumerated in
Table 21-5.1.
(b)   Within the business mixed-use districts, development standards shall be
as enumerated in
Table 21-3.4.
(c)   Additional development standards.
(1)    Except for necessary access drives and walkways, all yards must be
landscaped.
(2)    BMX-3 district height setbacks. Within the BMX-3 district, any portion
of a structure over 40 feet in height must have additional height setbacks as
follows:
(A)   For each 10 feet of additional height or portion thereof, an additional
1-foot setback must be provided; and
(B)   The additional setback must be a continuous plane from the top of the
structure to the height of 40 feet above grade (see
Figure 21-3.3).
(3)   BMX-3 district transitional height setbacks.
(A)   Where a zoning lot adjoins a zoning lot in a residential, A-1 or AMX-
1 district, the residential district height setback will be applicable at the
buildable area boundary line of the adjoining side of the BMX-3 zoning lot (see
Figure 21-3.5).
(B)   Where a zoning lot adjoins a zoning lot in an A-2, A-3, AMX-2, AMX-3, or
resort district, no portion of a structure may exceed 40 feet in height along
the buildable area boundary line on the adjoining side of the BMX-3 zoning lot;
provided that additional height will be permitted if the additional height is
set back 1 foot from the buildable area boundary line for each 10 feet in
height or fraction thereof. This setback must be a continuous plane from the
top of the structure to the beginning of the additional height (see
Figure 21-3.5).
(4)   BMX-4 district transitional height setback. Where a zoning lot adjoins a
zoning lot in a residential, apartment, apartment mixed use or resort district,
the height setback of the adjoining district will be applicable at the
buildable area boundary line of the adjoining side of the BMX-4 lot (see
Figure 21-3.5 ).
(5)   BMX-4 district height setback. For a minimum of 50 percent of any
contiguous street frontage, no portion of a structure located on a lot adjacent
to a street may exceed a height that is intersected by a plane over the
buildable area that makes an angle of 65 degrees with the horizontal at ground
elevation at the center line of the street (see
Figure 21-3.9).
(6)   Street trees. If a street tree plan exists for the street that fronts the
project, the applicant shall install a street tree or trees, as required by the
director.
(7)   BMX-3 district open space bonus.
(A)   For each square foot of public open space provided, 5 square feet of
floor area may be added, exclusive of required yards;
(B)   For each square foot of arcade area provided, 3 square feet of floor area
may be added, exclusive of required yards; and
(C)   Maximum density with open space bonuses cannot exceed the FAR as provided
under
Table 21-3.4.
(8)   BMX-4 district open space bonus.
(A)   For each square foot of public open space provided, 10 square feet of
floor area may be added. If provided, front yards may be included as public
open space;
(B)   For each square foot of arcade area provided, 5 square feet of floor area
may be added;
(C)   Maximum density with open space bonuses cannot exceed the FAR as provided
under
Table 21-3.4; and
(D)   For developments that exceed a height of 350 feet, for each square foot
of public open space provided, 10 square feet of floor area may be added below
350 feet of building height, or 7 square feet of floor area may be added above
350 feet of building height. If provided, front yards may be included as public
open space.
(9)   BMX-4 district heights above 350 feet. For developments that exceed a
height of 350 feet, but are permitted higher heights on the zoning maps, refer
to §
21-3.120-1 .
(10)   Historic resources bonus. For developments in the BMX-4 district that
exceed a height of 350 feet, refer to §
21-3.120-1  for provisions relating to additional floor area permitted for
preservation of historic resources.
Table 21-3.4
Resort, Business, and Business Mixed-Use Zoning District Development
Standards
Development Standard District
                     Resort B-1 B-2 BMX-3 BMX-4
Table 21-3.4
Resort, Business, and Business Mixed-Use Zoning District Development Standards
Development       District
Standard          Resort  B-1        B-2          BMX-3      BMX-4
Minimum lot area  15,0001 5,000      5,000        5,000      5,000
(square feet)
Minimum lot width 701     50         50           50         50
and depth (feet)
                                                  10 for
                                                  dwellings,
        Front     25      10         54           5 for      54,5
                                                  other
                                                  uses4
Yards                                             52 for
(feet):                   10 for     10 for       dwellings,
                          multi-     multi-family 10 for
        Side and  202     family     dwellings,   multi-     03
        rear              dwellings, 03 for other unit
                          03 for     uses         dwellings,
                          other uses              03 for
                                                  other uses
Maximum building
area (percent of  50      not regulated
zoning lot)
Maximum density   Lot area (sq. ft.) FAR calculation
(FAR) resort      Less than 10,000   FAR = (.00006 x lot area) + 0.4
district only     10,000 - 30,000    FAR = (.00002 x lot area) + 0.8
                  Over 30,000        FAR = 1.4
Maximum density   see
(FAR) for other   above   1.0        2.5          2.5        4.0
districts
Open                                 Yes, see §  Yes, see §
space   Available No                 21-3.110-1   21-3.120-2(c)
bonus                                (c)
        Max FAR   n/a     n/a        3.5          3.5        7.5
Maximum height    per                per zoning   per zoning per zoning map, see §
(feet)            zoning  40         map          map        21-3.120-1 for
                  map                                        additional height
                  per §
Height setbacks   21-     per §                  per §
                  3.100-1 21-3.110-1(c)           21-3.120-2(c)
                  (c)
1   There is no minimum lot area, width, or depth for remote parking facilities.
2   For duplex-unit dwelling zoning lots, 5 feet for any portion of any structure
not located on the common property line; the required side yard is zero feet for
that portion of the lot containing the common wall.
3   Where the side or rear property line of a zoning lot adjoins the side or rear
yard of a zoning lot in a residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning
district, the side or rear yard must conform to the yard requirements for dwelling
use of the adjoining district. In addition, see §
21-4.70-1 for landscaping and buffering requirements.
4   Where a zoning lot adjoins a residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-use
zoning district, and forms a continuous front yard, the lot or the first 100 feet of
the lot (whichever is less) must conform to the front yard requirements for the
dwelling use of the adjoining zoning district (see
Figure 21-3.6).
5   Five feet for structures up to 12 feet in height; provided that where the
adjacent street is greater than 50 feet in width, an area of open space or an arcade
equivalent to the required yard area may be provided elsewhere on the zoning lot
(see
Figure 21-3.8).
n/a = Not applicable
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.120-2) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 03-
37, 17-55)
§ 21-3.130 Industrial zoning districts—Purpose and intent.
(a)   The purpose of the industrial zoning districts is to recognize the
importance of industrial uses to the welfare of city residents by providing
areas for industrial uses without undue competition from other uses, and
ensuring compatibility with nonindustrial areas. Typical uses include
manufacturing, refining, sorting, processing, and storage of materials and
products. Limited business activities that directly support the industrial uses
or those employed by industries therein are permitted in these zoning
districts.
(b)   Heavy industrial uses such as heavy general manufacturing and processing,
and explosive or toxic chemical manufacturing, storage, and distribution will
only be allowed under certain conditions and in areas well away from other
zoning districts.
(c)   To minimize potential adverse impacts on property and persons in the same
or neighboring districts, standards are established for the more noxious uses
permitted in these zoning districts.
(d)   The intent of the I-1 limited industrial zoning district is to provide
areas for some of the industrial employment and service needs of rural and
suburban communities. It is intended to accommodate light industrial uses
including light general manufacturing and processing, linen supplier, and
publishing facility. Uses in this district are limited to those that have few
environmental impacts and complement the development scale of communities they
would serve.
(e)   The intent of the I-2 intensive industrial zoning district is to set
aside areas for the full range of industrial uses necessary to support the
city. It is intended for areas with necessary supporting public infrastructure,
near to major transportation systems, and with other locational characteristics
necessary to support industrial centers. It must be located in areas away from
residential communities where certain heavy industrial uses would be allowed.
(f)   The intent of the I-3 waterfront industrial zoning district is to set
apart and protect areas considered vital to the performance of port functions
and their efficient operation. It is the intent to permit a full range of
facilities necessary for successful and efficient performance of port
functions. It is intended to exclude uses that are inappropriate and could
locate elsewhere.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.130) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-3.130-1 Industrial uses and development standards.
(a)   Within the industrial districts, permitted uses and structures shall be
as enumerated in
Table 21-5.1.
(b)   Within the industrial districts, development standards shall be as
enumerated in
Table 21-3.5.
(c)   Additional development standards.
(1)   Transitional height setbacks. Where a zoning lot adjoins a zoning lot in
a residential, apartment, apartment mixed-use, or resort district, the
residential, apartment, apartment mixed-use, or resort district height setbacks
shall be applicable at the buildable area boundary line on the side of the
industrial zoning lot (see
Figure 21-3.5).
(2)   Street setbacks. In the I-2 and I-3 districts, on zoning lots adjacent to
a street, no portion of a structure shall exceed a height equal to twice the
distance from the structure to the vertical projection of the centerline of the
street (see
Figure 21-3.7).
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.130-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-3.140 Industrial-commercial mixed-use district—Purpose and intent.
(a)   The purpose of the industrial-commercial mixed-use district is to allow
mixing of some industrial uses with other uses. The intent of this district is
to provide for areas of diversified businesses and employment opportunities by
permitting a broad range of uses, without exposing nonindustrial uses to unsafe
and unhealthy environments. To a limited extent, some residential uses shall be
permitted.
(b)   This district is intended to promote and maintain a viable mix of light
industrial and commercial uses.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.140) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-3.140-1 Industrial-commercial mixed-use district uses and development
standards.
(a)   Within the industrial-commercial mixed-use district, permitted uses and
structures shall be as enumerated in
Table 21-5.1.
(b)   Within the industrial-commercial mixed-use district, development
standards shall be as enumerated in
Table 21-3.5.
(c)   Additional development standards.
(1)   Density. For purposes of this subdivision, uses marked by a superscript 2
in
Table 21-5.1  will be considered “commercial uses.” The maximum FAR for a
zoning lot is as follows:
 
Maximum Provided the following minimum FAR, in aggregate, of the total floor area on
FAR     the zoning lot is devoted to permitted “noncommercial” principal uses
1.5     0.00
2.0     0.5
2.5     0.75
 
Except a maximum 2.5 FAR with no limit for floor area devoted to commercial
uses will be applicable to zoning lots of 10,000 square feet or less in areas
that were of record on June 14, 1993, or to zoning lots within any technology
park so designated in
Chapter 24 if a unilateral agreement that includes limitations on the permitted
uses in the technology park has been recorded pursuant to §
21-2.80.
(2)   Transitional height setbacks.
(A)   Where a zoning lot adjoins a zoning lot in a residential, A-1 or AMX-
1 district, the residential district height setback will be applicable at the
buildable area boundary line of the adjoining side of the IMX-1 zoning lot (see
Figure 21-3.5).
(B)   Where a zoning lot adjoins a zoning lot in an A-2, A-3, AMX-2, AMX-3, or
resort district, no portion of a structure may exceed 40 feet in height along
the buildable area boundary line on the adjoining side of the IMX-1 zoning lot;
provided that additional height will be permitted if the additional height is
set back 1 foot from the buildable area boundary line for each 10 feet in
height or fraction thereof. This setback must be a continuous plane from the
top of the structure to the beginning of the additional height (see
Figure 21-3.5).
(3)   Height setbacks. Any portion of a structure over 40 feet in height must
have additional height setbacks as follows:
(A)   For each 10 feet of additional height or portion thereof, an additional
one-foot setback must be provided; and
(B)   The additional setback must be a continuous plane from the top of the
structure to the height of 40 feet above grade (see
Figure 21-3.3).
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.140-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 17-
40, 17-55)
Table 21-3.5
Industrial and Industrial Mixed-Use Districts Development Standards
Development Standard District
                     I-1 I-2 I-3 IMX-1
Table 21-3.5
Industrial and Industrial Mixed-Use Districts Development Standards
Development    District
Standard       I-1   I-2   I-3   IMX-1
Minimum lot
area (square   7,500 7,500 7,500 5,000
feet)
Minimum lot
width and      60    60    60    50
depth (feet)
        Front1 10    5     0     5
Yards   Side
(feet): and    02    02    02    03
        rear
               80
               However, the building area may be increased to include all of the
Maximum        buildable area of the zoning lot; provided that all structures beyond the
building area  designated 80% building area shall:
(percent of    a.   Provide a minimum clear interior height of 18 feet;
zoning lot)    b.   Contain no interior walls, except for those between a permitted use
               and a special accessory office; and
               c.   Provide a minimum distance of 40 feet between interior columns and
               other structural features
Maximum        1.0   2.5   2.5   1.5-2.5 see §
density (FAR)                    21-3.140-1(c)
Maximum height 40    per zoning map
(feet)
Height         per §      per §
setbacks       21-3.130-1  21-3.140-1(c)
               (c)
1   Except for necessary access drives and walkways, all front yards shall be
landscaped. Where a zoning lot adjoins a residential, apartment, apartment mixed-use, or
resort district and forms a continuous front yard, the lot or the first 100 feet of the
lot (whichever is less) shall conform to the front yard requirements for the dwelling
use of the adjoining district (see
Figure 21-3.6).
2   Where the side or rear property line of a zoning lot adjoins the side or rear yard
of a zoning lot in a residential, apartment, apartment mixed-use, or resort district,
there shall be a side or rear yard that conforms to the side or rear yard requirements
for dwelling use of the adjoining district. In the I-3 district only, this yard shall be
not less than 15 feet. In addition, see §
21-4.70-1 for landscaping and buffering requirements.
3   Where the side or rear property line of a zoning lot adjoins the side or rear yard
of a zoning lot in a residential, apartment, apartment mixed-use, or resort district,
there shall be a side or rear yard that conforms to the side or rear yard requirements
for dwelling use of the adjoining district.
 
(Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 03-37)
FIGURE 21-3.1
HEIGHT SETBACKS (P-2 AGRICULTURAL AND COUNTRY DISTRICTS)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-201.png]
(Added by Ord. 99-12)
FIGURE 21-3.2
HEIGHTS ON SLOPING LOTS (COUNTRY DISTRICTS)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-203.png]
(Added by Ord. 03-37)
FIGURE 21-3.3
A-2, A-3, AMX-2, AMX-3, B-2, BMX-3, AND IMX-1 DISTRICT HEIGHT SETBACK
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-205.png]
(Added by Ord. 17-55)
FIGURE 21-3.4
RESORT DISTRICT HEIGHT SETBACK
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-207.png]
FIGURE 21-3.5
TRANSITIONAL HEIGHTS (BUSINESS, BMX, IMX, AND ALL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-209.png]
(Added by Ord. 17-55)
FIGURE 21-3.6
FRONT YARDS (B-2, BMX-3, BMX-4, IMX, AND ALL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-211.png]
FIGURE 21-3.7
STREET SETBACKS ( I-2 AND I-3 DISTRICTS)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-213.png]
(Added by Ord. 17-55)
FIGURE 21-3.8
FRONT YARD (BMX-4 DISTRICT)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-215.png]
FIGURE 21-3.9
65 DEGREE ANGLE HEIGHT LIMIT (BMX-4 DISTRICT)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-217.png]
(Added by Ord. 99-12)
FIGURE 21-3.10
HEIGHT MEASUREMENTS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-219.png]
(Added by Ord. 03-37)
ARTICLE 4: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Sections
   
21-4.10   General development regulations—Purpose and intent
   
21-4.20   Flag lots
   
21-4.30   Yards and street setbacks
   
21-4.40   Retaining walls
   
21-4.50   Lots in two zoning districts
   
21-4.60   Heights
   
21-4.70   Landscaping and screening
   
21-4.70-1   Screening wall or buffering
   
21-4.80   Noise regulations
   
21-4.90   Sunlight reflection regulations
   
21-4.100   Outdoor lighting
   
21-4.110   Nonconformities
   
21-4.110-1   Transient vacation units—Nonconforming use certificates
   
21-4.110-2   Bed and breakfast homes—Nonconforming use certificates
§ 21-4.10 General development regulations—Purpose and intent.
(a)   It is the purpose of this article to establish reasonable standards
relating to land development that are generally applicable to any use or site,
irrespective of the zoning district in which it is located.
(b)   It is the intent that where these regulations conflict with
Article 8, “Optional development regulations,” or
Article 9, “Special district regulations,” the optional development or special
district regulations shall take precedence.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.10) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-4.20 Flag lots.
(a)   Flag lots are permitted when a parcel lacks sufficient street frontage
for more than one lot or parcel. This parcel may be subdivided to create a flag
lot; provided that the access drive for the flag lot shall be the sole access
for only one lot and shall have a minimum width of 12 feet. The director may
allow dual access of an access drive after consultation with the director of
transportation services (see
Figure 21-4.1).
(b)   The lot area excluding the access drive used for ingress and egress shall
be not less than 80 percent of the minimum lot area required for the zoning
district. The total lot area shall meet the minimum lot area standard for the
zoning district.
FIGURE 21-4.1
FLAG LOT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-221.png]
(Added by Ord. 03-37)
(c)   The lot width and lot depth of the flag lot shall be not less than the
required minimum lot width and depth of the underlying zoning district, with
the lesser dimension qualifying as lot width. Dimensions shall be measured as
average horizontal distances between property lines, with the lot width being
measured at right angles to lot depth.
(d)   The location of the access drive shall be subject to the approval of the
director.
(e)   The finished grade of any portion of the access drive shall not exceed 19
percent, with provisions for horizontal and vertical curves for adequate
vehicular access. The director may allow a steeper grade when necessary because
of topography, subdivision lot arrangement, and design. In granting a steeper
grade, the director shall consult with the fire department for their
consideration and recommendation, and the director may impose conditions
including but not limited to installation of fencing, walls, and safety
barriers.
Whenever the finished grade exceeds 12 percent, a reinforced concrete pavement
shall be installed. An alternative roadway pavement may be installed with the
approval of the director.
(f)   The minimum yards for a flag lot shall be the minimum side yard required
of a zoning lot in the applicable zoning district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.20) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-4.30 Yards and street setbacks.
(a)   No business, merchandising displays, uses, structures, or umbrellas,
shall be located or carried on within any required yard or street setback
except for the following:
(1)   Public utility poles;
(2)   Customary yard accessories, such as clotheslines and their supports;
unroofed trash enclosures not to exceed 6 feet in height; and bollards;
(3)   Structures for newspaper sales and distribution;
(4)   Fences and retaining walls as provided in subsection (c) and §
21-4.40;
(5)   Hawaiian Electric Company transformers, backflow preventers, and other
similar public utility equipment;
(6)   Signs, other than ground signs, or as restricted by special district
provisions;
(7)   Bicycle parking, including a fixed bicycle rack for parking and locking
bicycles;
(8)   The following equipment, not to exceed 4 feet in height, may extend a
maximum of 30 inches into the side or rear yard setbacks only:
(A)   Freestanding air conditioning equipment meeting the following standards:
(i)   The unit shall not exceed allowable decibel levels established pursuant
to law; and
(ii)   The minimum Seasonal Energy Efficiency Ratio (SEER) shall be:
(aa)   Twelve for units of 3 tons or less; and
(bb)   Sixteen for units exceeding 3 tons and not exceeding 5 tons;
(B)   Other minor mechanical and electrical apparatus; and
(9)   Other structures not more than 30 inches in height.
(b)   Roof overhangs, eaves, sunshades, sills, frames, beam ends, projecting
courses, planters and other architectural embellishments or appendages, and
minor mechanical and electrical apparatus with no more than a 30-inch vertical
thickness may project into required yards and height setbacks as follows:
 
Required Yard                                     Projection
Less than or equal to 10 feet                     30 inches
Greater than 10 but less than or equal to 20 feet 36 inches
Greater than 20 feet                              42 inches
 
Exterior balconies, chimneys, lanais, porte cocheres, arcades, pergolas, or
covered passageways are not permitted within required yards.
(c)   Other than retaining walls, walls and fences up to a height of 6 feet may
project into or enclose any part of a required yard; provided that:
(1)   They shall be prohibited in front yards in business, business mixed-use,
industrial, and industrial- commercial mixed-use districts;
(2)   Walls and fences constructed by public utilities may be up to 8 feet in
height, and may be topped with security wire to a total height of 9 feet;
(3)   Special district regulations under
Article 9 may provide for other restrictions; and
(4)   Fences located on land dedicated for agricultural use pursuant to §
8-7.3 may be up to 10 feet in height.
(d)   Parking and loading are not allowed in any required yard, except as
provided in
Article 6.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.30) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 03-37,
10-19, 10-24, 20-41)
§ 21-4.40 Retaining walls.
(a)   Retaining walls containing a fill within required yards shall not exceed
a height of 6 feet, measured from existing or finished grade, whichever is
lower, to the top of the wall along the exposed face of the wall. Heights of
terraced walls or combinations of retaining walls shall be measured combining
all walls located in the required yard (see
Figures 21-4.2(A) and
(B)).
(b)   A retaining wall that protects a cut below the existing grade may be
constructed within a required yard, up to the height of the cut. There shall be
no height limit for retaining walls that protect a cut; provided that a
retaining wall that protects a cut and contains fill shall not exceed a total
of 6 feet in height measured from the intersection of the wall and the existing
or finished grade, whichever is lower, to the top of the wall along the exposed
face of the wall.
(c)   A safety railing may be erected on top of any retaining wall within a
required yard. If the safety railing is generally constructed of a different
material than the retaining wall, and is open at intervals so as not to be
capable of retaining earth, it shall not exceed a height of 6 feet above the
retaining wall.
(d)   Safety railing or fences constructed of the same materials as the
retaining wall shall not exceed a total combined height of 6 feet measured from
the finished grade along the exposed face of the wall. Additional fence height
of different material not capable of retaining material may be erected, not to
exceed a height of 6 feet measured from the finished grade of the retained
material (see
Figure 21-4.2(B)).
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.40) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
FIGURE 21-4.2(A)
RETAINING WALLS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-223.png]
FIGURE 21-4.2(B)
RETAINING WALLS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-225.png]
§ 21-4.50 Lots in two zoning districts.
   The following apply to lots within two or more zoning districts or
precincts:
(a)   For a use common to the districts or precincts, district or precinct
boundary lines may be ignored for the purpose of yard, height setback, and
height requirements;
(b)   For uses not common to the districts or precincts, yard, height setback,
and height regulations of each individual district or precinct will be
applicable from the lot lines on the portions of the lot lying within that
district or precinct;
(c)   Where a lot lies in two zoning districts and a permitted use is common to
both districts, but the floor area ratios differ, the floor area ratios will be
calculated by the following formula, where:
A = FAR for total parcel in most intense district.
B = FAR for total parcel in least intense district.
C = Area of parcel in most intense district.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8835.png]
and
(d)   Where a lot lies in two zoning districts and a permitted use is common to
both districts, but the maximum building area differs, the maximum building
area will be calculated by the following formula, where:
A’ = Maximum building area (percent of) for zoning lot A.
B’ = Maximum building area (percent of) for zoning lot B.
A’ x (Lot area of zoning lot A) + B’ x (Lot area of zoning lot B).
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.50) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 17-40)
§ 21-4.60 Heights.
(a)   All structures must fall within a building height envelope at a height
specified by this chapter, or as specified on the zoning maps. Exceptions are
specified under subsection (c), and other exceptions may be specified under
special districts.
(b)   The building height envelope must run parallel to existing or finish
grade, whichever is lower (see
Figure 21-4.3), except where the finish grade is higher than existing grade in
order to meet city construction standards for driveways, roadways, drainage,
sewerage, and other infrastructure requirements, or to meet conditions of
permits approved under this chapter. In these cases, height will be measured
from finish grade.
(c)   The following structures and associated screening are exempt from zoning
district height limits under the following specified restrictions:
(1)   Vent pipes, fans, roof access stairwells, and structures housing rooftop
machinery, such as elevators and air conditioning, not to exceed 18 feet above
the governing height limit; provided that structures housing rooftop machinery
on single-unit, two-unit, and duplex-unit dwellings are not exempt from zoning
district height limits;
(2)   Chimneys, that may also project into required height setbacks;
(3)   Safety railings not to exceed 42 inches above the governing height limit;
(4)   Utility poles and antennas. The council finds and declares that there is
a significant public interest served in protecting and preserving the aesthetic
beauty of the city. Further, the council finds that the indiscriminate and
uncontrolled installation, location, and height of antennas are detrimental to
the city’s appearance and image; may result in significant damage to the
community’s sense of well-being, particularly in residential areas; and may
have negative economic impacts to the city’s tourism industry, which relies
heavily on the city’s physical appearance. However, the council also finds that
there is a need for additional height for certain types of utility poles and
antennas, and that there is a clear public interest served by ensuring that
those transmissions and receptions providing the public with power and
telecommunication services are unobstructed. Therefore, in accord with the
health, safety, and aesthetic objectives set forth in §
21-1.20, and considering the public interest needs associated with certain
types of power and telecommunication services:
(A)   Utility poles and broadcasting antennas must not exceed 500 feet from
existing grade.
(B)   Communication towers and communication support structures may not exceed
10 feet above the governing height limit; provided that in residential zoning
districts where utility lines are predominantly located underground, the
governing height limit will apply; and
(C)   Accessory receive only antennas may not exceed the governing height
limit, except as provided under §
21-2.140-1(i).
(5)   Spires, flagpoles, and smokestacks, not to exceed 350 feet from existing
grade;
(6)   One antenna for an amateur radio station operation per zoning lot, not to
exceed 90 feet above existing grade;
(7)   Wind energy generation facilities, where permitted; provided that each
wind energy generation facility must be set back from all property lines
pursuant to the standards in
Article 5;
(8)   Any energy-savings equipment, including heat pumps and solar panels, not
to exceed 5 feet above the governing height limit; provided that solar panels
on buildings other than single-unit, two-unit, or duplex-unit dwellings may not
exceed 12 feet above the governing height limit. The area underneath rooftop
solar panels installed pursuant to this subdivision may not be enclosed and
will not be counted as floor area;
(9)   Construction and improvements in certain flood hazard districts, as set
forth in §
21-9.10; and
(10)   Agricultural structures in agricultural zoning districts, as set forth
in
Article 3,
Table 21-3.1.
(d)   The following structures and associated screening may be placed on top of
an existing building that is nonconforming with respect to height, under the
following specified restrictions:
(1)   Any energy-savings equipment, including heat pumps and solar panels, not
to exceed 5 feet above the height of the rooftop; provided that solar panels on
buildings other than single-unit, two-unit, or duplex-unit dwellings may not
exceed 12 feet above the height of the rooftop. The area underneath rooftop
solar panels installed pursuant to this subdivision may not be enclosed and
will not be counted as floor area; and
(2)   Safety railings not to exceed 42 inches above the height of the rooftop.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.60) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 03-37,
22-28 , 25-2)
FIGURE 21-4.3
HEIGHT MEASUREMENT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-227.png]
§ 21-4.70 Landscaping and screening.
   Parking lots, vehicle service stations, trash enclosures, and rooftop-
mounted machinery must be landscaped or screened in all zoning districts as
follows.
(a)   Parking lots and structures must be landscaped as required in
Article 6.
(b)   All outdoor trash storage areas, except those for single-unit, two-unit,
or duplex-unit dwelling use, must be screened on a minimum of three sides by a
wall or hedge at least 6 feet in height. The wall must be painted, surfaced, or
otherwise treated to blend with the development it serves. All trash storage
areas must be curbed or graded to prevent runoff from reaching storm drains or
surface water.
(c)   Within the country, residential, apartment, apartment mixed-use, and
resort zoning districts, utility substations, other than individual
transformers, must be enclosed by a solid wall or a fence with a screening
hedge a minimum of 5 feet in height, except for necessary openings for access.
Transformer vaults for underground utilities and similar uses must be enclosed
by a landscape hedge, except for access openings.
(d)   All plant material and landscaping must be provided with a permanent
irrigation system.
(e)   All rooftop machinery and equipment, except for solar panels, antennas,
plumbing vent pipes, ventilators, and guardrails, must be screened from view
from all directions, including from above; provided that screening from above
is not required for any machinery or equipment whose function would be impaired
by the screening. Rooftop machinery and equipment in the industrial zoning
districts, and on structures or portions of structures less than 150 feet in
height will be exempt from this subsection.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.70) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 20-41,
25-2)
§ 21-4.70-1 Screening wall or buffering.
(a)   Any use located in the I-1, I-2, or I-3 zoning districts must be screened
from any adjacent zoning lot in a residential, apartment, apartment mixed-use,
or resort zoning district, by a solid wall 6 feet in height erected and
maintained along side and rear property lines. The walls must not project
beyond the rear line of an adjacent front yard in the residential, apartment,
apartment mixed-use, or resort zoning districts. In addition, a 5-foot-wide
landscaping strip must be provided along the outside of the solid wall.
(b)   Any use located in the IMX-1 zoning district must be screened from any
adjacent zoning lot in a residential, apartment, apartment mixed-use, or resort
zoning district, by a landscaped area a minimum of 5 feet in width along side
and rear property lines. The landscaped area must contain a screening hedge a
minimum of 42 inches in height. The requirements of this subsection do not
apply to necessary drives and walkways, nor to any meeting facility, child
daycare, adult daycare, large group living, or other use governed by subsection
(d).
(c)   Any use located in the B-1, B-2, or BMX-4 zoning districts, and any use
located in the BMX-3 zoning district except for single-unit, duplex-unit, two-
unit, and multi-unit dwellings, must be screened from any adjacent zoning lot
in a residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning district, by a
landscaped area a minimum of 5 feet in width along side and rear property
lines. The landscaped area must contain a screening hedge a minimum of 42
inches in height. The requirements of this subsection do not apply to necessary
drives and walkways, nor to any meeting facility, child daycare, adult daycare,
large group living, or other use governed by subsection (d).
(d)   Any meeting facility, child daycare, adult daycare, large group living,
parking facility, commercial use, industrial use, or similar use, located in
any zoning district other than those already addressed under subsections (a),
(b), and (c), must be screened from any adjacent zoning lot in a country,
residential, apartment, apartment mixed-use, or resort zoning district by:
(1)   A solid wall or fence, excepting chain link, 6 feet in height; or
(2)   An equivalent landscape buffer such as a 6-foot-high screening hedge.
The solid wall or fence, or equivalent landscape buffer, must be erected and
maintained along the common property line. The director may modify the
requirements of this subsection if warranted by topography.
(e)   This section does not preclude a public utility from constructing a wall
or fence exceeding 6 feet in height pursuant to §
21-4.30(c)(2).
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.70-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 03-37,
25-2)
§ 21-4.80 Noise regulations.
   For any commercial or industrial development, no public address system or
other devices for reproduction or amplifying voices or music, except as
described for drive-thru facilities in § 21-5.70-11(b), may be mounted outside
any structure on any zoning lot that is adjacent to any zoning lot in the
country, residential, apartment, apartment mixed-use, or resort zoning
district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.80) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-4.90 Sunlight reflection regulations.
   No building wall shall contain a reflective surface for more than 30 percent
of that wall’s surface area.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.90) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-4.100 Outdoor lighting.
   For any commercial or industrial use, outdoor lighting must be shielded with
full cut-off fixtures to eliminate direct illumination to any adjacent country,
residential, apartment, apartment mixed-use, or resort zoning district. For a
rooftop gathering space that is not enclosed, outdoor lighting must be
shielded, with full cut-off fixtures to eliminate direct illumination beyond
the rooftop gathering space.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.100) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 22-28 ,
25-2)
§ 21-4.110 Nonconformities.
   Constraints are placed on nonconformities to facilitate eventual conformity
with this chapter. In other than criminal proceedings, the owner, occupant, or
user shall bear the burden to prove that a zoning lot, structure, use, dwelling
unit, or parking or loading space was legally established as it now exists.
Nonconforming lots, structures, uses, dwelling units, commercial use density,
and parking and loading spaces may be continued, subject to the following
provisions.
(a)   Nonconforming lots.
(1)   A nonconforming lot may not be reduced in area, width, or depth, except
by government action to further the public health, safety, or welfare.
(2)   Any conforming structure or use may be constructed, enlarged, extended,
or moved on a nonconforming lot so long as all other requirements of this
chapter are met.
(b)   Nonconforming structures.
(1)   If that portion of a structure that is nonconforming is destroyed by any
means to an extent of more than 90 percent of its replacement cost at the time
of destruction, it may not be reconstructed except in conformity with this
chapter. All reconstruction and restoration work must comply with building code
and flood hazard regulations, and commence within two years after the date of
destruction.
(A)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, a nonconforming structure
devoted to a conforming use that consists of a multi-unit dwelling owned by
owners under the authority of the State of Hawaii Condominium Property Act or
HRS Chapter 421H, or dwelling units owned by a “cooperative housing
corporation” as defined in HRS § 421I-1, whether or not the structure is
located in a special district, and that is destroyed by any means, may be fully
reconstructed and restored to its former permitted condition; provided that
such restoration is permitted by the current building code and flood hazard
regulations, and is started within two years after the date of destruction.
(B)   A nonconforming structure that is required by law to be razed by the
owner thereof may not thereafter be reconstructed and restored except in full
conformity with this chapter.
(2)   If a nonconforming structure is moved, it must conform to this chapter.
(3)   Any nonconforming structure may be repaired, expanded, or altered in any
manner that does not increase its nonconformity.
(4)   Improvements on private property that become nonconforming through the
exercise of the government’s power of eminent domain may obtain waivers from
this subsection, as provided by §
21-2.130.
(5)   Nonconforming commercial use density will be regulated under this
subsection. For the purposes of this section, “nonconforming commercial use
density” means a structure that is nonconforming by virtue of the previously
lawful mixture of commercial uses on a zoning lot affected by commercial use
density requirements in excess of:
(A)   The maximum FAR permitted for commercial uses; or
(B)   The maximum percentage of total floor area permitted for commercial uses.
(c)   Nonconforming uses. Strict limits are placed on nonconforming uses to
discourage the perpetuation of these uses, and to facilitate the timely
conversion to conforming uses.
(1)   A nonconforming use may not extend to any part of a structure or lot that
was not arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption of this
chapter or subsequent amendment; nor may the nonconforming use be expanded in
any manner, or the hours of operation increased; provided that a recreational
use that is accessory to the nonconforming use may be expanded or extended if
the following conditions are met:
(A)   The recreational accessory use will be expanded or extended to a
structure in which a permitted use also is being conducted, whether that
structure is on the same lot or on an adjacent lot; and
(B)   The recreational accessory use is accessory to both the permitted use and
the nonconforming use.
(2)   Any nonconforming use that is discontinued for any reason for 12
consecutive months, or for 18 months during any three-year period, may not be
resumed; provided that a temporary cessation of the nonconforming use for
purposes of ordinary repairs for a period not exceeding 120 days during any 12-
month period will not be considered a discontinuation.
(3)   Work may be done on any structure devoted in whole or in part to a
nonconforming use; provided that work on the nonconforming use portion will be
limited to ordinary repairs. For the purposes of this subsection, the term
“ordinary repairs” is only construed to include the following:
(A)   The repair or replacement of existing walls, floors, roofs, fixtures,
wiring, or plumbing;
(B)   Work required to comply with city, State, or federal mandates, including
but not limited to the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) or the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA); or
(C)   Interior and exterior alterations; provided that there is no physical
expansion or intensification of the nonconforming use;
provided further that ordinary repairs may not exceed 10 percent of the current
replacement cost of the structure within a 12-month period, and the floor area
of the structure, as it existed on October 22, 1986, or on the date of any
subsequent amendment to this chapter pursuant to which a lawful use became
nonconforming, may not be increased; and further provided that the 10 percent
of the current replacement cost limitation does not apply to work involving
that portion of a structure devoted to nonconforming hotel use in the Diamond
Head special district.
(4)   Any nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use subject
to the prior approval of the director; provided that:
(A)   The change in use is only permitted if any adverse effects on neighboring
occupants and properties will not be greater than if the original nonconforming
use were to be continued; and
(B)   The director may impose conditions on the change in nonconforming use
necessary or appropriate to minimize impact or prevent greater adverse effects
related to a proposed change in use. Other than for ordinary repairs as
provided under subdivision (3), improvements intended to accommodate a change
in nonconforming use or tenant are not permitted.
(5)   Any action taken by an owner, lessee, or authorized operator that reduces
the negative effects associated with the operation of a nonconforming use,
including but not limited to reducing hours of operation or exterior lighting
intensity, will not be reversed.
(d)   Nonconforming dwelling units. With the exception of ohana units, which
are subject to §
21-2.140-1(h), nonconforming dwelling units are subject to the following
provisions:
(1)   A nonconforming dwelling unit may be altered, enlarged, repaired,
extended, or moved; provided that all other provisions of this chapter are met;
(2)   If a nonconforming dwelling unit is destroyed by any means to an extent
of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it
may not be reconstructed; and
(3)   When dwellings constructed on a zoning lot before January 1, 1950, exceed
the maximum number of dwelling units currently permitted, they will be deemed
nonconforming dwelling units.
(e)   Nonconforming parking and loading. Nonconforming parking and loading
spaces may be continued, subject to the following provisions:
(1)   If there is a change in use to a use with a higher parking or loading
space requirement, the new use must meet the off-street parking and loading
requirements established in Article 6;
(2)   Any use that adds floor area must provide off-street parking and loading
spaces for the addition as required by Article 6. Expansion of an individual
dwelling unit that results in a total floor area of no more than 2,500 square
feet will be exempt from this requirement;
(3)   When nonconforming parking or loading is reconfigured, the
reconfiguration must meet current requirements for arrangement of parking
spaces, dimensions, aisles and, if applicable, ratio of compact to standard
spaces, except as provided in subdivision (4). If, as a result of the
reconfiguration, the number of spaces is increased by five or more, landscaping
must be provided as required in §§
21-6.80 and
21-6.90; and
(4)   Parking lots and other uses and structures with an approved parking plan
on file with the department before May 10, 1999, and that include compact
parking spaces as approved in the plan, may retain up to the existing number of
compact spaces when parking is reconfigured.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.110) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 03-37,
06-15, 10-19, 17-40, 17-59, 20-6, 20-41, 21-30, 25-2)
Editor’s note:
   * “July 24, 1986” is substituted for “at the time of adoption of the
provisions of this chapter or subsequent amendment.”
§ 21-4.110-1 Transient vacation units—Nonconforming use certificates.
(a)   The purpose of this section is to permit certain transient vacation units
that have been in operation since prior to October 22, 1986, to continue to
operate as nonconforming uses subject to obtaining a nonconforming use
certificate as provided by this section. This section applies to any owner,
operator, or proprietor of a transient vacation unit who held a valid
nonconforming use certificate issued pursuant to this section on August 1,
2019.
(b)   The owner, operator, or proprietor of any transient vacation unit who has
obtained a nonconforming use certificate under this section shall apply to
renew the nonconforming use certificate in accordance with the following
schedule:
(1)   Between September 1, 2000 and October 15, 2000; then
(2)   Between September 1 and October 15 of every year thereafter.
Each application to renew must include proof that (i) there were in effect a
State of Hawaii general excise tax license and transient accommodations tax
license for the nonconforming use during the calendar year covered by the
nonconforming use certificate being renewed and (ii) there were transient
occupancies (occupancies of less than 30 days apiece) for a total of at least
35 days during such year.
Failure to meet these conditions will result in the denial of the application
for renewal of the nonconforming use certificate. The requirement for the 35
days of transient occupancies will be effective on January 1, 1995 and applies
to renewal applications submitted on or after January 1, 1996.
(c)   The owner, operator, or proprietor of any transient vacation unit who has
obtained a nonconforming use certificate under this section shall display the
certificate issued for the current year in a conspicuous place on the premises.
In the event that a single address is associated with numerous nonconforming
use certificates, a listing of all units at that address holding current
certificates may be displayed in a conspicuous common area instead.
(d)   The following additional provisions apply to transient vacation units
operating under a nonconforming use certificate pursuant to this section:
(1)   Section 21-5.70-3(a)(2)(C) relating to restrictions and standards; and
(2)   Section 21-5.70-3(a)(3) relating to advertisements.
(e)   In addition to the requirements in subsection (d), for transient vacation
units operating under a nonconforming use certificate pursuant to this section
that are located within the country, residential, or apartment zoning
districts, transient occupants are prohibited from parking their vehicles on
the public streets in the vicinity of the transient vacation unit.
(f)   A nonconforming use certificate for a transient vacation unit that has
been issued and renewed pursuant to this section may be renewed by a new owner,
operator, or proprietor of the transient vacation unit, so long as the new
owner, operator, or proprietor renews the nonconforming use certificate prior
to its expiration.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.110-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 19-
18, 22-7, 25-2)
Editor's note:
   Amendments made to § 21-4.110-1 in Ordinance 22-7 take effect on October 23,
2022; provided that the annual renewal requirement for nonconforming use
certificates for transient vacation units in § 21-4.110-1 applies to all
renewals after October 23, 2022; and provided further, that nonconforming use
certificates that had been renewed prior to October 23, 2022 will continue to
be effective for the applicable two-year period.
§ 21-4.110-2 Bed and breakfast homes—Nonconforming use certificates.
(a)   The purpose of this section is to permit certain bed and breakfast homes
that have been in operation since prior to December 28, 1989, to continue to
operate as nonconforming uses subject to obtaining a nonconforming use
certificate as provided by this section. This section applies to any owner,
operator, or proprietor of a bed and breakfast home who holds a valid
nonconforming use certificate issued pursuant to this section on August 1,
2019.
(b)   The owner, operator, or proprietor of any bed and breakfast home who has
obtained a nonconforming use certificate under this section shall apply to
renew the nonconforming use certificate in accordance with the following
schedule:
(1)   Between September 1, 2000, and October 15, 2000; then
(2)   Between September 1 and October 15 of every year thereafter.
Each application to renew must include proof that (i) there were in effect a
State of Hawaii general excise tax license and transient accommodations tax
license for the nonconforming use during the calendar year covered by the
nonconforming use certificate being renewed and (ii) there were transient
occupancies (occupancies of less than 30 days apiece) for a total of at least
35 days during such year.
Failure to meet these conditions will result in the denial of the application
for renewal of the nonconforming use certificate. The requirement for the 28
days of bed and breakfast occupancies will be effective on January 1, 1995 and
applies to renewal applications submitted on or after January 1, 1996.
(c)   Section 21-5.50-3(c) relating to home occupations does not apply to bed
and breakfast homes.
(d)   The owner, operator, or proprietor of any bed and breakfast home who has
obtained a nonconforming use certificate under this section shall display the
certificate issued for the current year in a conspicuous place on the premises.
(e)   The following additional provisions apply to bed and breakfast homes
operating under a nonconforming use certificate pursuant to this section:
(1)   Section 21-5.70-3(a)(2)(C) relating to restrictions and standards; and
(2)   Section 21-5.70-3(a)(3) relating to advertisements.
(f)   In addition to the requirements in subsection (e), bed and breakfast
homes operating under a nonconforming use certificate pursuant to this section
that are located within the residential zoning districts are subject to the
following:
(1)   A maximum of two rooms may be provided to transient occupants for
sleeping accommodations, and a maximum of four adult transient occupants may be
accommodated at any one time;
(2)   One off-street parking space must be provided for each room used for
transient occupant sleeping accommodations, in addition to the number of off-
street parking spaces required for the dwelling unit; and
(3)   Transient occupants are prohibited from parking their vehicles on the
public streets in the vicinity of the bed and breakfast home.
(g)   In addition to the requirements in subsections (e) and (f), bed and
breakfast homes operating under a nonconforming use certificate pursuant to
this section that are located within the country or apartment zoning districts
are subject to the following:
(1)   One off-street parking space must be provided for each room used for
transient occupant sleeping accommodations, in addition to the number of off-
street parking spaces required for the dwelling unit; and
(2)   Transient occupants are prohibited from parking their vehicles on the
public streets in the vicinity of the bed and breakfast home.
(h)   A nonconforming use certificate for a bed and breakfast home that has
been issued and renewed pursuant to this section may be renewed by a new owner,
operator, or proprietor of the bed and breakfast home, so long as the new
owner, operator, or proprietor renews the nonconforming use certificate prior
to its expiration.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.110-2) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 19-
18, 22-7, 25-2)
Editor's note:
   Amendments made to § 21-4.110-2 in Ordinance 22-7 take effect on October 23,
2022; provided that the annual renewal requirement for nonconforming use
certificates for bed and breakfast homes in § 21-4.110-2 applies to all
renewals after October 23, 2022; and provided further, that nonconforming use
certificates that had been renewed prior to October 23, 2022 will continue to
be effective for the applicable two-year period.
 
ARTICLE 5: USE REGULATIONS
Sections
   
21-5.10   Purpose and intent
   
21-5.20   Use classification
   
21-5.30   Use table
   
21-5.40   Agricultural uses
   
21-5.40-1   Crop production
   
21-5.40-2   Livestock and poultry keeping
   
21-5.40-3   Agricultural support
   
21-5.40-4   Accessory agricultural
   
21-5.50   Residential uses
   
21-5.50-1   Household living
   
21-5.50-2   Group living
   
21-5.50-3   Accessory residential
   
21-5.60   Public, civic, and institutional uses
   
21-5.60-1   Assembly
   
21-5.60-2   Communication
   
21-5.60-3   Education
   
21-5.60-4   Government
   
21-5.60-5   Parks and open space
   
21-5.60-6   Utility
   
21-5.70   Commercial uses
   
21-5.70-1   Daycare
   
21-5.70-2   Eating and drinking
   
21-5.70-3   Lodging
   
21-5.70-4   Medical
   
21-5.70-5   Office
   
21-5.70-6   Parking
   
21-5.70-7   Personal service
   
21-5.70-8   Recreation, outdoor
   
21-5.70-9   Retail
   
21-5.70-10   Vehicle-related
   
21-5.70-11   Accessory commercial
   
21-5.80   Industrial uses
   
21-5.80-1   Manufacturing and processing
   
21-5.80-2   Marine
   
21-5.80-3   Repair
   
21-5.80-4   Resource extraction
   
21-5.80-5   Storage and warehousing
   
21-5.80-6   Transportation
   
21-5.80-7   Waste-related
   
21-5.80-8   Accessory industrial
   
21-5.90   Miscellaneous uses
   
21-5.90-1   Historic structure reuse
   
21-5.90-2   Joint development of two or more adjacent zoning lots
§ 21-5.10 Purpose and intent.
   The purpose of this article is to identify the permissible land uses in the
various zoning districts and the conditions in which they may be conducted.
Development standards and uses restrictions are imposed on certain uses in
order to mitigate and prevent disruptive community impacts that might otherwise
result if these specially regulated uses were permitted without restriction.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.20 Use classification.
(a)   Permissible uses of property.Permissible uses of land in each zoning
district are identified in
Table 21-5.1. Land uses that are allowed with a land use permit or special
approval from the director or the council may only be conducted after obtaining
all necessary permits and approvals. It is a violation of this chapter to use
property in any manner prohibited by
Table 21-5.1.
(b)   If a land use is not identified in
Table 21-5.1, the use may only be conducted as an accessory use to a lawful
principal use or after obtaining the director s approval to conduct the use
under subsection (c).
(c)   A person wishing to conduct a land use that is not permitted in
Table 21-5.1 as a principal use must submit a written application to the
director that describes the proposed land use, the property on which the land
use is proposed, and the reasonably foreseeable impacts of the proposed land
use on the surrounding areas. The director shall review the application and may
require the submission of additional information relevant to the director s
decision. After reviewing the application and any additional information
requested by the director, the director may:
   (1)   Determine that the use falls within the definition of a land use
identified in
Table 21-5.1 and regulate the use according to the applicable requirements; or
   (2)   Determine that the use is not a land use regulated under
Table 21-5.1 and require a zoning variance to allow for the proposed use.
(d)   Land uses that are subject to use specific development standards are
identified with an asterisk (*) in
Table 21-5.1. Uses subject to use specific development standards must comply
with the general development standards for the underlying zoning district and
the use specific standards in this article. If there is a conflict between the
general development standards for the underlying zoning district and the use
specific standards in this article, the more stringent requirements will apply.
(e)   Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, land located in the State land
use conservation district will be regulated by the State department of land and
natural resources pursuant to HRS Chapter 183C.
(f)   Permitted uses for properties located in the Waikiki Special District are
governed by
Table 21-9.6(A).
(g)   In the event of any conflict between the text of this chapter and the
following table, the text of this chapter shall control.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.30 Use table.
Table 21-5.1
Table of Permitted Uses
 
KEY:
P = Permitted Use      C = Major Conditional Use      Cm = Minor Conditional
Use      PRU = Plan Review Use
* = Standards Apply      + = Special Use Permit1      Ac = Accessory Use subject to
standards2
1   For Land within the State Land Use Agricultural District, pursuant to HRS Chapter
205, a special use permit approved by the Planning Commission may be required.
2   If there is more than one symbol, all symbols apply.
 
Uses    Preservation,                                              Business,       Industrial,
(Note:  Agricultural,      Residential,      Apartment Mixed-Use,  Business Mixed- Industrial
Certain Country            Apartment         Resort                Use             Commercial
uses                                                                               Mixed-Use
are                        R-  R-
defined P- AG- AG-         20, 7.5, A- A- A- AMX- AMX- AMX-        B- B- BMX- BMX- I- I- I- IMX-
in      2  1   2   Country R-  R-5, 1  2  3  1    2    3    Resort 1  2  3    4    1  2  3  1    Standards
Article                    10  R-
10)                            3.5
             Preservation,                                              Business,       Industrial,
Uses         Agricultural,      Residential,      Apartment Mixed-Use,  Business Mixed- Industrial
(Note:       Country            Apartment         Resort                Use             Commercial
Certain uses                                                                            Mixed-Use
are defined                     R-  R-
in Article   P- AG- AG-         20, 7.5, A- A- A- AMX- AMX- AMX-        B- B- BMX- BMX- I- I- I- IMX-
10)          2  1   2   Country R-  R-5, 1  2  3  1    2    3    Resort 1  2  3    4    1  2  3  1    Standards
                                10  R-
                                    3.5
AGRICULTURAL USES
Crop Production
Aquaculture  P  P   P   P       -   -    -  -  -  -    -    -    -      -  -  -    -    P  P  P  P     
                                                                                                      §
Crop raising P* P   P   P       -   -    -  -  -  -    -    -    -      -  -  -    -    -  -  -  -    21-5.40-1
                                                                                                      (b)
Forestry     P  P   P   -       -   -    -  -  -  -    -    -    -      -  -  -    -    -  -  -  -     
Plant                                                                                                 §
nursery      -  P*  P*  P       -   -    -  -  -  -    -    -    -      -  -  -    -    P  P  -  P    21-5.40-1
                                                                                                      (c)
Urban                                                                   Cm Cm           Cm Cm Cm      §
agriculture  -  -   -   -       -   -    -  -  -  Cm * Cm * Cm * -      *  *  Cm * Cm * *  *  *  Cm * 21-5.40-1
                                                                                                      (a)
Livestock and Poultry Keeping
Animal                                                                            
raising
   Minor  P  P   P   P       -   -    -  -  -  -    -    -    -      -  -  -    -    -  -  -  -     
                                                                                                      §
   Major  -  P*  P*  -       -   -    -  -  -  -    -    -    -      -  -  -    -    -  -  -  -    21-5.40-2
                                                                                                      (a)
Agricultural Support
Agricultural
collection                                                                        
and storage
                                                                                                      §
   Minor  -  P   P   -       -   -    -  -  -  -    -    -    -      -  -  -    -    P  P  -  -    21-5.40-3
                                                                                                      (a)
                                                                                                      §
   Major  -  C*  C*  -       -   -    -  -  -  -    -    -    -      -  -  -    -    C* P  -  -    21-5.40-3
                                                                                                      (a)
Agricultural                                                                                          §
equipment    -  P*  P*  -       -   -    -  -  -  -    -    -    -      -  -  -    -    P  P  -  P    21-5.40-3
service                                                                                               (b)
Agricultural                                                                      
processing
                                                                                                      §
   Minor  -  P*  P*  -       -   -    -  -  -  -    -    -    -      -  -  -    -    P* P* -  P*   21-5.40-3
                                                                                                      (c)
                                                                                                      §
   Major  -  C*  C*  -       -   -    -  -  -  -    -    -    -      -  -  -    -    -  P* -  -    21-5.40-3
                                                                                                      (c)
Composting                                                                        
                                                                                                      §
   Minor  P* P*  P*                                                      P*       21-5.40-3
                                                                                                      (f)
                                                                                                      §
   Major    C*  C*                                                      P*       21-5.40-3
                                                                                                      (f)
                                                                                                      §
Feed store   -  P*+ P*+ -       -   -    -  -  -  -    -    -    -      -  -  -    -    P  P  -  -    21-5.40-3
                                                                                                      (d)
Livestock
and poultry  -  P+  P+  P       -   -    -  -  -  -    -    -    -      -  -  -    -    -  -  -  -     
veterinary
service
                                                                                                      §
Sawmill      -  P*  P*  -       -   -    -  -  -  -    -    -    -      -  -  -    -    -  P  -  -    21-5.40-3
                                                                                                      (e)
Accessory Agricultural
Agricultural                                                                                          §
energy       -  Cm* Cm* -       -   -    -  -  -  -    -    -    -      -  -  -    -    Ac Ac -  -    21-5.40-4
facility                                                                                              (a)
Agricultural                                                                                          §
farmers      -  Cm* Cm* -       -   -    -  -  -  -    -    -    -      -  -  -    -    -  -  -  -    21-5.40-4
market                                                                                                (f)
                                                                                                      §
Agritourism  -  Cm* Cm* -       -   -    -  -  -  -    -    -    -      -  -  -    -    -  -  -  -    21-5.40-4
                                                                                                      (b)
Farm                                                                                                  §
dwelling     -  AC* AC* -       -   -    -  -  -  -    -    -    -      -  -  -    -    -  -  -  -    21-5.40-4
                                                                                                      (c)
                                                                                                      §
Farm stand   -  AC* AC* AC*     -   -    -  -  -  -    -    -    -      -  -  -    -    -  -  -  -    21-5.40-4
                                                                                                      (d)
Farm worker                                                                                           §
housing      -  Cm* Cm* -       -   -    -  -  -  -    -    -    -      -  -  -    -    -  -  -  -    21-5.40-4
                                                                                                      (e)
 
Uses    Preservation,                                              Business,       Industrial,
(Note:  Agricultural,      Residential,      Apartment Mixed-Use,  Business Mixed- Industrial
Certain Country            Apartment         Resort                Use             Commercial
uses                                                                               Mixed-Use
are                        R-  R-
defined P- AG- AG-         20, 7.5, A- A- A- AMX- AMX- AMX-        B- B- BMX- BMX- I- I- I- IMX-
in      2  1   2   Country R-  R-5, 1  2  3  1    2    3    Resort 1  2  3    4    1  2  3  1    Standards
Article                    10  R-
10)                            3.5
                                                                                         Business,         Industrial,
                        Preservation,         Residential,         Apartment Mixed-Use,  Business Mixed-   Industrial
                        Agricultural, Country Apartment            Resort                Use               Commercial
Uses                                                                                                       Mixed-Use
(Note: Certain uses are                       R-  R-
defined in Article 10)                        20, 7.5,             AMX- AMX- AMX-                BMX- BMX-             IMX-
                        P-2 AG-1 AG-2 Country R-  R-5, A-1 A-2 A-3 1    2    3    Resort B-1 B-2 3    4    I-1 I-2 I-3 1    Standards
                                              10  R-
                                                  3.5
RESIDENTIAL USES
Household living
Single-unit dwelling    -   -    -    P       P   P    P   P   P   P    P    P    P      -   -   P    -    -   -   -   -     
                                                                                                                            §
Duplex-unit dwelling    -   -    -    P*      P*  P*   P*  P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   P*     -   -   P*   -    -   -   -   -    21-5.50-1
                                                                                                                            (a)
                                                                                                                            §
Two-unit dwelling       -   -    -    P*      P*  P*   P*  P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   P*     -   -   P*   -    -   -   -   -    21-5.50-1
                                                                                                                            (b)
                                                                                                                            §
Multi-unit dwelling     -   -    -    -          -    P   P   P   P    P    P    P      P*  P*  P    P    -   -   -   -    21-5.50-1
                                                                                                                            (c)
Group Living
   Small - State                                                                                                         §
regulated               -   -    C*+  P*      P*  P*   P*  P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   -      -   -   P*   P*   -   -   -   -    21-5.50-2
                                                                                                                            (a)
   Small - not State                                                                                                     §
regulated                      C*+  C*      C*  C*   C*  C*  C*  C*   C*   C*   -      -   -   C*   Cm*  -   -   -   -    21-5.50-2
                                                                                                                            (b)
                                                                                                                            §
   Large             -   -    -    C*      C*  C*   C*  C*  C*  C*   C*   C*   -      -   -   C*   Cm*  -   -   -   -    21-5.50-2
                                                                                                                            (c)
Accessory Residential
                                                                                                                            §
Accessory dwelling unit -   -    -    AC*     AC* Ac*  -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    -   -   -   -    21-5.50-3
                                                                                                                            (a)
                                                                                                                            §
Caretaker unit          AC* AC*+ AC*+                                          AC* AC* AC*  AC*  AC* AC* AC* AC*  21-5.50-3
                                                                                                                            (e)
                                                                                                                            §
Home occupation         -   AC*+ AC*+ AC*     AC* Ac*  AC* AC* AC* AC*  AC*  AC*  AC*    AC* AC* AC*  AC*  -   -   -   -    21-5.50-3
                                                                                                                            (b)
                                                                                                                            §
Ohana unit              -   AC*+ AC*+ AC*     AC* Ac*  -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    -   -   -   -    21-5.50-3
                                                                                                                            (c)
                                                                                                                            §
Rooming                 -   -    -    AC*     AC* Ac*  AC* AC* AC* AC*  AC*  AC*  AC*    AC* AC* AC*  AC*  -   -   -   AC*  21-5.50-3
                                                                                                                            (d)
PUBLIC, CIVIC, AND INSTITUTIONAL USES
Assembly
Meeting facility                                                                                        
                                                                                                                            §
   Small             -   -    Cm*+ Cm*     Cm* Cm*  Cm* Cm* Cm* Cm*  Cm*  Cm*  P*     P*  P*  P*   P*   P*  -   -   Cm*  21-5.60-1
                                                                                                                            (a)
                                                                                                                            §
   Medium            -   -    C*+  C*      C*  C*   C*  C*  C*  C*   C*   C*   C*     C*  C*  C*   C*   C*  -   -   C*   21-5.60-1
                                                                                                                            (a)
                                                                                                                            §
   Large             -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    PRU    PRU PRU PRU  PRU  -   -   -   PRU  21-5.60-1
                                                                                                                            (a)
Community-based                               P*  P*   P*  P*  P*                                                           §
recreation center       Cm* -    -    C m     Cm* Cm*  Cm* Cm* Cm* P    P    P    P      P   P   P    P    -   -   -   -    21-5.60-1
                                                                                                                            (b)
Communication
                                                                                                                            §
Broadcasting antenna    Cm* Cm*  Cm*  -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    C*  C*  C*  C*   21-5.60-2
                                                                                                                            (e)
 
Uses    Preservation,                                              Business,       Industrial,
(Note:  Agricultural,      Residential,      Apartment Mixed-Use,  Business Mixed- Industrial
Certain Country            Apartment         Resort                Use             Commercial
uses                                                                               Mixed-Use
are                        R-  R-
defined P- AG- AG-         20, 7.5, A- A- A- AMX- AMX- AMX-        B- B- BMX- BMX- I- I- I- IMX-
in      2  1   2   Country R-  R-5, 1  2  3  1    2    3    Resort 1  2  3    4    1  2  3  1    Standards
Article                    10  R-
10)                            3.5
                                                                                 Business,         Industrial,
Uses          Preservation,           Residential,         Apartment Mixed-Use,  Business Mixed-   Industrial
(Note:        Agricultural, Country   Apartment            Resort                Use               Commercial
Certain uses                                                                                       Mixed-Use
are defined                           R-  R-
in Article                            20, 7.5,             AMX- AMX- AMX-                BMX- BMX-             IMX-
10)           P-2  AG-1 AG-2  Country R-  R-5, A-1 A-2 A-3 1    2    3    Resort B-1 B-2 3    4    I-1 I-2 I-3 1    Standards
                                      10  R-
                                          3.5
PUBLIC, CIVIC, AND INSTITUTIONAL USES
Communication                                                                                                       §
support       Cm*  Cm*  Cm*   Cm*     Cm* Cm*  Cm* P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   P*     P*  P*  P*   P*   P   P   P   P    21-5.60-2
structure                                                                                                           (c)
Communication                                                                                                       §
tower         Cm*  Cm*  Cm*   Cm*     Cm* Cm*  Cm* Cm* Cm* Cm*  Cm*  Cm*  Cm*    Cm* Cm* Cm*  Cm*  P*  P*  P*  Cm*  21-5.60-2
                                                                                                                    (b)
                                                                                                                    §
Dish antenna  -    Cm*  Cm*   -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    P*     -   P*  P*   P*   P*  P*  P*  P*   21-5.60-2
                                                                                                                    (a)
Education
School, PreK-                                                                                                       §
12            -    -    C*+   Cm*     Cm* Cm*  Cm* Cm* Cm* Cm*  Cm*  Cm*  -      P   P   P    P    -   -   -   -    21-5.60-3
                                                                                                                    (a)
School                                                                                          
vocational
                                                                                                                    §
   Minor   -    P*   P*    -       -   -    -   -   -   P*   P*   P*   -      P   P   P    P    P   P   -   P    21-5.60-3
                                                                                                                    (b)
                                                                                                                    §
   Major   -    P*   P*    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    P   P   -   P    21-5.60-3
                                                                                                                    (b)
University,   PRU  PRU+ PRU+  PRU     PRU PRU  PRU PRU PRU PRU  PRU  PRU  PRU    PRU PRU PRU  PRU  PRU PRU PRU PRU   
college
Government
                                                                                                                    §
Consulate     -    -    -     -       P*  P*   P   P   P   P    P    P    P      P   P   P    P    -   -   -   -    21-5.60-4
                                                                                                                    (a)
Prison        PRU  PRU+ PRU+  PRU     PRU PRU  PRU PRU PRU PRU  PRU  PRU  PRU    PRU PRU PRU  PRU  PRU PRU PRU PRU   
Public        P    P+   P+    P       P   P    P   P   P   P    P    P    P      P   P   P    P    P   P   P   P     
facility
Parks and Open Space
              P*                                                                                                    §
Cemetery      PRU* -    PRU*+ -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    -   -   -   -    21-5.60-5
                                                                                                                    (a)
                                                                                                                    §
Park          P*   P*   P*    P*      P*  P*   P*  P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   P*     P*  P*  P*   P*   -   -   -   P*   21-5.60-5
                                                                                                                    (b)
Utility
                                                                                                                    §
Small         P*   P*   P*    P*      P*  P*   P*  P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   P*     P*  P*  P*   P*   P*  P*  P*  P*   21-5.60-6
                                                                                                                    (a)
                                                                                                                    §
Medium        Cm*  Cm*  Cm*   Cm*     Cm* Cm*  Cm* Cm* Cm* Cm*  Cm*  Cm*  Cm*    Cm* Cm* Cm*  Cm*  P*  P*  Cm* P*   21-5.60-6
                                                                                                                    (b)
                                                                                                                    §
Large         C*   C*   C*    C*      C*  C*   C*  C*  C*  C*   C*   C*   C*     C*  C*  C*   C*   C*  C*  C*  C*   21-5.60-6
                                                                                                                    (c)
Accessory Public, Civic, and Institutional
Accessory                                                                                                           §
receive only  AC*  AC*  AC*   AC*     AC* Ac*  AC* AC* AC* AC*  AC*  AC*  AC*    AC* AC* AC*  AC*  AC* AC* AC* AC*  21-5.60-2
antenna                                                                                                             (d)
 
Uses    Preservation,                                              Business,       Industrial,
(Note:  Agricultural,      Residential,      Apartment Mixed-Use,  Business Mixed- Industrial
Certain Country            Apartment         Resort                Use             Commercial
uses                                                                               Mixed-Use
are                        R-  R-
defined P- AG- AG-         20, 7.5, A- A- A- AMX- AMX- AMX-        B- B- BMX- BMX- I- I- I- IMX-
in      2  1   2   Country R-  R-5, 1  2  3  1    2    3    Resort 1  2  3    4    1  2  3  1    Standards
Article                    10  R-
10)                            3.5
                                                                               Business,         Industrial,
Uses          Preservation,         Residential,         Apartment Mixed-Use,  Business Mixed-   Industrial
(Note:        Agricultural, Country Apartment            Resort                Use               Commercial
Certain uses                                                                                     Mixed-Use
are defined                         R-  R-
in Article                          20, 7.5,             AMX- AMX- AMX-                BMX- BMX-             IMX-
10)           P-2 AG-1 AG-2 Country R-  R-5, A-1 A-2 A-3 1    2    3    Resort B-1 B-2 3    4    I-1 I-2 I-3 1    Standards
                                    10  R-
                                        3.5
COMMERCIAL USES
Daycare
                                                                                                                  §
Child daycare -   -    C*+  Cm*     Cm* Cm*  Cm* Cm* Cm* Cm*  Cm*  Cm*  P*     P*  P*  P*   P*   -   -   -   P*   21-5.70-1
                                                                                                                  (a)
                                                                                                                  §
Adult daycare -   -    C*+  Cm*     Cm* Cm*  Cm* Cm* Cm* Cm*  Cm*  Cm*  P*     P*  P*  P*   P*   -   -   -   P*   21-5.70-1
                                                                                                                  (b)
Eating and Drinking
General                                                                                                           §
eating and    -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   P*   P*   P*   P*     P*  P*  P*   P*   P*  P*  P*  P*   21-5.70-2
drinking                                                                                                          (a)
Bar,                                                                                          
nightclub
                                                                                                                  §
   Minor   -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    P*     -   P*  P*   P*   P*  P*  -   P*   21-5.70-2
                                                                                                                  (a)
                                                                                                                  §
   Major   -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    P*     -   P*  -    P*   -   -   -   P*   21-5.70-2
                                                                                                                  (b)
Lodging
Bed and                                                                                                           §
breakfast     -   -    -    -       -   -    P*  P*  -   -    -    -    P*     -   -   -    -    -   -   -   -    21-5.70-3
home                                                                                                              (a)
                                                                                                                  §
Hotel         -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    P      -   -   C*   P    -   -   -   C*   21-5.70-3
                                                                                                                  (b)
                                                                                                                  §
Timeshare     -   -    -    -       -   -    -   Cm* -   -    -    -    P      -   -   -    -    -   -   -   -    21-5.70-3
                                                                                                                  (c)
Transient                                                                                                         §
vacation unit -   -    -    -       -   -    P*  P*  -   -    -    -    P*     -   -   -    -    -   -   -   -    21-5.70-3
                                                                                                                  (a)
Medical
General                                                                                                           §
medical       -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   P*   P*   P*   P      P   P   P    P    -   -   -   P*   21-5.70-4
services                                                                                                          (a)
                                                                                                                  §
Hospital      PRU PRU+ PRU+ PRU     PRU PRU  PRU PRU PRU PRU  PRU  PRU  PRU    PRU PRU PRU  PRU  PRU PRU PRU PRU  21-5.70-4
                                                                                                                  (b)
Medical       -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      P   P   P    P    P   P   -   P     
laboratory
Office
General                                                                                                           §
office        -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   P*   P*   P*   P      P   P   P    P    P   P   -   P    21-5.70-5
                                                                                                                  (a)
Parking
Commercial                                                                                                        §
parking       -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   P*   P*   P*   P      P   P   P    P    P   P   -   P    21-5.70-6
                                                                                                                  (b)
Remote        -   -    -    Cm*     Cm* Cm*  Cm* Cm* Cm* Cm*  Cm*  Cm*  Cm*    Cm* Cm* Cm*  Cm*  Cm* Cm* Cm* Cm*  21-5.70-6
parking                                                                                                           (a)
Personal Services
General                                                                                                           §
personal      -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   P*   P*   P*   P      P   P   P    P    -   -   -   P    21-5.70-7
services                                                                                                          (a)
Animal care                                                                                   
                                                                                                                  §
   Minor   -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    P*   P*   P*     P*  P*  P*   P*   P*  P*  -   P*   21-5.70-7
                                                                                                                  (b)
                                                                                                                  §
   Major   -   -    P*+  P*      -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      P*  P*  P*   P*   P*  P*  -   P*   21-5.70-7
                                                                                                                  (b)
Recreation, Indoor
General
indoor        -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    P      P   P   P    P    P   P   P   P     
recreation
Theater       -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    P      P   P   P    P    -   -   -   P     
Recreation, Outdoor
General
outdoor       -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    C      C   C   C    C    C   C   -   Cm    
recreation
                                                                                                                  §
Golf course   PRU -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    PRU    -   -   -    -    -   -   -   -    21-5.70-8
                                                                                                                  (a)
Natural-based Cm*      Cm*                                                                                        §
recreation    C*  -    C*   -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    -   -   -   -    21-5.70-8
                                                                                                                  (c)
                                                                                                                  §
Zoo           PRU -    PRU+ -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    -   -   -   -    21-5.70-8
                                                                                                                  (b)
Retail
General                                                                                       
retail
                                                                                                                  §
   Small   -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   P*   P*   P*   P*     P*  P*  P*   P*   -   -   -   P*   21-5.70-9
                                                                                                                  (a)
                                                                                                                  §
   Medium  -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   P*   P*   P*   P*     P*  P*  P*   P*   -   -   -   P*   21-5.70-9
                                                                                                                  (a)
                                                                                                                  §
   Large   -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    P*     P*  P*  P*   P*   -   -   -   P*   21-5.70-9
                                                                                                                  (a)
Mobile                                                                                                            §
commercial    -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   P*   P*   P*   P*     P*  P*  P*   P*   P*  P*  P*  P*   21-5.70-9
establishment                                                                                                     (b)
Vehicle-Related
                                                                                                                  §
Car wash      -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      P*  P*  P*   P*   P*  P*  -   P*   21-5.70-
                                                                                                                  10(a)
Vehicle
fueling       -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      P   P   P    P    P   P   -   P     
station
Vehicle sales                                                                                 
and rental
   Light   -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   P   P    P    P   P   -   P     
   Heavy   -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    P   P   P   -     
Accessory                                                                                     
Commercial
                                                                                                                  §
Drive-thru    -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      AC* AC* AC*  AC*  AC* AC* AC* AC*  21-5.70-
                                                                                                                  11(a)
 
Uses    Preservation,                                              Business,       Industrial,
(Note:  Agricultural,      Residential,      Apartment Mixed-Use,  Business Mixed- Industrial
Certain Country            Apartment         Resort                Use             Commercial
uses                                                                               Mixed-Use
are                        R-  R-
defined P- AG- AG-         20, 7.5, A- A- A- AMX- AMX- AMX-        B- B- BMX- BMX- I- I- I- IMX-
in      2  1   2   Country R-  R-5, 1  2  3  1    2    3    Resort 1  2  3    4    1  2  3  1    Standards
Article                    10  R-
10)                            3.5
                                                                                Business,         Industrial,
               Preservation,         Residential,         Apartment Mixed-Use,  Business Mixed-   Industrial
Uses           Agricultural, Country Apartment            Resort                Use               Commercial
(Note: Certain                                                                                    Mixed-Use
uses are                             R-  R-
defined in                           20, 7.5,             AMX- AMX- AMX-                BMX- BMX-             IMX-
Article 10)    P-2 AG-1 AG-2 Country R-  R-5, A-1 A-2 A-3 1    2    3    Resort B-1 B-2 3    4    I-1 I-2 I-3 1    Standards
                                     10  R-
                                         3.5
INDUSTRIAL USES
Manufacturing and Processing
General
manufacturing                                                                                  
and processing
                                                                                                                   §
   Light    -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      P*  P*  P*   P*   P   P   P   P    21-5.80-1
                                                                                                                   (a)
                                                                                                                   §
   Heavy    -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    P*  P   P   -    21-5.80-1
                                                                                                                   (a)
Biofuel                                                                                                            §
processing     -   C*   C*   -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    -   Cm* Cm* -    21-5.80-1
facility                                                                                                           (b)
Brewery,
distillery,                                                                                    
winery
   Minor    -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    P      P   P   P    P    P   P   P   P     
   Major    -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    P   P   P   P     
Explosive or
toxic chemical                                                                                                     §
manufacturing, -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    -   C*  -   -    21-5.80-1
storage, and                                                                                                       (c)
distribution
Food                                                                                                               §
manufacturing  -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   P*  P*   P*   P   P   P   P    21-5.80-1
and processing                                                                                                     (d)
Linen supplier -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   P   P    P    P   P   P   P     
Petrochemical                                                                                                      §
plan           -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    -   C*  Cm* -    21-5.80-1
                                                                                                                   (e)
Production     -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   P   P    -    P   P   -   P     
studio
Publishing     -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   P   -    P    P   P   -   P     
facility
Marine
General marine                                                                                 
                                                                                                                   §
   Minor    C   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    Cm*    -   Cm* Cm*  Cm*  -   P   P   P*   21-5.80-2
                                                                                                                   (a)
   Major    -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    -   P   P   -     
Port           -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    -   -   P   -     
Repair
General repair -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   P    P    P    -      P   P   P    P    P   P   P   P     
                                                                                                                   §
Heavy repair   -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    P*  P   P   -    21-5.80-3
                                                                                                                   (a)
                                                                                                                   §
Vehicle repair -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      P*  P*  P*   P*   P*  P*  P*  P*   21-5.80-3
                                                                                                                   (b)
Research and Development
General
research and   -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   P   P    P    P   P   -   P     
development
Resource Extraction
General                                                                                                            §
resource       -   C*   C*   -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    -   P   -   -    21-5.80-4
extraction                                                                                                         (a)
Storage and Warehousing
General
storage,
warehousing,   -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    P   P   P   P     
and
distribution
                                                                                                                   §
Self-storage   -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   P*  P*   P*   P   P   -   P    21-5.80-5
                                                                                                                   (a)
                                                                                                                   §
Storage yard   -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    P*  P*  P*  -    21-5.80-5
                                                                                                                   (b)
Transportation
                                                                                                                   §
Airport        PRU PRU+ PRU+ PRU     PRU PRU  PRU PRU PRU PRU  PRU  PRU  PRU    PRU PRU PRU  PRU  PRU PRU PRU PRU  21-5.80-6
                                                                                                                   (a)
                                                                                                                   §
Base yard      -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    P*  P*  P*  P*   21-5.80-6
                                                                                                                   (b)
                                                                                                                   §
Heliport       -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    -   P*  -   -    21-5.80-6
                                                                                                                   (c)
Multimodal                                                                                                         §
facility       -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   C*   C*   C*   C*     Cm* Cm* Cm*  Cm*  Cm* -   -   Cm*  21-5.80-6
                                                                                                                   (d)
Truck terminal -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    -   P   P   -     
Waste-Related
Salvage,                                                                                                           §
scrap, or junk -   -    -    -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    -   Cm* Cm* -    21-5.80-7
storage and                                                                                                        (a)
processing
Waste disposal                                                                                                     §
and processing C*  -    C*+  -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    -      -   -   -    -    -   Cm* Cm* -    21-5.80-7
                                                                                                                   (b)
Accessory Industrial
                                                                                                                   §
Helistop       -   C*+  C*+  -       -   -    -   -   -   -    -    -    C*     -   C*  C*   C*   C*  AC* AC* C*   21-5.80-8
                                                                                                                   (a)
MISCELLANEOUS
Historic                                                                                                           §
structure      Cm* Cm*  Cm*  C*      C*  C*   C*  C*  C*  Cm*  Cm*  Cm*  Cm*    Cm* Cm* Cm*  Cm*  Cm* Cm* Cm* Cm*  21-5.90-1
reuse
Joint          Cm* Cm*  Cm*  Cm*     Cm* Cm*  Cm* Cm* Cm* Cm*  Cm*  Cm*  Cm*    Cm* Cm* Cm*  Cm*  Cm* Cm* Cm* Cm*  §
development                                                                                                        21-5.90-2
 
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.40 Agricultural uses.
   The following sections contain standards for the agricultural use
categories.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.40-1 Crop production.
   Uses in the crop production category that are required to comply with
specific standards are set forth in this section. Development standards
required in other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Urban agriculture standards.
(1)   The keeping and raising of livestock, poultry, and insects is prohibited.
(2)   Pedestrian walkways for customers must be provided on all-weather
surfaces.
(b)   Crop raising standard.Vertical farms are not permitted in the P-2 zoning
district.
(c)   Plant nursery standards.In the agricultural zoning districts:
(1)   Retail sales are limited to plants sold directly from the greenhouse or
open field where the plant was grown or cultivated, and only sales of the plant
in its primary form are allowed.
(2)   The sale of secondary products such as jams, juices, and baked goods is
prohibited.
(3)   Separate structures used primarily for retail sales are prohibited.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.40-2 Livestock and poultry keeping.
   Uses in the livestock and poultry keeping category that are required to
comply with specific standards are set forth in this section. Development
standards required in other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Animal raising, major standards.Feedlots, poultry, or swine enclosures
must be set back a minimum of 300 feet from the property line of any adjoining
property within the residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning
districts.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.40-3 Agricultural support.
   Uses in the agricultural support category that are required to comply with
specific standards are set forth in this section. Development standards
required in other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Agricultural collection and storage.
(1)   Minor:The building area of all agricultural support facilities must not
exceed 25 percent of the zoning lot area.
(2)   Major:
(A)   All structures and activities must be set back a minimum of 100 feet from
the property line of any adjoining property within the residential, apartment,
or apartment mixed-use zoning districts;
(B)   The building area of all agricultural support facilities must not exceed
25 percent of the zoning lot area; and
(C)   In the AG-1, AG-2, and I-1 zoning districts, if the facility is within
300 feet of a zoning lot in the residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-use
zoning district, pickup or drop-off of equipment between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. is prohibited.
(b)   Agricultural equipment service standards.
(1)   All structures and activities must be set back a minimum of 300 feet from
the property line of any adjoining property within the residential, apartment,
or apartment mixed-use zoning districts.
(2)   In the AG-1 and AG-2 zoning districts, the building area of all
agricultural support facilities must not exceed 25 percent of the lot area.
(c)   Agricultural processing standards.
(1)   Minor:All structures and activities must be set back a minimum of 50 feet
from the property line of any adjoining property within the country,
residential, apartment, apartment mixed-use, or resort zoning districts.
(2)   Major:All structures and activities must be set back a minimum of 1,500
feet from the property line of any adjoining property within the country,
residential, apartment, apartment mixed-use, or resort zoning district, unless
the director determines that potential impacts will be adequately mitigated by
the manner of operations and natural conditions, such as prevailing winds and
terrain. Where impacts are deemed adequately mitigated by the director, the
minimum distance between a property used for agricultural processing and a
property located in the country, residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-use
(but not the resort) zoning district may be reduced to no less than 500 feet.
(d)   Feed store standards.
(1)   Only products that are clearly incidental to agricultural activities may
be sold or stored.
(2)   The building area of all agricultural support facilities must not exceed
25 percent of the zoning lot area.
(3)   All structures and activities must be set back a minimum of 100 feet from
the property line of any adjoining property within the residential, apartment,
or apartment mixed-use zoning districts.
(e)   Sawmill standards.All structures and activities must be set back a
minimum of 500 feet from the property line of any adjoining property within the
residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning districts.
(f)   Minor and major composting standards.
(1)   Minor.
(A)   Materials storage and composting activities must be located at least 50
feet away from all surface water, streams, and wetlands.
(B)   Controls to manage odors, vectors, surface contamination, and groundwater
contamination are required. Odors from composting materials and activities may
not be detectable from abutting properties or public areas, including streets
and sidewalks.
(C)   Compost material must be securely stored; compost materials may not be
allowed to leave the property as a result of wind, vehicular tracking, runoff,
or other similar influences.
(D)   The director may require the implementation of mitigation measures to
reduce impacts related to composting activities, including requirements for
visual screening, odor control, and pest control. The failure to comply with
mitigation measures required by the director under this subdivision will be a
violation of this chapter.
(2)   Major.
(A)   All incoming and outgoing loads must be covered and managed to prevent
material from falling onto the ground and to mitigate odors while in transport.
(B)   Onsite areas where composting takes place must be located at least 50
feet away from all surface water, streams, or wetlands.
(C)   Controls to manage odors, vectors, surface contamination, and groundwater
contamination are required.
(D)   Compost material must be covered in such a way that no material will
leave or stray from the site.
(E)   Major composting may not occur on a zoning lot located within 1,500 feet
of property within the country, residential, apartment, apartment mixed-use, or
resort zoning district, unless the director determines that potential impacts
will be adequately mitigated by the manner of operations and natural
conditions, such as prevailing winds and terrain. Where impacts are deemed
adequately mitigated by the director, the minimum distance between a property
used for major composting and a property located in the country, residential,
apartment, or apartment mixed-use (but not the resort) zoning district may be
reduced to no less than 500 feet.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.40-4 Accessory agricultural.
   Uses in the accessory agricultural category that are required to comply with
specific standards are set forth in this section. Development standards
required in other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Agricultural energy facility standards.
(1)   No more than 10 percent of the portion of the zoning lot or zoning lots
used for crop production or livestock and poultry keeping may be used for the
agricultural energy facility, consistent with the regulation of permissible
uses within agricultural districts pursuant to HRS § 205-4.5(a)(17).
(2)   Structures associated with the agricultural energy facility must be set
back a minimum of 300 feet from the property line of any adjoining property
within the residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning district.
(b)   Agritourism minor and major standards.
(1)   Activities and improvements on the zoning lot may not diminish the long-
term agricultural potential of the zoning lot. Improvements on the zoning lot
used for agritourism must be capable of removal without unreasonable cost or
effort.
(2)   Structures primarily dedicated to agritourism must not exceed 10 percent
of the total zoning lot area.
(3)   Buildings and structures associated with agritourism that are not
required as part of crop production or livestock and poultry keeping on the
zoning lot are limited to 10,000 square feet of total floor area.
(4)   A minimum of 51 percent of the zoning lot area suitable for crop
production or livestock and poultry keeping must be dedicated to crop
production or livestock and poultry keeping for as long as the agritourism use
is in operation, as evidenced by a farm plan that shows the area and percentage
of the zoning lot to be in active agricultural use, and includes information
about a farm or ranch s resources, goals, business plan, and timeline to engage
in crop production or livestock and poultry keeping.
(5)   Accessory destination events, including weddings, are subject to the
following:
(A)   Events must take place at a designated event space; and
(B)   Predominantly open-air physical improvements associated with destination
events, such as a roofed pavilion, are allowed; provided that the total floor
area must not exceed 1,000 square feet.
(6)   Bus, jeep, or off-road vehicle tours using motorized vehicles, including
an all-terrain vehicle (ATV), quad, four-wheeler, off highway motorcycle, or
any other all-terrain or four-wheel drive vehicle, may only be conducted on a
currently operational farm or ranch engaged in crop production or livestock and
poultry keeping, and require a minor conditional use approval subject to the
following standards:
(A)   Tours must have an educational purpose related to the agricultural use of
the property; and
(B)   Tours may not interfere with surrounding farm or ranch operations.
(c)   Farm dwelling standards.
(1)   Each farm dwelling (including eaves, overhangs, carports, garages,
trellised areas, stairways, decks, storage sheds that are not used in
connection with agricultural activities, and swimming pools) must be contained
within an area not to exceed 5,000 square feet, confined to a polygon for which
no exterior angle is greater than 180 degrees.
(2)   In the AG-1 zoning district, the number of farm dwellings must not exceed
one for every 5 acres of zoning lot area; provided that a maximum of two farm
dwellings are permitted on a zoning lot unless approved by the director through
an agricultural site development plan or agricultural cluster permit.
(3)   In the AG-2 zoning district, the number of farm dwellings must not exceed
one for every 2 acres of zoning lot area; provided that a maximum of two farm
dwellings are permitted on a zoning lot unless approved by the director through
an agricultural site development plan or agricultural cluster permit.
(4)   A minimum of 51 percent of the zoning lot area suitable for crop
production or livestock and poultry keeping must be dedicated to crop
production and livestock and poultry keeping, and valid agricultural dedication
status must be maintained for as long as the farm dwelling use continues, as
evidenced by:
(A)   A farm plan that shows the area and percentage of the zoning lot to be in
active agricultural use, and includes information about a farm or ranch s
resources, goals, business plan, and timeline to engage in crop production or
livestock and poultry keeping; or
(B)   Agricultural dedication documents used to obtain a Honolulu real property
tax exemption.
(d)   Farm stand standards.
(1)   One farm stand for the growers and producers of agricultural products is
allowed per zoning lot. More than one grower or producer is allowed at a farm
stand.
(2)   Enclosed floor area for the farm stand must not exceed 500 square feet.
Additional unenclosed floor area may be roofed, but must otherwise be open to
the elements.
(3)   The farm stand must be located on private property and not on any public
right-of-way.
(4)   Hours of operation are limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
(e)   Farm worker housing standards.
(1)   All structures and facilities associated with farm worker housing:
(A)   Must occupy a contiguous total land area limited to 50 acres;
(B)   The building area must not exceed 50 percent of the land area associated
with the farm worker housing; and
(C)   Impervious surface area must not exceed 75 percent of the land area
associated with the farm worker housing.
(2)   The farm worker housing plans must be supported by agricultural plans.
The amount of labor necessary to farm the land must justify the number of
dwelling units proposed, and the dwelling units must be dedicated to farm
worker housing.
(3)   Farm worker housing may be composed of multiple detached dwelling units
or attached dwelling units, or may consist of multi-unit dwellings; provided
that no more than one employee and the employee s family live in each dwelling
unit, or up to three unrelated employees may share one dwelling unit. The
employee who occupies a dwelling unit in farm worker housing must be an
agricultural worker.
(4)   Each dwelling unit must not exceed 800 square feet of floor area.
(5)   No more than eight dwelling units are allowed in any multi-unit dwelling.
(6)   The landowner may not plan or develop a residential subdivision on the
agricultural land, except in accordance with the plantation community
subdivision regulations in HRS § 205-4.5(a)(12) (relating to permissible uses
within the agricultural districts).
(7)   When the associated farm is no longer in active production or no longer
employing farm workers, no workers may be housed on the zoning lot. An
exception is allowed to house one caretaker and the caretaker s immediate
family.
(f)   Agricultural farmers market standards.
(1)   Hours of operation are limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
(2)   A minimum of 51 percent of the zoning lot area suitable for crop
production or livestock and poultry keeping must be dedicated to crop
production or livestock and poultry keeping for as long as the agricultural
farmers market is in operation, as evidenced by a farm plan that shows the area
and percentage of the zoning lot to be in active agricultural use, and includes
information about a farm or ranch s resources, goals, business plan, and
timeline to engage in crop production or livestock and poultry keeping.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.50 Residential uses.
   The following sections contain standards for the residential use categories.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.50-1 Household living.
   Uses in the household living category that are required to comply with
specific standards are set forth in this section. Development standards
required in other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Duplex-unit dwelling standards. Each duplex-unit dwelling must be
attached by a boundary wall for a minimum of 15 feet or 50 percent of the
longer dwelling unit, excluding carports or garages, whichever length is
greater (see
Figure 21-10.3).
(b)   Two-unit dwelling standards.
(1)   Each two-unit dwelling must be surrounded by a yard.
(2)   Dwelling units may be:
(A)   On separate floors; or
(B)   Attached by a solid wall a minimum of 15 feet in length, or attached by a
carport or garage (see
Figure 21-10.3).
(3)   Dwelling units may not be connected solely by a covered open area,
exterior hallway, or breezeway.
(c)   Multi-unit dwelling standards.
(1)   In the B-1 and B-2 zoning districts, multi-unit dwellings are permitted;
provided that the following requirements are satisfied:
(A)   All residential uses and occupancies must be located on consecutive
floors that are located above all nonresidential uses and occupancies in the
multi-family dwelling. A residential lobby of up to 1,500 square feet of floor
area and other necessary points of ingress or egress may be located on the
ground floor. A building must have at least one nonresidential use; or
(B)   The multi-unit dwelling satisfies the following requirements:
(i)   For multi-unit dwellings located on zoning lots of 3 acres or less, a
minimum nonresidential floor area ratio of 0.2 must be developed on the lot;
(ii)   For multi-unit dwellings located on zoning lots larger than 3 acres, but
smaller than 7 acres, a minimum of 10,000 square feet or a floor area ratio of
0.05, whichever is greater, of nonresidential floor area must be developed on
the lot; or
(iii)   For multi-unit dwellings located on zoning lots larger than 7 acres, a
minimum of 40,000 square feet or a floor area ratio of 0.05, whichever is
greater, of nonresidential floor area must be developed on the lot.
(C)   For purposes of this subdivision, nonresidential uses must be fully
enclosed within a building and do not include areas used for parking.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.50-2 Group living.
   Uses in the group living category that are required to comply with specific
standards are set forth in this section. Development standards required in
other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Group living, small, State regulated standards.
(1)   Must be licensed, certified, registered, or monitored by the State.
(2)   In the AG-2 zoning district, group living activities must be of an
agricultural nature. A minimum of 51 percent of the zoning lot area suitable
for crop production or livestock and poultry keeping must be dedicated to crop
production or livestock and poultry keeping for as long as the small group
living that is State regulated is in operation, as evidenced by a farm plan
that shows the area and percentage of the zoning lot to be in active
agricultural use, and includes information about a farm or ranch s resources,
goals, business plan, and timeline to engage in crop production or livestock
and poultry keeping.
(3)   If a zoning lot is developed with a principal dwelling unit and an
accessory dwelling unit or an ohana unit, and each of the dwelling units is
being used as a small group living that is state regulated, if the aggregate
number of residents in both dwelling units exceed eight, the group living will
be considered a large group living.
(b)   Group living, small, not State regulated standards.
(1)   In the AG-2 zoning district, group living activities must be of an
agricultural nature. A minimum of 51 percent of the zoning lot area suitable
for crop production or livestock and poultry keeping must be dedicated to crop
production or livestock and poultry keeping for as long as the small group
living that is not State regulated is in operation, as evidenced by a farm plan
that shows the area and percentage of the zoning lot to be in active
agricultural use, and includes information about a farm or ranch s resources,
goals, business plan, and timeline to engage in crop production or livestock
and poultry keeping.
(2)   Within the country, residential, and A-1 zoning districts, except for
multifamily dwellings located in the A-1 zoning district that provide housing
for students or staff of an educational institution with a total enrollment of
10,000 or more students and are within a one-half-mile radius of the
educational institution, unless directly related to public health and safety,
small group living that is not State regulated may not be located within 1,000
feet of the next closest group living.
(3)   If a zoning lot that is developed with a principal dwelling unit and an
accessory dwelling unit or an ohana unit, and each of the dwelling units is
being used as a small group living that is not state regulated, if the
aggregate number of residents in both dwelling units exceed eight, the group
living will be considered a large group living.
(c)   Group living, large standards.
(1)   Access roads must comply with the standards established by
Chapter 22; provided that the director may waive or modify these requirements
if, after consulting with the appropriate State or city agencies, the director
determines that substandard roads or driveways provide reasonably safe access
to the large group living.
(2)   Minimum parking requirements will be determined by the director based on
the number of residents and the nature of the proposed use.
(3)   For special needs housing for the elderly, as defined in §
21-10.1, that are located in the apartment, apartment mixed-use, and business
mixed-use zoning districts, the underlying zoning district standards may be
modified under a conditional use permit as follows:
(A)   Density may be increased by a maximum of 25 percent of the maximum
density permitted in the underlying zoning district;
(B)   Height may be increased by a maximum of 25 percent of the maximum height
permitted in the underlying zoning district, or 30 feet, whichever is less; and
(C)   Off-street parking requirements may be reduced; provided that a minimum
of one parking space per four dwelling or lodging units and a minimum of one
guest parking space per 10 dwelling or lodging units is required.
(4)   The director may modify or waive the large group living standards in this
subsection and other applicable requirements as necessary to comply with the
federal Fair Housing Act or other laws with similar preemptive effect.
(5)   Within the country, residential, and A-1 zoning districts, except for
multifamily dwellings located in the A-1 zoning district that provide housing
for students or staff of an educational institution with a total enrollment of
10,000 or more students and are within a one-half-mile radius of the
educational institution, unless directly related to public health and safety,
large group living may not be located within 1,000 feet of the next closest
group living.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.50-3 Accessory residential.
   Uses in the accessory residential category that are required to comply with
specific standards are set forth in this section. Development standards
required in other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Accessory dwelling unit standards.
(1)   General.
(A)   Accessory dwelling units are not permitted:
(i)   On zoning lots in planned development housing or cluster housing; or
(ii)   On zoning lots that are landlocked.
(B)   The total floor area of an accessory dwelling unit must not exceed:
(i)   500 square feet for zoning lots up to 4,999 square feet in area; or
(ii)   1,000 square feet for zoning lots 5,000 square feet or more in area.
(C)   The construction or conversion of an accessory dwelling unit must meet
all development standards for the principal use in the underlying zoning
district.
(D)   An accessory dwelling unit may be created by:
(i)   Building a new structure (attached to, such as a two-unit dwelling, or
detached from the principal dwelling unit but located on the same zoning lot);
or
(ii)   Converting a legally established structure (attached to, such as a two-
unit dwelling, or detached from the principal dwelling unit but located on the
same zoning lot), attic, or basement.
(E)   Only one accessory dwelling unit is permitted on a zoning lot (including
a zoning lot with existing multiple dwelling units); provided that an ohana
unit that is otherwise permitted on a zoning lot is not considered to be an
accessory dwelling unit for purposes of limiting the number of accessory
dwelling units to one per zoning lot.
(F)   See §
21-6.30(b) for adjustments and exemptions to parking requirements for an
accessory dwelling unit.
(G)   Accessory dwelling units are only permitted where there is sufficient
infrastructure, including but not limited to wastewater treatment and disposal
and water supply, as well as adequate roadways and first-responder resources to
accommodate the accessory dwelling unit.
(2)   Conditions of approval.
(A)   Covenant for accessory dwelling units.The owners of the zoning lot shall
record covenants running with the land with the State bureau of conveyances or
the land court of the State of Hawaii, or both, as appropriate. The covenant
must be recorded in a form approved by the director and may contain such terms
as the director deems necessary to ensure its enforceability. The failure of an
owner or of an owner s heirs, successors, or assigns to abide by such covenant
will be deemed a violation of this chapter and will be grounds for enforcement
by the director pursuant to §
21-2.150. At a minimum, the covenant must state:
(i)   The accessory dwelling unit may only be used for long-term residential
occupancy and may not be used as a bed and breakfast home or transient vacation
unit;
(ii)   The deed restrictions lapse upon removal of the accessory dwelling unit;
(iii)   All of the covenants are binding upon any and all heirs, successors,
and assigns of the owners; and
(iv)   Neither the owners nor the heirs, successors, or assigns of the owners
may submit the zoning lot or any portion thereof to a condominium property
regime under the State of Hawaii Condominium Property Act to separate the
ownership of an accessory dwelling unit from the ownership of its principal
dwelling unit.
(B)   Removal. The owners of an accessory dwelling unit shall notify the
department upon removal of the accessory dwelling unit.
(b)   Home occupation standards.
(1)   General.
(A)   The home occupation must be clearly incidental and subordinate to the use
of the dwelling unit and zoning lot for residential living.
(B)   The home occupation use may not significantly change the exterior
appearance of the dwelling unit, zoning lot, or the surrounding neighborhood.
Onsite signage or advertisements for the home occupation is prohibited.
(C)   The outdoor storage of materials or supplies is prohibited.
(D)   The indoor storage of materials or supplies must not exceed 250 cubic
feet or 20 percent of the total floor area of the dwelling unit, whichever is
greater.
(E)   Noises and obnoxious odors associated with the home occupation must not
be detectable from abutting streets or sidewalks. The director may order the
mitigation of noise and odor impacts, or the cessation of a home occupation if
noise and odor impacts are not able to adequately mitigated.
(F)   The home occupation use may not create unreasonable risks of harm to
persons or property or cause significant adverse impacts to local traffic or
parking.
(G)   In the B-1 and B-2 zoning districts, a home occupation use is permitted
in a dwelling unit within a multi-unit dwelling.
(2)   Limitations on home occupations:
(A)   Commercial beekeeping may be a home occupation, subject to the standards
of this subsection and the animal nuisance provisions in §
12-2.5(b).
(B)   Items sold on the property are limited to items produced by the home
occupation.
(3)   Prohibited home occupations:Activities that are prohibited as a home
occupation use include but are not limited to:
(A)   Vehicle repair and painting that does not include the repair or painting
of up to five vehicles owned by a household member per year;
(B)   Uses and activities that are only permitted in the industrial zoning
districts;
(C)   Commercial weddings, including wedding ceremonies and receptions;
(D)   Storage yards, base yards, and stockpiling;
(E)   Sale of guns and ammunition;
(F)   Use of dwellings or zoning lots as a headquarters for the assembly of
employees for instructions or other purposes, or to be dispatched for work to
other locations;
(G)   Metal fabricating and cutting using welding or cutting torches, or other
uses that involve the excessive or continuous use of loud tools;
(H)   Commercial events and special events that involve the renting, for
compensation, of any portion of the zoning lot for use by guests or invitees;
and
(I)   Animal care, treatment, boarding, or veterinary services. The occasional
boarding and the occasional grooming of animals is permitted, so long as it
involves no more than three animals that are not household pets on the property
at any given time.
(4)   Employees:
(A)   In addition to the household member engaging in the home occupation, one
employee of the home occupation who is not a household member may be on the
property at any given time.
(B)   For home-based childcare, in addition to the one non-household member
employee of the home occupation who is allowed on the property at any given
time under paragraph (A), if an emergency renders unavailable the principal
caregiver who is a household member, an additional employee who is not a
household member may be on the property on a temporary basis to substitute for
the principal caregiver.
(5)   Parking. See §
21-6.30(d) for adjustments and exemptions to parking requirements for home
occupation.
(c)   Ohana unit standards.
(1)   General.
(A)   The construction or conversion of an ohana unit must meet all development
standards and requirements in the underlying zoning district for the principal
dwelling unit and the ohana unit.
(B)   An ohana unit may be created by:
(i)   Building a new structure (attached to, such as a two-unit dwelling, or
detached from the principal dwelling unit) on the same zoning lot; or
(ii)   Converting a legally established structure (attached to, such as a two-
unit dwelling, or detached from the principal dwelling unit), attic, or
basement.
(C)   An ohana unit may be permitted as accessory to a principal dwelling unit
on a zoning lot that already includes one accessory dwelling unit; provided
that all development standards and requirements in the underlying zoning
district for the principal dwelling unit, the accessory dwelling unit, and the
ohana unit are satisfied.
(2)   Occupants.The ohana unit must be occupied by persons who are related by
blood, adoption, guardianship, marriage, or other duly-authorized custodial
relationship to the family residing in the principal dwelling unit; provided
that ohana units for which a building permit was obtained prior to September
10, 1992, are not subject to this subsection and their occupancy by persons
other than persons who are related to the family residing in the principal
dwelling unit is permitted.
(3)   Covenant for ohana unit.The owners of the zoning lot on which an ohana
unit is located shall record covenants running with the land with the State
bureau of conveyances or the land court of the State of Hawaii, or both, as
appropriate. The covenant must be recorded on a form approved by or provided by
the director and may contain such terms as the director deems necessary to
ensure its enforceability. The failure of an owner or of an owner s heir,
successor, or assign, to abide by the recorded covenants will be deemed a
violation of this chapter and will be grounds for enforcement by the director
pursuant to §
21-2.150. At a minimum, the covenant must state:
(A)   The deed restrictions lapse upon removal of the ohana unit;
(B)   All of the covenants are binding upon any and all heirs, successors, and
assigns of the owners; and
(C)   Neither the owner or owners, nor the heirs, successors, or assigns of the
owner or owners may submit the zoning lot or any portion thereof to a
condominium property regime under the State of Hawaii Condominium Property Act
to separate the ownership of an ohana unit from the ownership of its principal
dwelling unit.
(4)   Zoning lot limitations.Ohana units are not permitted on zoning lots that
are:
(A)   Within a zero lot line project;
(B)   Within a cluster housing project;
(C)   Within an agricultural cluster project;
(D)   Within a country cluster project;
(E)   Within a planned development housing project; or
(F)   Within a duplex-unit project.
(5)   Ohana units are only permitted where there is sufficient infrastructure,
including but not limited to waste water treatment and disposal and water
supply, as well as roadways and first-responder resources to accommodate ohana
units.
(6)   See §
21-6.30(m) for adjustments and exemptions to parking requirements for ohana
unit.
(d)   Rooming standards.
(1)   No more than three roomers may reside in a dwelling unit (in addition to
the members of a related household occupying the dwelling unit); provided that
the dwelling may not be used as group living.
(2)   Overnight accommodations provided for compensation must be for periods of
90 consecutive days or more in the same dwelling unit as that occupied by an
owner, lessee, operator, or proprietor.
(e)   Caretaker unit standards.
(1)   In the P-2, AG-1, and AG-2 zoning districts, one caretaker unit per
zoning lot is allowed only as a secondary supplemental use for cemeteries and
Hawaiian fishponds, and the maximum total floor area for a caretaker unit is
1,000 square feet.
(2)   Except in the P-2, AG-1, and AG-2 zoning districts, one accessory
caretaker dwelling is permitted for each principal use; provided that:
(A)   No more than four caretaker units are allowed per zoning lot;
(B)   The accessory caretaker dwelling must be located in an area that does not
interrupt or interfere with the principal use; and
(C)   In the business, business mixed-use, industrial, and industrial mixed-use
zoning districts, the caretaker dwelling must be above or behind the principal
use.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.60 Public, civic, and institutional uses.
   The following sections contain standards for the public, civic, and
institutional use categories.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.60-1 Assembly.
   Uses in the assembly category that are required to comply with specific
standards are set forth in this section. Development standards required in
other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Meeting facility, small, medium, or large standards.
(1)   Adequate ingress and egress must be provided with access to a street or
right-of-way of a minimum width and sufficient street frontage as determined by
the appropriate government agencies.
(2)   Kitchens are allowed as accessory to the meeting facility, but may not be
used to support onsite or offsite commercial activities.
(3)   In the AG-2 zoning district:
(A)   A minimum of 51 percent of the zoning lot area suitable for crop
production or livestock and poultry keeping must be dedicated to crop
production or livestock and poultry keeping for as long as the meeting facility
is in operation, as evidenced by a farm plan that shows the area and percentage
of the zoning lot to be in active agricultural use, and includes information
about a farm or ranch s resources, goals, business plan, and timeline to engage
in crop production or livestock and poultry keeping.
(B)   The maximum capacity for a meeting facility is 500 individuals.
(4)   In the country, residential, and apartment zoning districts, noise and
odors from the meeting facility use must not be detectable from public streets
or sidewalks between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(5)   In the I-1 zoning district:
(A)   A meeting facility may not be located within 1,000 feet of another
meeting facility, whether the other meeting facility is a permitted use or a
nonconforming use.
(B)   The owner or operator of the meeting facility shall file with the
department and record with the State bureau of conveyances or the land court of
the State of Hawaii, or both, as appropriate, a declaration in a form
acceptable to the department, stating that the owner or operator acknowledges
that:
(i)   Structures formerly in industrial use may require upgrades to comply with
various government regulations governing use of a structure as a meeting
facility. These regulations include but are not limited to building,
electrical, plumbing, fire, and occupancy code requirements; and
(ii)   Adjacent and neighboring zoning lots may, by right, include potentially
annoying or toxic industrial uses at any time, including after the meeting
facility use has commenced.
The declaration must also include provisions that preclude the meeting facility
and its representatives from filing nuisance complaints against any industrial
use operating in compliance with applicable laws.
(C)   No accessory uses are permitted unless otherwise permitted as an
accessory use; provided that this paragraph does not prohibit the following
accessory uses to a religious facility such as a church, temple, or synagogue:
(i)   A school for the vocational training of adults for the priesthood,
ministry, or rabbinate; or
(ii)   Classes on religious subjects.
(D)   A parking area and landscaping plan demonstrating compliance with the
minimum requirements of this chapter for off-street parking, loading, and
landscaping and screening must be submitted to the director for review, and
must be approved by the director prior to any use of the meeting facility.
(b)   Community-based recreation center standards.
(1)   In the P-2 zoning district, community-based recreation centers are only
permitted if the community-based recreation center is being used to satisfy
park dedication requirements, or is a part of a master planned community.
(2)   In the residential and apartment zoning districts, if the community-based
recreation center is not being used to satisfy park dedication requirements, or
is not part of a master planned community, a minor conditional use permit is
required.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.60-2 Communication.
   Uses in the communication category that are required to comply with specific
standards are set forth in this section. Development standards required in
other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Dish antenna standards. All dish antennas must be located or screened to
minimize visual impacts, especially from public rights-of-way or public places.
(b)   Communication tower standards.
(1)   Communication towers must be set back from all property lines a minimum
of 1 foot for every 5 feet of height.
(2)   Communication towers must be enclosed by fencing a minimum of 6 feet in
height, and towers must be equipped with an anti-climbing device.
(3)   All communication towers in the residential zoning districts must use
monotree (designed to blend in with surrounding trees) or other stealth design
to minimize visual impacts.
(4)   In the industrial zoning districts, the communication tower must be set
back a minimum of 100 feet from the property line of any adjoining zoning lot
in the residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning districts.
(5)   Communication towers that qualify as eligible facility requests under 47
U.S.C. § 1455(a) and 47 C.F.R § 1.6100, as may be amended or superseded, do not
require any additional land use permits or approvals under this chapter;
provided that the communication tower complies with all conditions of the
initial land use permit or approval.
(c)   Communication support structure standards.
(1)   At-grade equipment must be screened by a solid wall or fence, or by a
landscape hedge of sufficient height and width to screen the equipment.
(2)   Antennas must be concealed within the communication support structure or
designed to minimize visual impacts through architecture, landscaping, or other
site solutions. Antennas are not considered to be concealed or designed to
minimize visual impacts if the antenna extends above the top of the
communication support structure or above the top of screening walls or
features. Acceptable concealment may be accomplished through the use of one or
more of the following design features:
(A)   Antennas integrated into the architectural features of a structure, or
placed in alignment with elements of the structure, such as corners or columns;
(B)   Antennas hidden behind screening walls or features, where the screening
walls or features are colored to match or otherwise blend in with the existing
structure;
(C)   Antennas mounted on screening walls or features that do not extend above
the screening walls or features, where the antennas and visible mounting
supports are colored to match the existing structure; or
(D)   Antennas set back from the edge of the structure to minimize visual
impacts from the ground level at the closest public right-of-way or public
place.
(3)   If satisfying the concealment and integration requirements in subdivision
(2) results in the antenna not being able to provide the service it was
designed to provide in the desired coverage area, the director may allow for
flexibility from the strict application of these requirements if the applicant
demonstrates that:
(A)   The communication support structure is not structurally capable of
supporting the design under applicable codes;
(B)   The location of the antenna interferes with the existing use of the
communication support structure, such as having to locate antennas on balconies
or decks; or
(C)   The antenna is not able to properly transmit radio frequencies due to
technology limitations, such as:
(i)   Inability of the antenna to transmit radio frequencies through paint or
screening walls or features;
(ii)   To transmit properly, the antenna is required to be located close to or
at the edge of the roof; or
(iii)   Paint or screening walls or features compromise antenna functionality,
such as overheating;
provided that the director shall first determine that there are no feasible
alternatives to minimize the visual impacts of the antenna, including possible
relocation of the antenna.
(4)   Communication support structures that qualify as eligible facility
requests under 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a) and 47 C.F.R § 1.6100, as may be amended or
superseded, do not require any additional land use permits or approvals under
this chapter; provided that the communication support structure complies with
all conditions of the initial land use permit or approval.
(5)   In the I-1, I-2, and I-3 zoning districts, antennas need not satisfy the
concealment and integration requirements in subdivision (2) unless the
communication support structure is located within 100 feet of the property line
of any adjoining zoning lot in the residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-
use zoning districts.
(d)   Accessory receive only antenna standards.
(1)   Antennas may not be located in the required yards.
(2)   All antennas must be set back from all property lines one-third of the
height of the antenna or according to the setback requirements for the
underlying zoning district, whichever is greater.
(3)   The antenna must be located at a distance equal to or greater than the
antenna height from the nearest residential dwelling, excluding the owner s
primary dwelling or structure.
(4)   Antennas may not be illuminated.
(5)   All antennas must be equipped with safety devices to prevent them from
being climbed, and must be securely fastened.
(6)   All guy wires must be anchored onsite and outside of any right-of-way.
(7)   When mounted on the ground, the accessory receive only antenna must be
screened by walls, earth berms, or landscaping a minimum of 4 feet in height.
(e)   Broadcasting antenna standards.
(1)   Freestanding broadcasting antennas must be set back from all property
lines a minimum of 1 foot for every 5 feet of height.
(2)   Broadcasting antennas supported by guy wires must be set back from all
property lines a minimum of 1 foot for every 1 foot of height.
(3)   AM antennas must be set back a minimum of 500 feet from the property line
of any adjoining zoning lot in the country, residential, apartment, or
apartment mixed-use zoning districts.
(4)   FM and TV antennas must be set back a minimum of 2,500 feet from the
property line of any adjoining zoning lot in the country, residential,
apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning districts.
(5)   Broadcasting antennas must be designed to structurally accommodate:
(A)   For TV broadcasting antennas:
(i)   At least three high power television antennas and one microwave facility
or one low power television antenna; or
(ii)   Two FM antennas and at least one two-way radio antenna for every 10 feet
of the tower over 200 feet; or
(B)   For broadcasting antennas other than for TV:
(i)   At least one two-way radio antenna for every 10 feet of the tower; or
(ii)   At least one two-way radio antenna for every 20 feet of the tower and at
least one microwave facility or one low power TV antenna;
provided that these requirements may be reduced if the Federal Communications
Commission provides a written statement that no additional licenses for those
broadcast frequencies will be available in the foreseeable future. These
requirements may also be reduced if the height of the tower needed
significantly exceeds the height of existing towers in the area and would
therefore create an unusually onerous visual impact that would dominate and
alter the visual character of the area when compared to the visual impact of
existing towers.
(6)   Once a site for a broadcasting antenna is approved, additional antennas
and accessory uses proposed within the approved envelope (within a specified
height and distance) will be processed without requiring modification to the
initial land use permit or approval, unless the broadcasting antenna site is
within a special district.
(7)   Broadcasting antennas and associated facilities must be enclosed by
fencing a minimum of 6 feet in height.
(8)   All requests for broadcasting antenna installations must be accompanied
by a landscape plan.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.60-3 Education.
   Uses in the education category that are required to comply with specific
standards are set forth in this section. Development standards required in
other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   School, PreK-12 standards.
(1)   All structures and facilities must be set back a minimum of 20 feet from
the property line of any adjoining zoning lot in the country, residential,
apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning districts. The director may waive this
requirement upon finding that the topography or landscaping makes a buffer
unnecessary.
(2)   Schools must be located with access to a street or right-of-way of
minimum access width and sufficient street frontage as determined by the
appropriate government agencies.
(3)   Parking and loading.
(A)   Schools with a design capacity of more than 25 students must provide an
off-street drop-off area, with a minimum capacity equivalent to four standard-
sized parking spaces. This number may be adjusted by the director as the design
capacity of the school changes, or if a traffic management plan is approved.
The pickup and drop-off spaces may be used as parking spaces outside of the
designated pickup and drop-off time periods.
(B)   Schools with a design capacity of more than 50 students must provide at
least one multipurpose bay that is a minimum of 40 feet in depth by 14 feet in
width to accommodate bus pickup and drop- off. This multipurpose bay may be
used for other activities outside of pickup and drop-off hours. The director
may adjust this requirement as the design capacity of the school changes.
(4)   In the AG-2 zoning district, a minimum of 51 percent of the zoning lot
area suitable for crop production or livestock and poultry keeping must be
dedicated to crop production or livestock and poultry keeping for as long as
the PreK-12 school is in operation, as evidenced by a farm plan that shows the
area and percentage of the zoning lot to be in active agricultural use, and
includes information about a farm or ranch s resources, goals, business plan,
and timeline to engage in crop production or livestock and poultry keeping.
(b)   School, vocational standards.
(1)   Minor:
(A)   Hours of operation are limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(B)   In the AG-1 and AG-2 zoning districts, vocational schools must involve
agricultural education programs conducted on a farming or ranching operation
that is accessory and secondary to the principal agricultural use of the zoning
lot as described in HRS § 205-4.5(a)(19).
(2)   Major:In the AG-1 and AG-2 zoning districts, vocational schools must
involve agricultural education programs conducted on a farming or ranching
operation that is accessory and secondary to the principal agricultural use of
the zoning lot as described in HRS § 205-4.5(a)(19).
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.60-4 Government.
   Uses in the government category that are required to comply with specific
standards are set forth in this section. Development standards required in
other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Consulate standards. All structures and facilities must be set back a
minimum of 20 feet from any adjoining zoning lot in the residential, apartment,
or apartment mixed-use zoning districts, unless buffered by a solid wall,
screening fence, or buffering hedge that is a minimum of 6 feet in height.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.60-5 Parks and open space.
   Uses in the parks and open space category that are required to comply with
specific standards are set forth in this section. Development standards
required in other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Cemetery standards.
(1)   Prior to approval of an application for a cemetery, a certificate of
approval must be obtained from the Board of Water Supply indicating that there
is no danger of contamination of the water supply.
(2)   In the AG-2 zoning district, burials are prohibited within 50 feet from
the property line of any adjoining zoning lot located in the country,
residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning districts.
(3)   In the AG-2 zoning district, a minimum 50-foot landscaped buffer is
required from the property line of any adjoining zoning lot located in the
country, residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning districts.
(4)   In the P-2 zoning district, the following development standard
flexibility may be permitted pursuant to the plan review use process:
(A)   An increase of up to 25 feet above the maximum height limit; and
(B)   An increase in the maximum building area.
(b)   Park standards. Playgrounds, sport courts, or sport fields must be set
back from all property lines a minimum of 20 feet.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.60-6 Utility.
   Uses in the utility category that are required to comply with specific
standards are set forth in this section. Development standards required in
other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Small standards.
(1)   General:
(A)   All equipment, including rooftop-mounted equipment, must be set back
pursuant to the height setbacks for the underlying zoning district or special
district, unless otherwise specified below.
(B)   All clearances to utility facilities, including overhead lines and poles,
must comply with all standards of the applicable utility provider.
(C)   Small utilities will be deemed abandoned if operations cease for one
continuous year, with the exception of periods related to necessary
maintenance, transfer of ownership or operation, or repairs to the system. Upon
determination by the director that a small utility has been abandoned, the
structure must be dismantled and removed or repurposed within 90 days after
receipt of written notice from the director, unless the small utility owner or
operator demonstrates to the director s satisfaction the owner or operator s
good faith efforts to sell, repurpose, dismantle, or remove the small utility
in a timely manner, or to otherwise restore the site on which the abandoned
small utility was located.
(D)   In an emergency, a utility may undertake corrective actions deemed
necessary by the utility to avoid unacceptable hazard to life, significant loss
of property, or significant economic hardship due to extended loss of power or
service.
(2)   Solar energy generation.
(A)   A solar energy generation facility of any size is considered a small
utility if it is mounted to the roof of a permitted structure dedicated to a
separate principal use permitted in the underlying zoning district.
(B)   A solar energy generation facility of up to 5 acres in size is considered
a small utility if it is mounted on a structural support over existing surface
parking dedicated to a use permitted in the underlying zoning district.
(C)   A ground-mounted solar energy generation facility is considered a small
utility if it is less than 20 acres in area.
(D)   Notwithstanding paragraphs (A), (B), and (C), a solar energy generation
facility is not considered a small utility, but rather a medium utility if:
(i)   There are proposed or existing solar energy generation facilities on the
same zoning lot or abutting zoning lots, so that the total facility size
exceeds 20 acres, excluding permitted rooftop solar energy generation
facilities;
(ii)   The zoning lot is within the State land use agricultural or conservation
districts; or
(iii)   The solar energy generation facility involves the use of a historic
site listed on the Hawaii or National Register of Historic Places.
(E)   Applications for solar energy generation facilities must include a
landscape plan that shows how the facility will be screened from surrounding
uses and how displaced trees will be relocated or replaced elsewhere on the
zoning lot or surrounding area.
(F)   If a solar energy generation facility exceeds 50,000 square feet in area
and is within 500 feet of the property line of any adjoining zoning lot in the
country, residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning districts, the
facility must be fully screened from the adjoining zoning lots in those zoning
districts by a landscaped hedge, solid wall, or screening fence a minimum of 6
feet in height. If the provision of solid screening is not feasible, the solar
energy generation facility will be considered a medium utility.
(3)   Wind energy generation.
(A)   A wind energy generation facility is considered a small utility if it is
located within the agricultural, country, residential, apartment, apartment
mixed-use, business, business mixed-use, resort, industrial, industrial mixed-
use, or preservation zoning districts, and has a rated capacity of no more than
15 kilowatts.
(B)   A rooftop wind energy generation facility is considered a small utility
if it is accessory to a principal use permitted in the underlying zoning
district on the same zoning lot.
(C)   For a ground-mounted wind energy generation facility, the tower climbing
apparatus and blade tips must not be lower than 15 feet from ground level,
unless enclosed by a fence a minimum of 6-feet in height, and must not be
within 7 feet of any roof or structure unless the blades are completely
enclosed by a protective screen or fence.
(D)   A small wind energy generation facility must be set back from all
property lines at a minimum distance equal to the height of the facility.
Height is measured from the farthest vertical extension of the tower, which
includes the height of the tower or its vertical support structure and the
farthest vertical extension of the blade tip from the tower.
(E)   In the AG-1 and AG-2 zoning districts, a minimum of 51 percent of the
zoning lot area suitable for crop production or livestock and poultry keeping
must be dedicated to crop production or livestock and poultry keeping for as
long as the small wind energy generation facility is in operation, as evidenced
by a farm plan that shows the area and percentage of the zoning lot to be in
active agricultural use, and includes information about a farm or ranch s
resources, goals, business plan, and timeline to engage in crop production or
livestock and poultry keeping .
(b)   Medium standards.
(1)   General.
(A)   All equipment, including rooftop-mounted equipment, must be set back
pursuant to the height setbacks for the underlying zoning district or special
district, unless otherwise specified below.
(B)   All clearances to utility facilities, including overhead lines and poles,
must comply with all standards of the applicable utility provider.
(C)   Medium utilities will be deemed abandoned if operations cease for one
continuous year, with the exception of periods related to necessary
maintenance, transfer of ownership or operation, or repairs to the system. Upon
determination by the director that a medium utility has been abandoned, the
structure must be dismantled and removed or repurposed within 180 days after
receipt of written notice from the director, unless the medium utility owner or
operator demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director the owner or operator
s good faith efforts to sell, repurpose, dismantle, or remove the medium
utility in a timely manner, or to otherwise restore the site on which the
abandoned medium utility was located.
(D)   In an emergency, a minor conditional use permit is not required to
undertake corrective actions deemed necessary by the utility to avoid
unacceptable hazard to life, significant loss of property, or significant
economic hardship due to extended loss of power or service; provided that the
utility shall obtain after-the-fact approvals for the emergency work performed
as soon as practicable after the emergency has ended.
(2)   Solar energy generation.
(A)   Applications for solar energy generation facilities must include a
landscape plan that shows how the facility will be screened from surrounding
uses and how displaced trees will be relocated or replaced elsewhere on the
zoning lot or within the surrounding area.
(3)   Wind energy generation.
(A)   A wind energy generation facility is considered a medium utility if it is
located within the agricultural, country, industrial, or industrial mixed-use
zoning districts, and has a rated capacity of 15 kilowatts or more, but no more
than 99 kilowatts. Medium wind energy generation facilities are not permitted
in other zoning districts.
(B)   For any ground-mounted wind energy generation facility, the tower
climbing apparatus and blade tips of the facility may not be lower than 15 feet
from ground level, unless enclosed by a 6-foot high fence, and may not be
within 7 feet of any roof or structure, unless the blades are completely
enclosed by a protective screen or fence.
(C)   A public safety sign must be posted at the base of the wind energy
generation facility warning of high voltage and dangerous moving blades.
(D)   All guy wires must be anchored onsite and outside of any right-of-way,
equipped with safety devices that will prevent them from being climbed, and
securely fastened.
(E)   A medium wind energy generation facility, whether mounted on the ground
or on a structure, must be set back from all property lines at a minimum
distance equal to the height of the facility. Height is measured from the
farthest vertical extension of the tower, which includes the height of the
tower or its vertical support structure and the farthest vertical extension of
the blade tip from the tower.
(F)   In the AG-1 and AG-2 zoning districts, a minimum of 51 percent of the
zoning lot area suitable for crop production or livestock and poultry keeping
must be dedicated to crop production or livestock and poultry keeping for as
long as the medium wind energy generation facility is in operation, as
evidenced by a farm plan that shows the area and percentage of the zoning lot
to be in active agricultural use, and includes information about a farm or
ranch s resources, goals, business plan, and timeline to engage in crop
production or livestock and poultry keeping.
(c)   Large standards.
(1)   General.
(A)   All equipment, including rooftop-mounted equipment, must be set back
pursuant to the height setbacks for the underlying zoning district or special
district precinct, unless otherwise specified below.
(B)   All clearances to utility facilities, including overhead lines and poles,
must comply with all standards of the applicable utility provider.
(C)   Large utilities will be deemed abandoned if operations cease for one
continuous year, with the exception of periods related to necessary
maintenance, transfer of ownership or operation, or repairs to the system. Upon
determination by the director that a large utility has been abandoned, the
structure must be dismantled and removed or repurposed within one year after
receipt of written notice from the director, unless the large energy generation
system owner or operator demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director the
owner or operator s good faith efforts to sell, repurpose, dismantle, or remove
the large utility in a timely manner, or to otherwise restore the site on which
the abandoned large utility was located.
(D)   In an emergency, a minor conditional use permit is not required to
undertake corrective actions deemed necessary by the utility to avoid
unacceptable hazard to life, significant loss of property, or significant
economic hardship due to extended loss of power or service; provided that the
utility shall obtain after-the-fact approvals for the emergency work performed
as soon as practicable after the emergency has ended.
(2)   Wind energy generation.
(A)   Large wind energy generation facilities are not permitted in the
preservation, residential , apartment, apartment mixed-use, business, business
mixed-use, resort, industrial, and industrial mixed-use zoning districts.
(B)   For any ground-mounted wind energy generation facility, the tower
climbing apparatus and blade tips of the facility may not be lower than 15 feet
from ground level, unless enclosed by a 6-foot high fence, and may not be
within 7 feet of any roof or structure, unless the blades are completely
enclosed by a protective screen or fence.
(C)   A public safety sign must be posted at the base of the wind energy
generation facility warning of high voltage and dangerous moving blades.
(D)   All guy wires must be anchored onsite and outside of any right-of-way,
and equipped with safety devices that will prevent them from being climbed, and
must be securely fastened.
(E)   Large wind energy generation facilities must be set back as follows:
(i)   From all property lines a minimum distance equal to the height of the
facility; and
(ii)   From the property lines of any zoning lot located in the country,
residential, apartment, apartment mixed-use, or resort zoning districts, a
minimum distance of 10 times the height of the facility or 1.25 miles,
whichever is greater.
For purposes of this paragraph, height is measured from the farthest vertical
extension of the tower, which includes the height of the tower or its vertical
support structure and the farthest vertical extension of the blade tip from the
tower.
(F)   With regard to occupied buildings in proximity to the facility that exist
on the submission date of the facility s conditional use permit application:
(i)   No portion of a large wind energy facility may cause more than 10 hours
per year or 10 minutes per day of shadow flicker on existing occupied
buildings; and
(ii)   During normal operation, facility noise levels may not exceed 10 dBA
above ambient sound levels at existing occupied buildings.
Prior to the issuance of a conditional use permit for the facility, the
applicant shall submit to the department site-specific data (such as weather,
topography, and turbine operating characteristics) using software models such
as WindPro or iNoise, demonstrating conformity with shadow flicker and noise
restrictions.
(G)   For large wind energy generation facilities with approved land use
permits that were legally established on September 30, 2025, the repair,
maintenance, or component replacement of the facility during the term of the
facility s current power purchase agreement may involve an increase in the
height of the facility as follows:
(i)   By an incremental amount not to exceed 7 percent of the original height
of the facility; or
(ii)   Up to a maximum height of 575 feet;
whichever is the lesser facility height; provided that the facility operates
under and within the scope of its approved land use permits, and must comply
with the minimum setback required under paragraph (E)(i). Any increase in
height pursuant to this paragraph will not be deemed to increase the facility s
setback nonconformity.
(H)   In the AG-1 and AG-2 zoning districts, a minimum of 51 percent of the
zoning lot area suitable for crop production or livestock and poultry keeping
must be dedicated to crop production or livestock and poultry keeping for as
long as the large wind energy generation facility is in operation, as evidenced
by a farm plan that shows the area and percentage of the zoning lot to be in
active agricultural use, and includes information about a farm or ranch s
resources, goals, business plan, and timeline to engage in crop production or
livestock and poultry keeping.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
Editor s note:
   September 30, 2025 is substituted for the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 21-5.70 Commercial uses.
   The following sections contain standards for the commercial use categories.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.70-1 Daycare.
   Uses in the daycare category that are required to comply with specific
standards are set forth in this section. Development standards required in
other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Child daycare standards.
(1)   All outdoor activity areas, such as playgrounds, toddler lots, play
courts, and similar facilities, must be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the
property line of any adjoining zoning lot within the country, residential,
apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning districts, and a minimum 6-foot high
solid wall must be provided as a buffer. The director may waive this
requirement upon finding that the topography or landscaping makes a buffer
unnecessary.
(2)   Facilities with a design capacity exceeding 25 care recipients must
provide an onsite pickup and drop-off area equivalent to four standard-sized
parking spaces. The pickup and drop-off spaces may be used as parking spaces
outside of the designated pickup and drop-off time periods.
(3)   In the AG-2 zoning district, a minimum of 51 percent of the zoning lot
area suitable for crop production or livestock and poultry keeping must be
dedicated to crop production or livestock and poultry keeping for as long as
the child daycare is in operation, as evidenced by a farm plan that shows the
area and percentage of the zoning lot to be in active agricultural use, and
includes information about a farm or ranch s resources, goals, business plan,
and timeline to engage in crop production or livestock and poultry keeping.
(b)   Adult daycare standards.
(1)   Facilities with a design capacity exceeding 25 care recipients must
provide an onsite pickup and drop-off area equivalent to four standard-sized
parking spaces. The pickup and drop-off spaces may be used as parking spaces
outside of the designated pickup and drop-off time periods.
(2)   In the AG-2 zoning district, a minimum of 51 percent of the zoning lot
area suitable for crop production or livestock and poultry keeping must be
dedicated to crop production or livestock and poultry keeping for as long as
the adult daycare is in operation, as evidenced by a farm plan that shows the
area and percentage of the zoning lot to be in active agricultural use, and
includes information about a farm or ranch s resources, goals, business plan,
and timeline to engage in crop production or livestock and poultry keeping.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.70-2 Eating and drinking.
   Uses in the eating and drinking category that are required to comply with
specific standards are set forth in this section. Development standards
required in other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   General eating and drinking standards.
(1)   In the apartment mixed-use zoning district, the density requirements in
Table 21-3.3 and §
21-3.90-1(c)(3) apply.
(2)   In the AMX-1, AMX-2, AMX-3, B-1, and I-3 zoning districts, the
preparation and selling of liquor must end at 12:00 a.m.
(3)   When the principal entrance is less than 75 feet or its parking or
loading areas are less than 20 feet from any adjoining zoning lot in the
country, residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning district:
(A)   A solid wall or fence (not a chain-link fence) or equivalent landscape
buffer (such as a screening hedge), 6 feet in height, must be installed and
maintained at the common property lines; and
(B)   Hours of operation are limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
General eating and drinking establishments that are intended to operate beyond
these hours may be permitted under a minor conditional use permit.
(b)   Bar, nightclub, minor and major standards.
(1)   Must be set back a minimum of 300 feet from any zoning lot in the
country, residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning district.
(2)   The director may require mitigation of impacts from noise, odor, or
glare.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.70-3 Lodging.
   Uses in the lodging category that are required to comply with specific
standards are set forth in this section. Development standards required in
other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Bed and breakfast home; Transient vacation unit standards.
(1)   Permitted districts.Bed and breakfast homes and transient vacation units
are permitted as described in paragraphs (A), (B), and (C), and as depicted in
the figures referred to in paragraph (D); provided that if there is any
inconsistency between the descriptions in paragraphs (A), (B), and (C), and the
depiction in the figures referred to in paragraph (D), the figures referred to
in paragraph (D) will prevail.
(A)   Bed and breakfast homes and transient vacation units are permitted in the
A-1 low-density apartment zoning district and the A-2 medium-density apartment
zoning district; provided that:
(i)   They are within 3,500 feet of a resort zoning district of greater than 50
contiguous acres; and
(ii)   The resort district and the A-1 or A-2 district have been rezoned
pursuant to the same zone change application as part of a master-planned resort
community;
(B)   Bed and breakfast homes and transient vacation units are permitted in the
apartment precinct of the Waikiki special district on the zoning lots
identified as tax map keys (1) 2-6-025:005 and (1) 2-6-028:011; and
(C)   Bed and breakfast homes and transient vacation units are permitted on
certain zoning lots located in the A-2 medium-density apartment zoning district
contiguous to the Hoakalei Resort and Lagoon.
(D)   The areas in which bed and breakfast homes and transient vacation units
are permitted as set forth in paragraphs (A), (B), and (C) are depicted in the
following figures:
(i)   The areas located within the apartment precinct of the Waikiki special
district mauka of Kuhio Avenue, as designated in
Figure 21-5.1;
(ii)   The areas located within the A-1 low-density apartment zoning district
and the A-2 medium-density apartment zoning district situated in close
proximity to the Ko Olina Resort, as designated in
Figure 21-5.2;
(iii)   The area located within the A-1 low-density apartment zoning district
situated in close proximity to the Turtle Bay Resort, as designated in
Figure 21-5.3; and
(iv)   The area located within the A-2 medium-density apartment zoning district
located contiguous to the Hoakalei Resort and lagoon, as designated in
Figure 21-5.4.
Figure 21-5.1
Bed and Breakfast Homes and Transient Vacation Units
Permitted Areas - Waikiki Special District Mauka of Kuhio Avenue
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9108.png]
 
Figure 21-5.2
Bed and Breakfast Homes and Transient Vacation Units
Permitted Areas - Close Proximity to the Ko Olina Resort
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9106.png]
 
Figure 21-5.3
Bed and Breakfast Homes and Transient Vacation Units
Permitted Areas - Close Proximity to the Turtle Bay Resort
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9104.png]
 
Figure 21-5.4
Bed and Breakfast Homes and Transient Vacation Units
Permitted Areas - Contiguous to the Hoakalei Resort and Lagoon
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10287.png]
 
(2)   Requirements:The following standards and requirements apply to bed and
breakfast homes and transient vacation units; provided that bed and breakfast
homes operating under valid nonconforming use certificates pursuant to §
21-4.110-2, or transient vacation units operating under a valid nonconforming
use certificate pursuant to §
21-4.110-1need only comply with paragraph (C):
(A)   Registration:
(i)   The owner or operator of a bed and breakfast home or transient vacation
unit shall register the bed and breakfast home or transient vacation unit with
the department on a form prescribed by the director, and submit the following
in the initial application for registration:
(aa)   A title report for the subject property that has been issued or updated
within 30 days prior to its submission, and identifies all persons owning an
interest in the property;
(bb)   A valid current State of Hawaii general excise tax license, transient
accommodations tax license, and city transient accommodations tax license for
the subject property;
(cc)   For a bed and breakfast home, evidence of a real property tax home
exemption for the subject property, and evidence that the applicant has a
minimum 50 percent ownership interest in the subject property;
(dd)   An initial registration fee of $1,000 for the bed and breakfast home or
transient vacation unit;
(ee)   Evidence that the use as a bed and breakfast home or transient vacation
unit is covered by an insurance carrier for the subject property, pursuant to
subdivision (3)(B)(iii)(dd);
(ff)   Confirmation that the bed and breakfast home or transient vacation unit
is permitted by any applicable homeowners association, apartment owners
association, or condominium property regime articles, by-laws, and house rules;
(gg)   The informational binder required under subdivision (2)(C)(vi); provided
that a copy of a registration certificate need not be included;
(hh)   Evidence that a dwelling unit proposed for use as a bed and breakfast
home or transient vacation unit:
(AA)   Is not an affordable unit subject to income restrictions;
(BB)   Did not receive housing or rental assistance subsidies; and
(CC)   Was not subject to an eviction within the last 12 months.
(ii)   Registration will be effective for a period of one year beginning on the
date a certificate of registration is issued by the department, and must be
renewed annually prior to expiration.
(B)   Registration renewal.
(i)   Annually, no earlier than three months prior to the expiration of the
registration certificate, the owner or operator of a bed and breakfast home or
transient vacation unit shall renew the registration certificate for a bed and
breakfast home or transient vacation unit with the department on a form
prescribed by the department, and submit to the department the following in the
registration renewal application:
(aa)   For a bed and breakfast home, evidence of a real property tax home
exemption for the subject property;
(bb)   A tax clearance certificate issued by the department of budget and
fiscal services certifying that real property taxes were assessed at the rates
required by §
8-7.1and paid in full during the preceding tax year;
(cc)   A tax clearance certificate issued by the State department of taxation
certifying the payment of State of Hawaii general excise taxes and transient
accommodations taxes, and a tax clearance certificate issued by the department
of budget and fiscal services certifying the payment of city transient
accommodations taxes, for the subject property during the previous tax year;
(dd)   If there has been any change in ownership of the subject property, an
updated title report that has been issued within 30 days prior to the
submission of the renewal application to the department;
(ee)   A renewal fee of $500 for the bed and breakfast home or transient
vacation unit;
(ff)   Evidence that the use as a bed and breakfast home or transient vacation
unit is covered by an insurance carrier for the property pursuant to
subdivision (2)(C)(iv); and
(gg)   Confirmation that the bed and breakfast home or transient vacation unit
is permitted by any applicable homeowners association, apartment owners
association, or condominium property regime articles, by-laws, and house rules.
(ii)   The director may deny renewal of a registration if:
(aa)   The owner or operator receives one or more notices of order for
violation of this subsection within a one year period;
(bb)   The owner or operator demonstrates an inability to operate a bed and
breakfast home or transient vacation unit without causing significant negative
impacts to the surrounding community, including but not limited to instances
where complaints from the public indicate that noise or other nuisances created
by guests disturbs residents of the neighborhood in which the bed and breakfast
home or transient vacation unit is located; or
(cc)   Where other good cause exists for denial of the renewal application.
(C)   Restrictions and standards:Bed and breakfast homes and transient vacation
units must operate in accordance with the following restrictions and standards:
(i)   Functioning smoke detectors must be installed in each room that is
suitable and used for transient occupant sleeping accommodations, and each
hallway connected to such room. In addition to smoke detectors, functioning
carbon monoxide detectors must be installed in each room that is suitable and
used for transient occupant sleeping accommodations, and each hallway connected
to such room, if the room is served by natural gas, propane, or other
combustible gas;
(ii)   Occupancy limits and sleeping arrangements are as follows:
(aa)   All overnight transient occupants must be registered with the owner or
operator of the bed and breakfast home or transient vacation unit;
(bb)   Except for studio units, sleeping accommodations for all transient
occupants must be provided in bedrooms or other rooms that are suitable for
sleeping accommodations (such as a living room with a sofabed). No more than
two adults may sleep in each allowable room in which sleeping accommodations
are provided;
(cc)   The total number of adult overnight transient occupants may not exceed
two times the number of rooms provided to transient occupants for sleeping
accommodations; and
(dd)   The owner or operator shall maintain a current two-year registry setting
forth the names and telephone numbers of all transient occupants and the dates
of their respective stays;
(iii)   Exterior signage indicating that a dwelling unit is used as a bed and
breakfast home or transient vacation unit is prohibited;
(iv)   Insurance coverage required.The owner or operator must maintain a
minimum of $1,000,000 per occurrence in commercial general liability insurance
at all times. Owners or operators may fulfill insurance requirements through
coverage offered by a hosting platform; provided the insurance coverage
satisfies the minimum requirements of this paragraph;
(v)   Gatherings restricted. The property on which a bed and breakfast home or
transient vacation unit is located may not be used for gatherings of ten or
more individuals who are not registered as overnight transient occupants at the
bed and breakfast home or transient vacation unit;
(vi)   Informational binder required.The owner or operator shall create a
binder that must be placed and maintained in a conspicuous location within the
bed and breakfast home or transient vacation unit at all times. The binder must
provide guidance to transient occupants on being respectful of neighbors and
responding to emergencies. The binder must be made available for inspection by
the department upon request. At a minimum, the binder must include the
following documents and information:
(aa)   A floor plan of the dwelling unit used as a bed and breakfast home or
transient vacation, identifying the location of all transient occupant
bedrooms, the maximum occupancy of each bedroom, and the location of all fire
exits;
(bb)   Parking plan:
(AA)   For bed and breakfast homes and transient vacation units that are not
located in a multifamily dwelling, a parking plan identifying the location and
number of parking stalls available to persons associated with the bed and
breakfast home or transient vacation unit (such as owners, transient occupants,
visitors, or service providers); the parking plan must include illustrations,
drawn to scale, showing the size of designated parking spaces, their location
on the zoning lot, and which spaces may be occupied by vehicles of the
transient occupants; or
(BB)   For bed and breakfast homes or transient vacation units located in a
multifamily dwelling, a parking plan identifying the location and number of
parking stalls within the multifamily dwelling that may be used by persons
associated with the bed and breakfast home or transient vacation unit; the
parking plan may be provided in narrative form without illustrations or
graphics;
(cc)   Instructions for trash collection and disposal, including the dates and
times of scheduled trash collections;
(dd)   A copy of the house rules for the bed and breakfast home or transient
vacation unit, which must impose quiet hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
and for bed and breakfast homes and transient vacation units operating pursuant
to nonconforming use certificates and located within the country, residential,
or apartment zoning districts, the house rules must prohibit transient
occupants from parking vehicles on the public streets in the vicinity of the
bed and breakfast home or transient vacation unit;
(ee)   A list of emergency contacts, which must include a 24-hour telephone
number for the owner or operator of the bed and breakfast home or transient
vacation unit, the 911 emergency telephone number, and the website address for
the Hawaii emergency management agency;
(ff)   A copy of the certificate of insurance for the bed and breakfast home or
transient vacation unit;
(gg)   Copies of the general excise and transient accommodations tax licenses
for the bed and breakfast home or transient vacation unit; and
(hh)   A copy of the registration certificate or nonconforming use certificate
for the bed and breakfast home or transient vacation unit.
(vii)   Upon reasonable notice, any bed and breakfast home or transient
vacation unit must be made available for inspection by the department;
(viii)   The violation of any provision of this subsection will be grounds for
administrative fines and nonrenewal unless corrected before the renewal
deadline. Recurring or multiple violations will result in denial of renewal
requests;
(ix)   The director may revoke a registration at any time by issuing a notice
of revocation under the following circumstances:
(aa)   The owner or operator receives more than two notices of order within a
one year period for violation of this subsection;
(bb)   The owner or operator demonstrates an inability to operate a bed and
breakfast home or transient vacation unit without causing significant negative
impacts to the surrounding community; including but not limited to instances
where complaints from the public indicate that noise or other nuisances created
by transient occupants disturbs residents of the neighborhood in which the bed
and breakfast home or transient vacation unit is located; or
(cc)   The director determines that good cause exists for revocation of the
registration; and
(x)   Registration as a bed and breakfast home or transient vacation unit is
not transferable, and shall not run with the land.
(3)   Advertisements.
(A)   Definitions:As used in this paragraph, unless the context otherwise
requires:
(i)   Advertisement means the display or transmission of any communication that
may cause a reasonable person to understand that a dwelling unit or portion
thereof is available for rent. Advertisements include but are not limited to
written and spoken words, emails, text messages, electronic and hard copy
publications, flyers, handbills, signs, websites, and expressive images.
(ii)   Person means a legal person or a natural person, consisting of
individuals and all types of business and legal entities, including but not
limited to associations, nonprofit organizations, trusts, estates,
partnerships, corporations, and limited liability companies.
(B)   Prohibition:Advertisements for specifically identified bed and breakfast
homes and transient vacation units, or for the lease or rental of other
specifically identified dwelling units where the advertisement may reasonably
be read as being an advertisement for the lease or rental of a bed and
breakfast home or transient vacation unit, are subject to this subparagraph.
(i)   It is unlawful for any person to advertise or cause the advertisement of
a bed and breakfast home or transient vacation unit without including in the
advertisement a current registration certificate number obtained pursuant to
this section, or a nonconforming use certificate number obtained pursuant to §
21-4.110-1 or §
21-4.110-2, and a tax map key number for the property on which the bed and
breakfast home or transient vacation unit is located.
(ii)   It is unlawful for any person to advertise or cause the advertisement of
a dwelling unit that is not a registered bed and breakfast home or transient
vacation unit pursuant to this section or is not operating under a
nonconforming use certificate pursuant to §
21-4.110-1 or §
21-4.110-2, for a term of less than 90 consecutive days. Any advertisement for
the rental of a dwelling unit that is not a registered bed and breakfast home
or transient vacation unit or is not operating pursuant to a nonconforming use
certificate as aforesaid may not include daily or less than three-month rental
rates, and must include the following statement: This property may not be
rented for less than 90 consecutive days. Rental prices will not be reduced or
adjusted based on the number of days the rental is actually used or occupied.
(iii)   Within seven days after receipt of a notice of violation of paragraph
(A) or (B), the owner or operator of a dwelling unit shall remove, or cause the
removal of, the advertisement identified in the notice, including but not
limited to any advertisement made through a hosting platform. If the
advertisement is not removed within seven days after receipt of the notice of
violation, the following civil fines will be levied against the owner or
operator of the dwelling unit:
(aa)   An initial fine not to exceed $5,000; and
(bb)   A fine not to exceed $10,000 for each day thereafter that the
advertisement is on public display.
(iv)   The existence of an advertisement that is unlawful under paragraph (A)
or (B) will be prima facie evidence that a bed and breakfast home or a
transient vacation unit is being operated at the listed address. The burden of
proof is on the owner of the subject real property to establish that the
property is not being used as a bed and breakfast home or transient vacation
unit, or that the advertisement was placed without the property owner s
knowledge or consent.
(C)   Exemptions:The following are exempt from this subdivision.
(i)   Legally established hotels, whether owned by one person or owned
individually as unit owners but operating as a hotel as defined in §
21-5.70-3(b).
(ii)   Legally established timeshare units, as provided in §
21-5.70-3(c).
(4)   Unpermitted bed and breakfast homes or unpermitted transient vacation
units.
(A)   Definitions:As used in this paragraph, unless the context otherwise
requires:
(i)   Unpermitted bed and breakfast home means a bed and breakfast home that is
not:
(aa)   Operating under a valid nonconforming use certificate pursuant to §
21-4.110-2; or
(bb)   Validly registered under this section.
(ii)   Unpermitted transient vacation unit means a transient vacation unit that
is not:
(aa)   Operating under a valid nonconforming use certificate pursuant to §
21-4.110-1; or
(bb)   Validly registered under this section.
(B)   Unlawful actions:It is unlawful for any owner or operator of an
unpermitted bed and breakfast home or unpermitted transient vacation unit, or
the owner or operator s agent or representative to:
(i)   Rent, offer to rent, or enter into a rental agreement to rent an
unpermitted bed and breakfast home for fewer than 90 consecutive days;
(ii)   Rent, offer to rent, or enter into a rental agreement to rent an
unpermitted bed and breakfast home or unpermitted transient vacation unit,
where such rental, offer, or rental agreement limits actual occupancy of the
premises to a period of less than the full stated rental period, or conditions
the right to occupy the rented premises for the full stated rental period on
the payment of additional consideration;
(iii)   Set aside or exclusively reserve an unpermitted bed and breakfast home
or unpermitted transient vacation unit for rental or occupancy for a period of
90 consecutive days or more, but limit actual occupancy of the premises to a
period of less than the full stated rental period, or condition the right to
occupy the rented premises for the full stated rental period on the payment of
additional consideration; or
(iv)   Advertise, solicit, offer, or knowingly provide rental of an unpermitted
bed and breakfast home or unpermitted transient vacation unit to transient
occupants for less than 90 consecutive days. An advertisement for an
unpermitted bed and breakfast home or unpermitted transient vacation unit that
includes daily or less than three-month rental rates will be deemed to be in
violation of this paragraph.
(5)   Complaints:Any person may submit a written complaint to the director
reporting a violation of this subsection regarding bed and breakfast homes and
transient vacation units.
(A)   A complaint reporting a suspected violation of this section must:
(i)   Identify the address of the bed and breakfast home or transient vacation
unit that is the subject of the suspected violation, including the apartment or
unit number of the dwelling unit if it is located in a multifamily dwelling;
(ii)   State all of the facts that cause the complainant to believe that a
violation has occurred;
(iii)   Identify the provisions of this section that the complainant believes
are being violated; and
(iv)   Provide the complainant s name and a mailing address where the director
may respond to the complaint.
(B)   Within 30 days after receiving a written complaint reporting a violation
of the provisions of this paragraph, the director shall provide a written
response to the complainant either:
(i)   Declining jurisdiction over the complaint, in which case the complainant
may pursue judicial relief pursuant to HRS § 46-4(b);
(ii)   Entering a finding of no violation, which may be appealed to the zoning
board of appeals pursuant to Charter § 6-1516; or
(iii)   Advising the complainant that the director has initiated an
investigation of the complaint.
(6)   This subsection does not terminate or supersede private restrictive
covenants or other restrictions that prohibit the use of real property as a bed
and breakfast home or transient vacation unit.
(7)   Notwithstanding any contrary provisions in this chapter, bed and
breakfast homes and transient vacation units that do not have a valid
nonconforming use certificate or registration certificate are not permitted in
areas where the applicable development plan or sustainable communities plan
prohibits the establishment of new bed and breakfast homes or transient
vacation units; provided that bed and breakfast homes or transient vacation
units may renew valid registration certificates that were initially issued
prior to an amendment to the applicable development plan or sustainable
communities plan that prohibits bed and breakfast homes or transient vacation
units in the plan area.
(b)   Hotel standards.
(1)   In the BMX-3 zoning district, hotels are permitted within the Primary
Urban Center development plan, Ewa development plan, or Central Oahu
sustainable communities plan areas; provided that all of the following are
satisfied:
(A)   The hotel does not exceed a floor area ratio of 2.0, excluding floor area
dedicated to separate permitted uses;
(B)   The hotel may not be used or include facilities for weddings,
conventions, or special events as an accessory use, and specific uses must be
permitted as a principal use in the underlying zoning district; and
(C)   Guest rooms must be offered or used for transient accommodations for a
minimum of 275 days per year, unless unavailable for occupancy due to necessary
repair or maintenance.
(2)   In the IMX-1 zoning district, hotels are permitted in the areas situated
in close proximity to the Daniel K. Inouye International Airport, as designated
in
Figure 21-5.5.
Figure 21-5.5
Hotels Permitted Areas - IMX-1 Zoning District
Close Proximity to the Daniel K. Inouye International Airport
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10296.png]
 
(c)   Timeshare standards. Timeshare units are permitted as described in
subdivision (1) and as depicted in the figure referred to in subdivision (2);
provided that if there is any inconsistency between the description in
subdivision (1) and the depiction in the figure referred to in subdivision (2),
the figure referred to in subdivision (2) will prevail.
(1)   Timeshare units are permitted in the A-2 medium density apartment zoning
district; provided that:
(A)   They are within 3,500 feet of a resort zoning district of greater than 50
contiguous acres; and
(B)   The resort district and the A-2 district have been rezoned pursuant to
the same zone change application as part of a master-planned resort community;
and
(2)   The areas in which timeshare units are permitted as set forth in
subdivision (1) are depicted as the areas located within the A-2 medium density
apartment zoning district situated in close proximity to the Ko Olina Resort,
as designed in
Figure 21-5.6.
Figure 21-5.6
Timeshare Permitted Areas - Close Proximity to the Ko Olina Resort
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10298.png]
 
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.70-4 Medical.
   Uses in the medical category that are required to comply with specific
standards are set forth in this section. Development standards required in
other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   General medical services standards.
(1)   In the apartment mixed-use zoning district, the density requirements of
Table 21-3.3 and §
21-3.90-1(c)(3) apply.
(2)   In the industrial mixed-use zoning district, the density requirements of
Table 21-3.5 and §
21-3.140-1(c) apply.
(b)   Hospital standards. As required pursuant to a plan review use permit.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.70-5 Office.
   Uses in the office category that are required to comply with specific
standards are set forth in this section. Development standards required in
other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   General office standards. The density requirements of
Table 21-3.3 and §
21-3.90-1(c)(3) apply.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.70-6 Parking.
   Uses in the parking category that are required to comply with specific
standards are set forth in this section. Development standards required in
other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Remote parking standards.
(1)   In the apartment, apartment mixed-use, and resort zoning districts, there
is no minimum zoning lot area, width, or depth for remote parking facilities.
(2)   For additional requirements applicable to remote parking see §
21-6.70.
(b)   Commercial parking standards. The density controls of
Table 21-3.3 and §
21-3.90-1(c)(3) apply.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.70-7 Personal service.
   Uses in the personal service category that are required to comply with
specific standards are set forth in this section. Development standards
required in other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   General personal services standards.
(1)   In the apartment mixed-use zoning district:
(A)   All services involving amplified music or music instruction must be
located in a fully enclosed, sound-attenuated structure, and hours of operation
are limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(B)   The density requirements of
Table 21-3.3 and §
21-3.90-1(c)(3) apply.
(2)   In the industrial mixed-use zoning district, the density requirements of
Table 21-3.5 and §
21-3.140-1(c) apply.
(3)   When the principal entrance is less than 75 feet or its parking area is
less than 20 feet from any adjoining zoning lot in the country, residential,
apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning district:
(A)   A solid wall or fence (not a chain-link fence) or equivalent landscape
buffer (such as a screening hedge), 6 feet in height, must be installed and
maintained at the common property lines; and
(B)   Hours of operation are limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
General personal services uses that are intended to operate beyond these hours
may be permitted under a minor conditional use permit.
(b)   Animal care, minor and major standards.
(1)   All structures and facilities associated with keeping animals overnight
must either:
(A)   Be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any adjoining zoning lot in the
residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning district; or
(B)   Be fully enclosed, soundproofed, and air-conditioned if it is within 100
feet from any adjoining zoning lot in the residential, apartment, or apartment
mixed-use zoning district.
(2)   In the business, business mixed-use, and IMX-1 zoning districts, major
animal care must be soundproofed and air-conditioned, and associated odors must
not be detectable from common areas within a building, abutting properties, or
public areas such as public streets and sidewalks.
(3)   Except for occasional and infrequent incidents, animal noises must not be
detectable from common areas within a building, abutting properties, or public
areas such as streets and sidewalks.
(4)   For minor animal care, outdoor animal care areas are limited to
supervised play areas and runs.
(5)   In the AG-2 zoning district, a minimum of 51 percent of the zoning lot
area suitable for crop production or livestock and poultry keeping must be
dedicated to crop production or livestock and poultry keeping for as long as
the major animal care is in operation, as evidenced by a farm plan that shows
the area and percentage of the zoning lot to be in active agricultural use, and
includes information about a farm or ranch s resources, goals, and business
plan to engage in crop production or livestock and poultry keeping.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.70-8 Recreation, outdoor.
   Uses in the outdoor recreation category that are required to comply with
specific standards are set forth in this section. Development standards
required in other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Golf course standards. As required pursuant to a plan review use permit.
(b)   Zoo standards. As required pursuant to a plan review use permit.
(c)   Nature-based recreation standards.
(1)   In the P-2 and AG-2 zoning districts, a minimum of 51 percent of the
zoning lot area must be dedicated to crop production, livestock and poultry
keeping, or passive undeveloped recreational areas, such as natural open space,
forests, and trails, for as long as the nature-based recreation is in
operation, as evidenced by a farm plan or recreational plan that shows the area
and percentage of the zoning lot to be in active agricultural use or passive
undeveloped recreational use, and includes information about a farm, ranch, or
recreational area resources, goals, and business plan to engage in crop
production or livestock and poultry keeping, or for passive recreational
purposes.
(2)   The overall density for cabins must not exceed one cabin per acre, and no
kitchens or wet bars are allowed.
(3)   For horseback riding tours, all buildings housing horses and all corrals
in which horses are kept or assembled must be set back a minimum of 100 feet
from the property line of any adjoining zoning lot located in the country,
residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning districts.
(4)   A minor conditional use permit is required if the nature-based recreation
activity does not include overnight stays. A major conditional use permit is
required if the nature-based recreation activity includes overnight stays.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.70-9 Retail.
   Uses in the retail category that are required to comply with specific
standards are set forth in this section. Development standards required in
other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   General retail, small, medium, large standards.
(1)   All incidental storage of material and equipment must be located in a
fully enclosed structure.
(2)   When the principal entrance is less than 75 feet or its parking area is
less than 20 feet from any adjoining zoning lot in the country, residential,
apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning district:
(A)   A solid wall or fence (not a chain-link fence) or equivalent landscape
buffer (such as a screening hedge), 6 feet in height, must be installed and
maintained at the common property lines; and
(B)   Hours of operation are limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Small,
medium, or large general retail uses that are intended to operate beyond these
hours may be permitted under a minor conditional use permit.
(3)   In the apartment mixed-use zoning district, hours of operation are
limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., including any loading activities
associated with the retail use.
(4)   In the industrial mixed-use zoning district, the density controls of
Table 21-3.5 and §
21-3.140-1(c) apply.
(b)   Mobile commercial establishment standards.
(1)   Mobile commercial establishments must operate on all-weather surfaces,
unless otherwise specified in this chapter.
(2)   Mobile commercial establishments must operate outside of any required
yards.
(3)   One portable sign per mobile commercial establishment is allowed during
hours of operation. The sign must be located within 5 feet of the mobile
commercial establishment, unless weather conditions render it unsafe.
(4)   When three or more mobile commercial establishments operate on one zoning
lot:
(A)   A parking management plan is required. See §
21-6.30(m) for adjustments and exemptions to parking requirements for mobile
commercial establishments.
(B)   A pedestrian and vehicle circulation plan is required.
(C)   Hours of operation are limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(D)   If seating areas are provided for patrons of the mobile commercial
establishments, restrooms or portable restrooms accessible to patrons must be
present on the zoning lot and adequately screened from public view.
(5)   If a mobile commercial establishment is located less than 75 feet from
any adjoining zoning lot:
(A)   In the country, apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning district, hours
of operation are limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(B)   In the residential zoning district, hours of operation are limited to
between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(6)   In the Haleiwa special district, the mobile commercial establishment
requirements in §
21-9.90-4(j) supersede the standards listed in this subsection.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.70-10 Vehicle-related.
   Uses in the vehicle-related category that are required to comply with
specific standards are set forth in this section. Development standards
required in other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Car wash standards.
(1)   When the use occurs less than 75 feet from any adjoining zoning lot in
the country, residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning district:
(A)   A solid wall or fence (not a chain-link fence) or equivalent landscape
buffer (such as a screening hedge), 6 feet in height, must be installed and
maintained at the common property lines; and
(B)   Hours of operation are limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Car
wash uses that are intended to operate beyond these hours may be permitted
under a minor conditional use permit.
(2)   A closed-loop water recycling system with no offsite discharge or run-off
must be used.
(3)   The use must be in a sound-attenuated structure.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.70-11 Accessory commercial.
   Uses in the accessory commercial category that are required to comply with
specific standards are set forth in this section. Development standards
required in other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Drive-thru standards.
(1)   Speaker boxes must be set back a minimum of 75 feet from the property
line of any zoning lot in the country, residential, apartment, or apartment
mixed-use zoning districts.
(2)   Drive-thru lanes must be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the property
line of any zoning lot in the country, residential, apartment, or apartment
mixed-use zoning districts.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.80 Industrial uses.
   The following sections contain standards for the industrial use categories.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.80-1 Manufacturing and processing.
   Uses in the manufacturing and processing category that are required to
comply with specific standards are set forth in this section. Development
standards required in other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   General manufacturing and processing standards.
(1)   Light:In the business and business mixed-use zoning districts, total
floor area must not exceed 10,000 square feet.
(2)   Heavy:
(A)   All structures and activities must be set back a minimum of 100 feet from
the property line of any adjoining zoning lot in the residential, apartment, or
apartment mixed-use zoning districts.
(B)   Areas used for pickup or drop-off of equipment between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. must be set back a minimum of 300 feet from the property
line of any adjoining zoning lot in the residential, apartment, or apartment
mixed-use zoning districts.
(b)   Biofuel processing facility standards.
(1)   All structures and activities must be set back a minimum of 1,500 feet
from the property line of any zoning lot in the country, residential,
apartment, apartment mixed-use, or resort zoning districts.
(2)   If the director determines that potential impacts of the facility will be
adequately mitigated due to prevailing winds, terrain, technology, or similar
considerations, the required minimum setback may be reduced; provided that
under no circumstances may the setback distance be less than 500 feet.
(3)   In the AG-1 and AG-2 zoning districts, agricultural land and other
agricultural uses in the vicinity of the biofuel processing facility must not
be adversely impacted, consistent with the regulation of permissible uses
within the agricultural districts pursuant to HRS § 205-4.5(a)(16).
(c)   Explosive or toxic chemical manufacturing, storage, and distribution
standards.
(1)   All structures and activities must be set back a minimum of 1,500 feet
from the property line of any zoning lot in the country, residential,
apartment, apartment mixed-use, or resort zoning districts.
(2)   If the director determines that potential impacts of the facility will be
adequately mitigated due to prevailing winds, terrain, technology, or similar
considerations, the required minimum setback may be reduced; provided that
under no circumstances may the setback distance be less than 500 feet.
(3)   Explosives storage must be effectively screened by a natural landform or
artificial barrier either surrounding the entire site or surrounding each
storage magazine or production facility. The height of the landform or barrier
must be taller than any magazine or production facility and must consist of an
earthen mound or revetted wall with a minimum thickness of 3 feet.
(d)   Food manufacturing and processing standards.
(1)   In the business and business mixed-use zoning districts, total floor area
must not exceed 4,000 square feet.
(2)   The slaughter of animals is not permitted.
(e)   Petrochemical plant standards.
(1)   All structures and activities must be set back a minimum of 1,500 feet
from the property line of any zoning lot in the country, residential,
apartment, apartment mixed-use, or resort zoning districts.
(2)   If the director determines that potential impacts of the facility will be
adequately mitigated due to prevailing winds, terrain, technology, or similar
considerations, the required minimum setback may be reduced; provided that
under no circumstances may the setback distance be less than 500 feet.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.80-2 Marine.
   Uses in the marine category that are required to comply with specific
standards are set forth in this section. Development standards required in
other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   General marine standards.
(1)   Minor:
(A)   Except as provided in (B) or (C), launching ramps, boat repair
facilities, establishments for the sale of boating supplies and fuel,
clubhouses and drydock facilities, or other areas for storage of boats on land
must be set back from the property line of any adjoining zoning lot in the
residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning districts by:
(i)   Except as provided in (ii), 300 feet if open between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; or
(ii)   One hundred fifty feet if not open between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m., or if the activity or facility is screened by a solid wall at
minimum of 6 feet in height.
(B)   A master planned community with an inland waterway designated as within
the preservation zoning district is not subject to the additional setback
requirements; provided that the master planned community was created pursuant
to the same zone change application as part of a single rezoning action.
(C)   Where a general marine use occurs adjacent to an inland waterway
designated as within the preservation zoning district, no setback requirement
is required for uses not common to both the underlying zoning district and the
preservation zoning district.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.80-3 Repair.
   Uses in the repair category that are required to comply with specific
standards are set forth in this section. Development standards required in
other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Heavy repair standards.
(1)   All structures and activities must be set back a minimum 100 feet from
the property line of any zoning lot in the residential, apartment, or apartment
mixed-use zoning districts.
(2)   All activities conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
must be set back a minimum of 300 feet from the property line of any adjoining
zoning lot in the residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning
districts.
(b)   Vehicle service standards. All activities conducted within 300 feet from
the property line of any zoning lot in the residential, apartment, or apartment
mixed-use zoning districts are limited to the hours between 6:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.80-4 Resource extraction.
   Uses in the resource extraction category that are required to comply with
specific standards are set forth in this section. Development standards
required in other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   General resource extraction standards.
(1)   Blasting operations are restricted to Mondays through Fridays between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
(2)   The application for a conditional use permit must include a plan for the
development of the property, which includes the exploitation and reuse of the
property.
(A)   The plan for the exploitation phase must show the proposed development as
planned in relation to surrounding property within 300 feet, and include
topographic surveys and other materials indicating existing conditions
(including drainage) and the conditions (including topography, drainage, and
soils) that will exist at the end of the exploitation phase. Contour intervals
for topography must be 5 feet in areas where the slope is greater than 10
percent, or 2 feet in areas where the slope is 10 percent or less.
(B)   The plan for the reuse phase must indicate how the property is to be left
in a form suitable for reuse for purposes permissible in the underlying zoning
district, and the relation between the reuse and the existing or proposed uses
for surrounding properties. Among items to be included in the plan are:
(i)   Feasible circulation patterns in and around the site;
(ii)   The treatment of exposed soil or subsoil (including measures to be taken
to replace topsoil or establish vegetation in excavated areas) in order to make
the property suitable for the proposed reuse; and
(iii)   The treatment of slopes to prevent erosion and delineation of floodways
and floodplains (if any) to be maintained in open usage.
In the plan for reuse, intermittent lakes and marshes are not permitted, except
in areas within flood hazard districts; provided that the intermittent lake or
marsh is situated more than 1,000 feet from the property line of the nearest
zoning lot in the residential, apartment, apartment mixed-use, or resort zoning
districts.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.80-5 Storage and warehousing.
   Uses in the storage and warehousing category that are required to comply
with specific standards are set forth in this section. Development standards
required in other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Self-storage standards.
(1)   No individual storage area may exceed 6,000 cubic feet in volume.
(2)   All buildings must have windows or architectural treatments that look
like windows.
(3)   Storage spaces may not be used for activities other than the storage of
personal property. Accessory uses are limited to the sale of boxes, tape, and
other packing-related materials.
(b)   Storage yard standards.
(1)   Sale or processing of scrap, salvage, or secondhand material is
prohibited.
(2)   Except for necessary openings for ingress and egress, storage yards must
be completely enclosed by a fence or wall a minimum of 6 feet in height.
(3)   Within the I-1 zoning district:
(A)   All structures and activities must be set back a minimum 100 feet from
the property line of any zoning lot in the residential, apartment, or apartment
mixed-use zoning districts.
(B)   If the facility is within 300 feet of a zoning lot in the residential,
apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning districts, equipment startup,
including motor vehicles, are limited to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.80-6 Transportation.
   Uses in the transportation category that are required to comply with
specific standards are set forth in this section. Development standards
required in other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Airport standards. As required pursuant to a plan review use permit.
(b)   Base yard standards.
(1)   Except for necessary openings for ingress and egress, storage yards must
be completely enclosed by a fence or wall a minimum of 6 feet in height.
(2)   Within the I-1 zoning district:
(A)   All structures and activities must be set back a minimum of 100 feet from
any zoning lot in the residential, apartment, or apartment mixed-use zoning
districts.
(B)   If the facility is within 300 feet of a zoning lot in the residential,
apartment or apartment mixed-use zoning districts, startup of equipment,
including motor vehicles, is limited to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m.
(c)   Heliport standards. Except for emergency medical operations and search
and rescue operations:
(1)   Heliports may not exceed one operation per hour.
(2)   Takeoff and landing operations are restricted to the hours between 8:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
(3)   Rotorcraft are limited to a maximum gross weight of up to 7,000 pounds.
(d)   Multimodal facility standards. As required by a conditional use permit.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.80-7 Waste-related.
   Uses in the waste-related category that are required to comply with specific
standards are set forth in this section. Development standards required in
other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Salvage, scrap, or junk storage and processing standards.
(1)   All structures and activities must be set back a minimum of 1,500 feet
from the property line of any zoning lot in the country, residential,
apartment, apartment mixed-use, or resort zoning district.
(2)   If the director determines that potential impacts of the facility will be
adequately mitigated due to prevailing winds, terrain, technology, or similar
considerations, the setback requirement may be reduced; provided that under no
circumstances may the distance be less than 500 feet.
(b)   Waste disposal and processing standards.
(1)   No waste disposal and processing facility may be located within 1,500
feet of any zoning lot in the country, residential, apartment, apartment mixed-
use, or resort zoning districts. If it can be determined that potential impacts
will be adequately mitigated due to prevailing winds, terrain, technology, or
similar considerations, the 1,500-foot distance may be reduced; provided that
the distance may not be less than 500 feet;
(2)   Solid waste landfills and construction and demolition landfills may not
be constructed, modified, or expanded unless a minimum 0.5-mile buffer zone is
provided around the waste or disposal facility from the property line of any
zoning lot used for residential, school, or hospital purposes;
(3)   This subsection does not apply to the continued operation of an existing
solid waste landfill or construction and demolition landfill that is properly
permitted; provided that the continued operation does not require vertical or
horizontal physical expansion of the facility requiring additional permit
review and modification; and
(4)   This subsection does not apply to any individual, State-certified, non-
industrial redemption center.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.80-8 Accessory industrial.
   Uses in the accessory industrial category that are required to comply with
specific standards are set forth in this section. Development standards
required in other articles of this chapter apply to all uses.
(a)   Helistop standards.
(1)   Structures for rotorcraft storage are prohibited.
(2)   May include overnight parking of one rotorcraft.
(3)   Except for emergency medical operations and search and rescue operations:
(A)   Helistops may not exceed one operation per hour.
(B)   Takeoff and landing operations are restricted to the hours between 8:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
(C)   Rotorcraft are limited to a maximum gross weight of up to 7,000 pounds.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.90 Miscellaneous uses.
   The following sections set forth the standards for uses in the miscellaneous
use categories. Development standards required in other articles of this
chapter apply to all uses.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.90-1 Historic structure reuse.
   Uses that incentivize the owner of a historic structure to maintain the
structure when the use is not otherwise permitted in the underlying zoning
district.
(a)   Any use is permitted in a structure listed on the Hawaii or National
Register of Historic Places; provided that any proposed alteration, repair, or
renovation beyond the structure s original design and the proposed use must be
approved by the appropriate historic preservation entity, and may not result in
the destruction or demolition of the structure.
(b)   The director may deny any historic structure reuse request upon
determining that the reuse may result in adverse impacts on the surrounding
neighborhood for which reasonable mitigative measures are not possible or
practicable.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-5.90-2 Joint development of two or more adjacent zoning lots.
(a)   Whenever two or more adjacent zoning lots are developed jointly in
accordance with this section, they will be considered and treated as one zoning
lot; provided that whenever the zoning lots involve two or more zoning
districts, the lots will be subject to §
21-4.50.
(b)   An owner, owners, duly authorized agents of the owners, or duly
authorized lessees holding leases with a minimum of 30 years remaining in their
terms of adjacent zoning lots who believe that joint development of their
properties would result in a more efficient use of land shall apply for a minor
conditional use permit to undertake the joint development.
(c)   When applying for a minor conditional use permit for joint development
under this section, the applicants shall submit to the director a joint
development agreement that binds themselves and their successors in title or
lease, individually and collectively, to maintain the pattern of joint
development proposed in such a way that there will be conformity with
applicable zoning regulations. The development standards listed in §
21-2.90-2(c) may not be modified through a conditional use permit for joint
development unless allowed through another discretionary approval. The right to
enforce the agreement will also be granted to the city. The joint development
agreement is subject to the approval of the corporation counsel of the city.
(d)   If the director finds that the proposed agreement assures future
protection of the public interest and meets the requirements for issuance of a
conditional use permit, the director shall issue the conditional use permit.
Upon issuance of the permit, the joint development agreement, which must be one
of the conditions of the conditional use permit, must be recorded as a covenant
running with the land with the State bureau of conveyances or the land court of
the State of Hawaii, or both, as appropriate. Proof of such recording in the
form of a copy of the covenant certified by the appropriate agency must be
filed with the director prior to the issuance of any building permit.
(Added by Ord. 25-2)
ARTICLE 6: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Sections
   
21-6.10   Off-street parking and loading—Purpose and intent
   
21-6.20   Off-street parking requirements
   
21-6.30   Adjustments and exceptions to parking requirements
   
21-6.40   Bicycle parking
   
21-6.50   Parking space dimensions and access
   
21-6.60   Electric vehicle charging stations
   
21-6.70   Remote parking and loading
   
21-6.80   Surface parking site planning
   
21-6.90   Structured parking site planning and design standards
   
21-6.100   Unbundled parking
   
21-6.110   Off-street loading requirements
   
21-6.120   Adjustments and exceptions to loading requirements
   
21-6.130   Loading space dimensions and access
   
21-6.140   Passenger ride hailing services and deliveries
   
21-6.150   Nonconforming off-street parking and loading
§ 21-6.10 Off-street parking and loading—Purpose and intent.
(a)   The purpose of off-street parking and loading standards is to provide:
(1)   Regulations and guidance regarding off-street parking and loading;
(2)   Regulations to assist with satisfying the goals of the Oahu general plan,
development plans, sustainable communities plans, neighborhood transit-oriented
development plans, Oahu resilience strategy, and other adopted city plans and
policies; and
(3)   Regulations to create opportunities to reduce housing and development
costs and support multimodal communities.
(b)   The intent of parking and loading standards is to:
(1)   Ensure the provision of sufficient off-street parking and loading spaces
in lots and structures that contribute to attractive, environmentally sound,
and pedestrian-friendly streetscapes;
(2)   Provide mechanisms and incentives to encourage the development of a more
sustainable and multimodal transportation network, and encourage the use of
transportation options to reduce congestion, improve pedestrian safety, and
enhance the quality of the environment; and
(3)   Provide reasonable flexibility to ensure that environmental, economic,
and technical concerns are given appropriate consideration in decision-making.
(c)   Off-street parking and loading spaces must be provided as required by
this article.
(d)   Unless otherwise specified in this article, the term "parking spaces"
refers to motor vehicle parking spaces, and the term "vehicle" refers to motor
vehicles.
(Added by Ord. 20-41)
§ 21-6.20 Off-street parking requirements.
(a)   Determining if parking is required, and the appropriate parking ratio. No
off-street parking is required in the Primary Urban Center Development Plan
area and Ewa Development Plan area, except for those areas thereof located in
the residential, agricultural, and preservation zoning districts. Additionally,
no off-street parking is required in any zoning district within 0.5 miles of an
existing or future Honolulu rail transit station, as identified in the accepted
environmental impact statement, or in the transit-oriented development special
districts. The minimum off-street parking ratios shown below in Table 21-6.1
apply to all other areas not identified in this subsection. In areas where no
parking is required, any parking that is provided must meet the design,
dimensions, and other standards set forth in this chapter.
Table 21-6.1 Minimum Off-Street Parking Ratios
Use Categories Standard (per floor area unless noted otherwise)
Table 21-6.1 Minimum Off-Street Parking Ratios
Use Categories                                                                    Standard (per floor area unless noted otherwise)
RESIDENTIAL AND LODGING
Household living–single-unit, two-unit, duplex-unit, and multi-unit dwellings
Group living–small and large                                                    1 per 1,000 square feet of private dwelling or
Accessory residential–accessory dwelling unit, home occupation, ohana unit,     lodging area, not including areas identified in §
rooming                                                                           21-6.20(b)(2)(A)
Accessory agricultural–farm dwelling, farm worker housing
Lodging–hotel, major and minor; timeshare; vacation rental unit
COMMERCIAL 1
Daycare–child daycare and adult daycare
Eating and drinking–general eating and drinking; bar/nightclub, major and minor
Medical services–general medical services, hospital, medical laboratory         1 per 500 square feet
Office–general office
Personal services–general personal services; animal care, minor and major
Retail–general retail, medium and large; mobile commercial establishment
COMMERCIAL 2
Retail–general retail, small
Vehicle related–car wash; vehicle fueling station; vehicle sales and rental,    1 per 1,000 square feet
light and heavy
Accessory commercial–drive-thru
AGRICULTURE, INDUSTRY, AND WAREHOUSING
Agricultural support–agricultural equipment services; agricultural collection and
storage, major and minor; feed store; agricultural processing, major and minor;
sawmills; veterinary services
Manufacturing and processing–general manufacturing and processing, light and
heavy; bio-fuel processing facility; brewery, distillery, winery, minor and
major; explosive or toxic chemical manufacturing, storage, and distribution; food
manufacturing and processing; linen supplier; petrochemical plant; production     1 per 2,000 square feet
studio; publishing facility
Marine–general marine, minor and major; port
Repair–general repair, heavy repair
Research and development–general research and development
Storage and distribution–general storage, warehousing, and distribution; self-
storage; storage yard
SCHOOLS
Education–school, K-12; vocational school, minor or major                       1 per 500 square feet of office or classroom
PLACES OF ASSEMBLY
Assembly–meeting facility, small, medium, or large                              1 per 125 square feet of assembly area, or 1 per 5
Recreation, indoor–theater                                                      fixed seats, whichever is less
RECREATION
Recreation, indoor–general indoor recreation                                    1 per 250 square feet of assembly area or seating,
Recreation, outdoor–general outdoor recreation                                  plus 2 per court, and 10 per field or pool
SPECIAL USES AND CIRCUMSTANCES
Agricultural
   Crop production–aquaculture; crop raising; forestry; plant nursery; urban
farm; vertical farm
   Livestock and poultry keeping–animal raising, minor and major
   Accessory agricultural–agricultural energy facility, agritourism, beekeeping,
biofuel processing facility, farm stand, farmers market
Residential
   Accessory residential–home occupation
Public, civic, and institutional
   Communication–dish antenna; tower antenna; stealth antenna; accessory receive
only antenna
   Government–prison, consulate, public facility                             Determined by Director
   Parks and open space–cemetery, open land, park, wildlife preserve
Utility–small, medium, or large
Commercial–commercial parking
Industrial
   Accessory industrial–helistop
   Resource extraction–general resource extraction
   Transportation–airport, base yard, heliport, multi-modal facility, truck
terminal
   Waste related–salvage, scrap, or junk storage and processing; waste disposal
and processing
Miscellaneous–Historic structure re-use, other unique uses not captured elsewhere
 
(b)   Method of calculating the number of required parking spaces.
(1)   When computation of the total required parking spaces for a zoning lot
results in a number with a fraction of 0.5 or greater, the number of required
parking spaces will be the next highest whole number.
(2)   When a building or premises includes uses incidental or accessory to a
principal use, the total number of required parking spaces will be determined
on the basis of the parking requirements of the principal use. Floor area that
may be eliminated for purposes of calculating parking requirements includes:
(A)   Common areas and accessory recreation areas in multi-unit dwellings,
lodging, small or large group living, and consulates;
(B)   Accessory areas in assembly, education, government, or other similar
uses, except all classrooms, offices, and gallery space;
(C)   Stairwells and ancillary spaces, when directly and exclusively used for
mechanical spaces and not actively used by employees. Mechanical car-wash areas
are included in this exemption; and
(D)   Other areas that do not induce a parking demand, as determined by the
director.
(Added by Ord. 20-41) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-6.30 Adjustments and exceptions to parking requirements.
(a)   Change of use. If there is a change in use, the number of off-street
parking spaces set forth in
Table 21-6.1 for the new use is required, except as provided under §
21-4.110(e), relating to nonconforming parking and loading.
(b)   For accessory dwelling units, except for accessory dwelling units located
within 0.5 miles of a rail station, one off-street parking space must be
provided in addition to the required off-street parking for the primary
dwelling unit. For accessory dwelling units located on zoning lots within the
Primary Urban Center development plan area or the Ewa development plan area,
the off-street parking space requirement is waived if the zoning lot developed
with an accessory dwelling unit is located within 800 feet of a city bus stop;
provided that this waiver does not apply if an off-street parking waiver has
already been applied to an ohana unit located on the same zoning lot.
(c)   For bed and breakfast homes in areas where parking is required for the
dwelling, one off-street parking space for each guest bedroom is required in
addition to the required off-street parking for the dwelling.
(d)   Home occupations.
(1)   Home occupations that involve client visits must provide one off-street
parking space for every four clients that may be on the property at any given
time in addition to the parking spaces required the dwelling use. This
requirement will be calculated as requiring one off-street parking for the
first four clients and one additional off-street parking for every fractional
increment up to four thereafter.
(2)   Home occupations that involve employees must provide one off-street
parking space for the one onsite employee that may be on the property at any
given time.
(3)   Residents of multi-unit dwellings may fulfill their parking requirement
using guest parking if allowed by the rules and regulations for the multi-unit
dwelling.
(4)   Commercial vehicles associated with the home occupation (other than
occasional, infrequent, and momentary parking of a vehicle for pickups and
deliveries as a service to the home occupation) may not park on the street.
(e)   In connection with planned development projects, cluster housing,
conditional use permits, existing use permits, and within special districts,
the director may impose special parking and loading requirements.
(f)   Except for multi-unit dwellings and lodging, all buildings and uses that
are located within the boundaries of any improvement district for public off-
street parking, and that have been assessed their share of the cost of the
improvement district, are exempt from the off-street parking requirements of
this chapter.
(g)   Joint use of parking and loading, onsite and remote.  Onsite joint use of
parking and loading is permitted on lots with more than one use. Remote joint
use of parking and loading is permitted, subject to §
21-6.70 and this section. All parking spaces provided under this section must
be standard size. The number of required parking and loading spaces may be
reduced by applying the rates provided in
Table 21-6.2 to the total requirement for the various uses when added together.
Table 21-6.2
Join-use Parking and Loading Reduction Matrix
Uses Residential Office/Industrial Other Commercial Eating and Lodging Other
                                                    Drinking
Table 21-6.2
Join-use Parking and Loading Reduction Matrix
Uses            Residential Office/    Other      Eating and Lodging Other
                            Industrial Commercial Drinking
Residential     100%        80%        90%        90%        90%     90%
Office/         80%         100%       80%        80%        90%     90%
Industrial
Other           90%         80%        100%       90%        80%     90%
Commercial
Eating and      90%         80%        90%        100%       90%     90%
Drinking
Lodging         90%         90%        80%        90%        100%    90%
Other           90%         90%        90%        90%        90%     90%
Three different 90%
uses                        All joint-use parking spaces must be standard
Four or more    80%         size.
uses
 
(h)   Incentives for sustainable transportation.
(1)   Unbundled parking. Except in the residential zoning districts, in areas
where parking is otherwise required under §
21-6.20, if at least 50 percent of the parking spaces provided by a project is
unbundled, the project has no minimum parking requirement.
(2)   Bicycle parking in excess of the minimum bicycle parking requirements.
Four short-term or long-term bicycle parking spaces in excess of the minimum
bicycle parking requirement may be substituted for one off-street vehicle
parking space, up to a maximum of four vehicle parking spaces or 15 percent of
the required off-street vehicle parking spaces, whichever is greater. Bicycle
parking must comply with §
21-6.40.
(3)   Bicycle sharing. Shared bicycle parking spaces, provided off-street on
private property, may be substituted for required bicycle parking spaces, or
may be substituted for up to a maximum of two vehicle parking spaces or 15
percent of the required off-street vehicle parking spaces, whichever is
greater. Four shared bicycle parking spaces are equivalent to one off-street
vehicle parking space. To be eligible for a reduction in the required number of
vehicle parking spaces, the following must be submitted prior to the project's
building permit approval:
(A)   A written agreement with the provider of the bicycle sharing service,
including the number and a written description of the location of shared
bicycles;
(B)   A floor plan or site plan of the area clearly identifying the location of
the shared bicycles;
(C)   The property owner and provider's contact information, including street
address; and
(D)   Any other pertinent information as determined by the director.
(4)   Car-sharing. A parking space that is utilized by a car-sharing
organization, as that term is defined in HRS § 251-1, for a shared car in its
fleet may be substituted for three required off-street vehicle parking spaces.
The shared car parking spaces must be accessible to the members of the car-
sharing organization and may include members of the car-sharing organization
who access the shared cars from a public street. To be eligible for a reduction
in the required number of vehicle parking spaces, the following must be
submitted prior to the issuance of a building permit for the project:
(A)   A written agreement with the car-sharing organization that must include
the number of shared car parking spaces and a description of the location of
the shared car parking spaces;
(B)   A floor plan or site plan of the parking area clearly identifying the
location of the shared car parking spaces;
(C)   The property owner and provider's contact information, including street
address; and
(D)   Any other pertinent information as required by the director.
(5)   Motorcycle and moped parking. One motorcycle or moped parking space may
be substituted for one off-street vehicle parking space, up to a maximum of two
spaces, or 10 percent of the required off-street vehicle parking spaces,
whichever is greater. Motorcycle and moped parking must comply with §
21-6.50.
(i)   No additional off-street parking spaces are required for nonconforming
zoning lots beyond parking spaces existing on December 23, 2020. Any parking
spaces provided on nonconforming zoning lots are subject to the parking space
standards in this chapter.
(j)   The following sections may have additional requirements or opportunities
not set forth in this article:
(1)   Section
21-2.140-1(a), relating to conditions that allow for carports and garages to
encroach into front and side yards;
(2)   Section
21-2.140-1(h), relating to issues that may affect the required number of
parking spaces when changing uses within a previously developed lot or parcel;
(3)   Section
21-2.140-1(o), relating to situations in which converted accessory structures
may be exempted from off-street parking requirements; and
(4)   Section 21-5.50-3(c), relating to home occupations.
(k)   Excluding zoning lots in the preservation, agricultural, country, and
residential zoning districts, off-street parking spaces will not be required
for additional floor area up to 15,000 square feet per zoning lot; provided
that application of this subsection may only be used once on the same zoning
lot.
(l)   For mobile commercial establishments, when three or more mobile
commercial establishments operate on one zoning lot, a minimum of five parking
spaces per mobile commercial establishment is required.
(m)   For ohana units, the off-street parking space requirements are the same
as required for the primary dwelling unit, which are in addition to the
required off-street parking for the primary dwelling unit. For ohana units that
are 1,000 square feet or less in size and are located on zoning lots within the
Primary Urban Center development plan area or the Ewa development plan area,
the off-street parking space requirement is waived if the zoning lot developed
with an ohana unit is located within 800 feet of a city bus stop; provided that
this waiver does not apply if an off-street parking waiver has already been
applied to an accessory dwelling unit located on the same zoning lot.
(Added by Ord. 20-41) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-6.40 Bicycle parking.
(a)   Parking for bicycles is required in the apartment, apartment mixed use,
business, business mixed use, and resort districts, and in all precincts of the
Waikiki special district.
(b)   Number of bicycle parking spaces required.  Short-term and long-term
bicycle parking spaces must be provided as set forth in
Table 21-6.3; provided that no bicycle parking spaces are required for single-
unit, two-unit, and duplex-unit dwellings. Short-term and long-term bicycle
parking spaces must be provided whenever new floor area, new dwelling units, or
a new commercial parking lot or structure is proposed. When computation of the
total required bicycle parking spaces for a zoning lot results in a number with
a fraction of 0.5 or greater, the number of required bicycle parking spaces
will be the next highest whole number.
 
Table 21-6.3
Bicycle Parking Spaces Required
Use or Use Category Short-Term Bicycle Parking    Long-Term Bicycle Parking
                    1 space per 2,000 square feet 1 space per 12,000 square
                    of floor area or portion      feet of floor area, or
Commercial          thereof, or                   1 space per 30 vehicle
                    1 space for every 10 vehicle  spaces, or portion thereof,
                    spaces or portion thereof,    whichever is greater.
                    whichever is greater.
                    1 space per 4,000 square feet 1 space per 18,000 square
Industrial          of office floor area or       feet of office floor area or
                    portion thereof (excludes     portion thereof (excludes
                    storage floor area).          storage floor area).
Residential         1 space for every 10 dwelling 1 space for every 2 dwelling
                    or lodging units.             or lodging units.
Hotel               1 space for every 20 dwelling 1 space for every 10 dwelling
                    or lodging units.             or lodging units.
 
(c)   Anchoring and security. For each bicycle parking space required, a
bicycle rack must be provided, to which a bicycle frame and one wheel may be
secured with a high-security U-shaped lock. If a bicycle may be locked to each
side of the rack without conflict, each side may be counted toward a required
space.
(d)   Size and accessibility.
(1)   Each bicycle parking space must be a minimum of 2 feet in width, 6 feet
in length, and must be accessible without moving another bicycle. Vertical or
stacked spaces that meet the dimension, security, and accessibility
requirements above are permitted, and the depth and height of these spaces must
be a minimum of 4 feet. All types of bicycle parking spaces must be clear of
walls, poles, landscaping (other than ground cover), street furniture, drive
aisles, pedestrian ways, and vehicle parking spaces for at least 5 feet from
the edge of the bicycle parking space on the side that the bicyclist accesses
the bicycle parking area.
(2)   Short-term bicycle parking spaces must be located as close as practicable
to the entrances of the principal uses on a lot so they are highly visible and
easily identifiable. Section
21-4.110(e), relating to nonconforming parking and loading, does not apply to
short-term bicycle parking spaces.
(3)   Bicycle parking spaces, including those with fixed racks for parking and
locking, are allowed within front yards pursuant to §
21-4.30(a)(7).
(4)   Long-term bicycle parking must be provided in the form of enclosed
bicycle lockers or easily accessible, secure, and covered bicycle storage.
Section
21-4.110(e), relating to nonconforming parking and loading, does not apply to
long-term bicycle parking spaces.
(5)   Bicycle parking spaces within enclosed parking structures must be located
as close as practicable to an entrance of the parking structure so they are
visible from the street or sidewalk. Where the bicycle parking spaces are not
visible from the front entrance, signage indicating the location of the bicycle
parking spaces is required.
(6)   To accommodate technological advances, at the request of an applicant,
size, accessibility, and other requirements may be modified at the discretion
of the director.
(e)   Excluding zoning lots in the preservation, agricultural, country, and
residential zoning districts, short-term and long-term bicycle parking spaces
will not be required for additional floor area up to 15,000 square feet per
zoning lot; provided that application of this subsection may only be used once
on the same zoning lot.
(Added by Ord. 20-41) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-6.50 Parking space dimensions and access.
(a)   Dimensions of parking spaces.
   (1)   Standard parking spaces must be at least 18 feet in length and 8 feet
3 inches in width, with parallel spaces at least 22 feet in length.
   (2)   Compact parking spaces must be at least 16 feet in length and 7 feet 6
inches in width, with parallel spaces at least 19 feet in length.
   (3)   All provided parking spaces must be standard-sized parking spaces,
except that single-unit, two-unit, duplex-unit, and multi-unit dwellings may
have up to 50 percent of the total number of provided parking spaces as compact
parking spaces, and accessory dwelling units may satisfy the parking
requirement with a compact parking space.
   (4)   Required parking spaces for boat launching ramps must have minimum
dimensions of 40 feet in length and 12 feet in width.
   (5)   Motorcycle and moped parking spaces must be at least 8 feet in length
and 4 feet in width, and must provide a minimum 5-foot-wide access way clear of
obstructions.
   (6)   Minimum aisle widths for parking bays must be provided in accordance
with
Table 21-6.4.
Table 21-6.4
Parking Aisle Widths
Parking Angle Aisle Width
Table 21-6.4
Parking Aisle Widths
Parking Angle            Aisle Width
0 degrees to 44 degrees  12 ft.
45 degrees to 59 degrees 13.5 ft.
60 degrees to 69 degrees 18.5 ft.
70 degrees to 79 degrees 19.5 ft.
80 degrees to 89 degrees 21 ft.
90 degrees               22 ft.
 
If the parking angle is 90 degrees, the minimum aisle width may be reduced by 1
foot for every 6 inches of additional parking space width above the minimum
width of 8 feet 3 inches, to a minimum aisle width of 19 feet.
(7)   Ingress and egress aisles must be provided to a street and between
parking bays. Driveways leading into a parking area must be a minimum of 12
feet in width, except that driveways for single-unit, two-unit, or duplex-unit
dwellings, and internal one-way driveways connecting parking aisles must be a
minimum of 10 feet in width.
(b)   Arrangement of parking spaces.
(1)   All parking spaces must be unobstructed; provided that structural support
columns may extend a maximum of 6 inches into the sides of the parking space. A
wall is not considered a structural support column.
(2)   Where five or more parking spaces are provided, the spaces or area must
be designed or arranged in a manner so that no maneuvering into or from any
street, alley, or walkway is necessary in order for a vehicle to enter or leave
a space, and that allows all vehicles to enter the street in a forward manner.
Parking spaces must be individually marked. Compact spaces must be labeled
"compact only."
(3)   All parking spaces must be arranged so that any motor vehicle may be
moved without moving another motor vehicle; provided that tandem parking is
permissible in any of the following instances:
(A)   Where two or more parking spaces are assigned to a single dwelling unit,
or a parking space is assigned to an accessory dwelling unit;
(B)   Where the parking spaces are used as employee parking; provided that the
number of parking spaces allocated for employees must not exceed 25 percent of
the total number of provided parking spaces, and employee tandem parking is
limited to a configuration where only one vehicle must be moved to provide
access to another vehicle;
(C)   Where all parking is performed by an attendant at all times, and vehicles
may be moved within the lot without entering any street, alley, or walkway; or
(D)   For public assembly facilities and temporary events, where user arrivals
and departures are simultaneous, and parking is attendant directed.
(c)   Surface materials. Off-street parking spaces, parking lots, and driveways
must be maintained with a dust-free, durable, all-weather surface except in the
preservation, agricultural, and country districts, where parking lots and
driveways may be surfaced with crushed rock or limestone, or as determined by
the director pursuant to
Article 2. Suitable dust-free all-weather surfaces may include but are not
limited to permeable pavers, including grass-block, or similar systems;
provided that the surface is maintained to prevent sediment, dirt, mud, or
other debris from being transferred into the right-of-way.
(Added by Ord. 20-41) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-6.60 Electric vehicle charging stations.
(a)   Equipment mounted on pedestals, lighting posts, bollards, or other
devices at electric vehicle charging stations must be designed and located so
as to not impede pedestrian, bicycle, or wheelchair movement, or create safety
hazards.
(b)   Existing standard-sized parking spaces constructed prior to December 23,
2020 may be reduced in size to that of a compact space, if necessary, to
accommodate electric vehicle charging equipment.
(Added by Ord. 20-41)
§ 21-6.70 Remote parking and loading.
(a)   Required parking spaces, loading spaces, or bicycle parking spaces may be
located off the premises as remote parking and loading facilities, in
compliance with §
21-2.90 relating to conditional uses. Remote parking and loading may be used in
conjunction with the joint use of parking and loading.
(b)   The distance between the entrance to the parking facility and nearest
principal entrance of the establishment must not exceed 2,640 feet (a half-
mile) using customary pedestrian routes. Remote loading facilities must not be
separated from the establishment requiring the loading by a street, and must be
connected by an improved pedestrian path or sidewalk. The distance between
remote bicycle parking and the nearest principal pedestrian entrance of the
establishment requiring the bicycle parking must not exceed 400 feet by
customary pedestrian routes.
(c)   When the remote parking or loading is necessary to meet minimum parking
requirements, a written instrument must be recorded in the State bureau of
conveyances, or the office of the assistant registrar of the land court of the
State of Hawaii, or both, as appropriate, for both the zoning lot containing
the principal structure or use and the remote parking lot or structure. The
agreement must assure the continued availability of the number of required
remote parking spaces being provided. The agreement must stipulate that if a
required parking space is not maintained, or a parking space acceptable to the
director is not substituted, the use or the portion of the use that is
deficient in the number of required parking spaces must be discontinued. The
agreement will be subject to the approval of the department of the corporation
counsel as to form and legality.
(Added by Ord. 20-41) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-6.80 Surface parking site planning.
(a)   Surface parking location and configuration. Setbacks.
(1)   Surface parking, except that in the residential and country districts,
must be set back a minimum of 5 feet from all side and rear property lines that
adjoin lots in the country, residential, apartment, or apartment mixed use
zoning districts.
(2)   Parking and loading are not permitted in any required yards, except as
follows:
(A)   In the country, agricultural, and residential districts, parking and
loading may encroach into the required yards;
(B)   For lots that are split zoned and have nonresidential parking, the
parking and loading spaces may encroach entirely into the side yard created by
the zoning boundary that splits the lot.
(b)   Surface parking lot landscaping and screening. Parked vehicles in surface
parking lots must be screened from view from all streets and public spaces.
(1)   Surface parking lots of five or more parking spaces must provide a
minimum 5-foot landscape strip adjacent to any adjoining street right-of-way.
If wheel stops are provided, parking spaces may overhang the 5-foot landscape
strip (but not the required yard) by 3 feet (see
Figure 21-6.2); provided that hedges and other landscape elements, including
planter boxes over 6 inches in height, are not permitted within the overhang
space. This 5-foot strip must contain a continuous screening hedge a minimum of
36 inches in height with plantings a maximum of 18 inches on center. A minimum
36 inch high wall or fence may be placed outside the yard in lieu of a hedge.
If a wall or solid fence is erected, either a vine or shrub must be planted at
the base of the wall or solid fence on the side fronting the property line. One
canopy form tree, a minimum of 2-inch caliper, must be planted in the landscape
strip for each 50 feet or major fraction of adjacent lineal street frontage.
(2)   To provide shade in surface parking lots and minimize visibility of paved
surfaces, parking lots with more than 10 parking spaces must provide one canopy
form tree, a minimum of 2-inch caliper, for every 6 parking spaces or major
fraction thereof, or one canopy form tree of 6-inch caliper or more for every
12 parking spaces or major fraction thereof (see
Figure 21-6.1). Each tree must be located in a planting area or tree well a
minimum of 9 square feet in area. The minimum width of an area for a tree is 3
feet. If wheel stops are provided, continuous planting areas with low ground
cover, and tree wells with trees centered at the corner of parking spaces may
be located within the 3-foot overhang space of parking spaces (see
Figure 21-6.2). Hedges and other landscape elements, including planter boxes
over 6 inches in height, are not permitted within the overhang space of the
parking spaces. Trees must be sited so as to evenly distribute shade throughout
the parking lot. As an alternative to the above described planter areas for
trees, a tree box specifically designed to treat stormwater runoff may be used
on a one-for-one basis in place of the landscaped area. Tree boxes must be
approved for compliance with the rules related to stormwater quality.
(3)   All service areas and loading spaces must be screened from adjoining lots
in the country, residential, apartment, and apartment mixed use districts by a
wall 6 feet in height.
(4)   All plant material and landscaping must be provided with a permanent
irrigation system.
Figure 21-6.1
Canopy Tree Replacement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9503.png]
Figure 21-6.2
Permitted Vehicle Overhangs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9128.png]
 
(c)   Surface parking lot lighting. Lighting or illumination for surface
parking lots must be designed or shielded to prevent any direct illumination
toward any other zoning lot or street.
(Added by Ord. 20-41) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-6.90 Structured parking site planning and design standards.
(a)   Structured parking location and configuration.
(1)   All mechanical equipment on or in structured parking that is visible from
a street, right-of-way, or public park, including but not limited to electrical
panels, transformers, telecommunication distribution boxes, and backflow
preventers must be screened from view. Mechanical equipment necessary for
emergency responders, such as fire prevention standpipes, need not be screened.
(2)   Mechanical parking systems are permitted in parking structures.
(3)   Illuminated parking areas within the structure and on the roof must be
designed or shielded to prevent any direct illumination toward any other zoning
lot or street.
(b)   Landscape screening for parking structures. Parking structures that are
adjacent to zoning lots with side or rear setback requirements must meet the
following requirements:
(1)   An 18-inch landscaping strip along the abutting property line must be
provided, and consist of landscaping a minimum of 42 inches in height; provided
that a solid wall 42 inches in height may be substituted for this requirement;
and
(2)   A minimum 2-inch caliper vertical-form tree must be planted for every 50
linear feet of structured parking building length facing a required yard.
(Added by Ord. 20-41)
§ 21-6.100 Unbundled parking.
   Any parking space may be unbundled.
(Added by Ord. 20-41)
§ 21-6.110 Off-street loading requirements.
(a)   Required number of loading spaces. Off-street loading requirements apply
to all zoning lots exceeding 7,500 square feet in lot area for the types of
uses specified in
Table 21-6.5.
Table 21-6.5
Required Number of Loading Spaces
Use or Use Category Floor Area in Square Feet Loading Space Requirements
Table 21-6.5
Required Number of Loading Spaces
Use or Use Category       Floor Area in Square Feet  Loading Space Requirements
A. General retail,        2,000 - 10,000             1
general eating and        10,001 - 20,000            2
drinking, wholesale       20,001 - 40,000            3
operations, general       40,001 - 60,000            4
storage, warehousing, and
distribution, general     Each additional 50,000 or  1
personal services,        major fraction thereof
repair, self-storage
                          5,000 - 10,000             1
B. Hotels, hospitals or   10,001 - 50,000            2
similar institutions,     50,001 - 100,000           3
places of public assembly Each additional 100,000 or 1
                          major fraction thereof
                          20,000 - 50,000            1
C. Offices or office      50,001 - 100,000           2
buildings                 Each additional 100,000 or 1
                          major fraction thereof
                          20 - 150                   1
D. Multi-unit dwellings   151 - 300                  2
(units)                   Each additional 200 or     1
                          major fraction thereof
 
(b)   Method of calculating the number of required loading spaces.
(1)   If a building is used for more than one use, and the floor area for each
use is less than the minimum floor area that would require a loading space, and
the aggregate floor area of the several uses exceeds the minimum floor area of
the use category requiring the greatest number of loading spaces, a minimum of
one loading space is required.
(2)   Basements devoted to a use having a loading requirement count towards the
total floor area for calculating loading requirements.
(3)   When computation of the total required loading spaces for a zoning lot
results in a number with a fraction of 0.5 or greater, the number of required
loading spaces will be the next highest whole number.
(c)   Special loading requirements. Child and adult daycare and educational
uses have special loading requirements. Facilities used for child daycare must
provide a pickup and drop off area equivalent to four parking spaces pursuant
to § 21-5.70-1(a). K-12 schools with more than 25 students must provide a
pickup and drop off area equivalent to four parking spaces pursuant to § 21-
5.60-3(a).
(Added by Ord. 20-41) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-6.120 Adjustments and exceptions to loading requirements.
(a)   Exceptions to off-street loading requirements. The director may impose
special loading requirements in connection with planned development projects,
cluster housing, conditional use permits, and projects located within special
districts.
(b)   Joint use of loading. Two or more uses on the same or adjacent zoning
lots may share a loading area. If the loading area is being jointly used by
different property owners, a loading agreement between the owners is required.
A jointly used loading agreement must satisfy the requirements of a jointly
used parking agreement pursuant to §
21-6.70.
(c)   Change of use. If there is a change in use, the number of off-street
loading spaces required pursuant to
Table 21-6.5 for the new use must be provided, except as provided under §
21-2.140.
(d)   Excluding zoning lots in the preservation, agricultural, country, and
residential zoning districts, off-street loading spaces will not be required
for additional floor area up to 15,000 square feet per zoning lot; provided
that application of this subsection may only be used once on the same zoning
lot.
(Added by Ord. 20-41)
§ 21-6.130 Loading space dimensions and access.
(a)   Dimensions of loading spaces.
(1)   When only one loading space is required, the minimum horizontal
dimensions of the space are 19 feet in length and 8 feet 6 inches in width,
with a minimum vertical clearance of 10 feet.
(2)   When more than one loading space is required, the minimum horizontal
dimensions for one-third of the required spaces are 35 feet in length and 12
feet in width, with a minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet. For the remaining
required loading spaces, the minimum horizontal dimensions are 19 feet in
length and 8 feet 6 inches in width, with a minimum vertical clearance of 10
feet. When computation of the total required loading spaces with the dimensions
35 feet in length by 12 feet in width results in a number with a fraction of
one-half or greater, the number of required loading spaces will be the next
highest whole number.
(3)   Access to loading spaces must have the same minimum vertical clearance as
required for the loading spaces.
(b)   Location and improvement of loading spaces.
(1)   If loading space areas are illuminated, all sources of illumination must
be designed or shielded to prevent any direct illumination toward any zoning
lot or street.
(2)   Each required loading space must be identified and must be reserved for
loading purposes.
(3)   All loading spaces and maneuvering areas must be maintained with an all-
weather surface.
(4)   Loading spaces or maneuvering areas are not permitted in any required
yard, except in the preservation, agricultural, and country districts. For lots
that are split zoned and have nonresidential loading, the loading spaces may
encroach entirely into the side yard created by the zoning boundary that splits
the lot.
(5)   The width of loading bays entering buildings must not exceed 25 feet when
facing streets, except in the agricultural, country, and industrial districts.
(6)   Vehicular access to loading areas should be located where it is least
likely to impede pedestrian circulation.
(Added by Ord. 20-41)
§ 21-6.140 Passenger ride hailing services and deliveries.
(a)   Except in the preservation, agricultural, country, and industrial
districts, each zoning lot that is required to have at least two loading spaces
must provide one of the following or a combination thereof:
(1)   A driveway sized to accommodate at least two vehicles designed for pickup
and drop-off of passengers and deliveries; or
(2)   One dedicated short-term, standard sized, parking space (ten-minute
maximum parking period) for every required loading space for the pickup and
drop off of passengers and deliveries. The parking space is subject to all
parking setback requirements, and must be located near the entrance to the
parking area and accessible to drivers or operators of delivery vehicles. The
parking spaces required under this subdivision may count toward the minimum
parking requirement.
(Added by Ord. 20-41)
§ 21-6.150 Nonconforming off-street parking and loading.
   Parking and loading spaces that do not conform to the standards and
requirements of this article should become conforming over time. If a
nonconforming parking or loading space is modified to conform to the standards
and requirements of this article, or a nonconformity is reduced, the
nonconformity may not be reintroduced. Certain nonconformities may be allowed
to continue pursuant to §
21-4.110.
(Added by Ord. 20-41)
ARTICLE 7: SIGN REGULATIONS
Sections
   
21-7.10   Sign regulations—Purpose and intent
   
21-7.20   Definitions and general sign standards
   
21-7.30   Prohibited signs
   
21-7.40   Specific district sign standards
   
21-7.50   Special regulations for certain uses
   
21-7.60   Permits and fees
   
21-7.70   Abatement and removal
   
21-7.80   Signs for nonconforming uses
   
21-7.80-1   Nonconforming signs
§ 21-7.10 Sign regulations—Purpose and intent.
   The council finds and declares:
(a)   That the people of the city have a primary interest in controlling the
erection, location, and maintenance of outdoor signs in a manner designed to
protect the public health, safety, and morals, and to promote the public
welfare;
(b)   That the rapid economic development of the city has resulted in a great
increase in the number of businesses with a marked increase in the number and
size of signs advertising such business activities;
(c)   That the increased number and size of such signs, coupled with the
increased use of motor vehicles, make it imperative that the public streets and
highways be kept free from signs, which distract motorists’ attention from
driving and which detract from traffic safety signs promoting traffic safety;
(d)   That the indiscriminate erection, location, illumination, coloring, and
size of outdoor signs constitute a significant contributing factor in
increasing the number of traffic accidents on the public streets and highways
by detracting from the visibility of official traffic lights and signals, and
by tending to distract and divert the attention of drivers away from the flow
of traffic movement;
(e)   That in addition, thereto, the construction, erection, and maintenance of
large outdoor signs suspended from, or placed on top of buildings, walls, or
other structures, constitute a direct danger to pedestrian traffic below such
signs, especially during periods when winds of high velocity are prevalent;
(f)   That the size and location of such outdoor signs may, if uncontrolled,
constitute an obstacle to effective firefighting techniques;
(g)   That the natural beauty of the landscape, view, and attractive
surroundings of the Hawaiian Islands, including the city, constitutes an
attraction for tourists and visitors;
(h)   That a major source of income and revenue of the people of the city is
derived from the tourist trade;
(i)   That the indiscriminate erection and maintenance of large signs seriously
detract from the enjoyment and pleasure of the natural scenic beauty of the
city which, in turn, injuriously affect the tourist trade and thereby the
economic well-being of the city; and
(j)   That it is necessary for the promotion and preservation of the public
health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city that the erection,
construction, location, and maintenance of signs be regulated and controlled.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 7, § 21-7.10) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-7.20 Definitions and general sign standards.
   This section applies to signs in all zoning districts and zoning precincts.
Specific sign standards for the zoning districts and zoning precincts are found
in §
21-7.40.
   Unless specifically prohibited, all signs except ground signs may project
into required yards. All signs except ground signs and garden signs may project
into the public right-of-way; provided that the horizontal clearance between
the sign and the street line shall not be less than 2 feet; and provided that
the lower edge of the sign shall have a vertical clearance of at least 8 feet.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Address Signs. Signs indicating a street address.
Standard: Not to exceed 1 square foot in area.
Building Frontage. That portion of the principal building of an establishment
which faces a street. If the principal buildings are arranged on the lot in
such a manner as to face a parking area, walkway, or open space accessible to
the general public, then the area facing the parking area, walkway, or open
space may be considered the building frontage for an establishment; provided
that the establishment has an entryway on that frontage. Signs may be placed
facing the street or the parking area, walkway, or open space in any
combination, but shall not exceed two signs.
Business Signs. Signs that direct attention to a profession, business,
commodity, service, entertainment, or activity conducted, sold, or offered on
the premises where the sign is located.
Directional Signs. Signs indicating entrances and exits, including those for
parking lots and garages.
Standard: No more than one sign per entrance or exit; provided that if the sign
includes the name, emblem, or address of an establishment on the premises where
the directional sign is located, the identification portion of the sign shall
not exceed 1 square foot in sign area.
Directory Sign. A sign identifying the location of occupants of a building or
group of buildings which are divided into rooms or suites used as separate
offices, studios, or shops.
Flags. Weather flags and official flags of government jurisdictions, including
flags which are emblems of on-premises business firms and enterprises,
religious, charitable, public, and nonprofit organizations.
Standard: Not to exceed 50 square feet each in area and five in number per
street frontage per zoning lot.
Flashing Sign. A sign designed to attract attention by the inclusion of a
flashing, changing, revolving, or flickering light source or a change of light
intensity; and, also includes any sign involving electronically generated or
controlled images, such as an electronic programmable message sign, digital
sign, plasma or LED sign, or video or holographic display.
Garden Sign. A freestanding sign or a sign attached to the face of a
freestanding wall.
Standard: Not to exceed 6 square feet in sign area; may be indirectly
illuminated. A freestanding garden sign shall not exceed 30 inches in height;
when attached to a wall, it may not project more than 6 inches from the face of
the wall or exceed 6 feet in height above finished grade.
Ground Signs. Freestanding, self-supported structures erected or supported from
the ground containing one or more faces for sign or display purposes. A ground
sign includes a pole sign.
Standard: Not to exceed a height of 16 feet above finished grade.
Hanging Signs. Signs that hang down from and are supported by or attached to
the underside of a canopy, awning, or marquee.
Standard: When extending over walkways, no less than 7.5 feet of clearance
between the lower edge of the sign and the ground level below.
Identification Signs. Signs that depict the name or address of a building,
project or establishment on the premises where the sign is located as a means
of identifying the building, project, or establishment.
Illuminated Signs. Signs that are designed to give forth artificial light from
an artificial source. Such signs may be directly or indirectly illuminated and
shall include interior lighted signs.
(1)   Directly Illuminated Sign. A sign with its light source as an integral
part of the sign, including interior lighting and backlighting.
(2)   Indirectly Illuminated Signs. Signs illuminated with a light directed
primarily toward such sign and so shielded that no direct rays from the light
are visible elsewhere than on the lot where the illumination occurs.
(3)   Nonilluminated Signs. Signs that do not give forth artificial light from
an artificial source.
Marquee. A canopy or covered structure projecting from and supported by a
building.
Marquee Fascia Signs. Signs attached to or painted on the face of a marquee and
not projecting above or beneath the marquee face.
Moving Signs. Signs designed to attract attention by physical movement of all
or parts of the sign, including rotation, motion, or the perception of motion.
(1)   Rotating Signs. Moving signs or portions of such signs which physically
revolve about an axis.
Standard: Not to exceed 10 revolutions per minute.
(2)   Wind Sign. Any moving sign or display fastened in such a manner to move
upon being subjected to pressure by wind or breeze.
Standard: Not to exceed 16 square feet in area or 16 feet in height including
but not limited to flags, banners, balloons, streamers, and rotating devices.
Plaques. Commemorative plaques placed by historical agencies recognized by the
city or the State of Hawaii.
Portable Signs. Signs that have no permanent attachment to a building or the
ground, including but not limited to A-frame signs, pole attachments,
searchlights, stands, and business signs not related to window displays.
Standard: Not to exceed 16 square feet in sign area or 16 feet in height above
ground level.
Projecting Signs. Signs with the faces generally perpendicular to, and which
are affixed or attached to, and supported solely by, an exterior building wall
and which extend beyond the building wall more than 15 inches but not greater
than 5 feet.
Standard: Not to exceed 6 feet in height above the roof level of a one-story
building or 4 feet in height above the roof level of the second story of a
building over one story in height.
Public Signs. Signs of a public or noncommercial nature, which shall include
public transit service signs, utility information signs, safety signs, danger
signs, trespassing signs, signs indicating scenic or historical points of
interest, and all signs erected by a public officer in the performance of a
public duty.
Roof Level. The lowest point of intersection between the plane of the roof and
the plane of the exterior wall.
Roof Signs. Signs erected on a vertical framework supported by or located
entirely over the roof of a building.
Standard: Not to exceed a height of 5 feet above the roof level of a one-story
building in the industrial districts and 3 feet above the roof level in
business and business mixed-use districts. Not permitted in any district on
buildings exceeding one story in height or 16 feet above ground level,
whichever is the lower height.
Second Floor Establishment. For the purposes of §
21-7.40, any establishment, the operation of which is located on the second
floor of a building of no more than three stories in height; provided that the
establishment is accessible from the ground floor by a stairway which is not
separated from the rest of the second floor by a door. No part of the operation
of the establishment, except for primary access to the establishment, may be
located on the ground floor of the building. For purposes of this definition, a
story excludes any basement.
Sign. Any structure, billboard, marquee, awning, canopy, street clock,
announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, flag, pennant, banner,
balloon, illustration, or insignia used to advertise, attract, or promote the
interests of any person when it is placed on any property, building, or
structure in view of the general public; provided that window displays or
merchandise displays shall not be considered signs.
Sign Area. The entire area within a single, continuous perimeter of regular
geometric form enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem,
or any fixture of similar character, together with any frame or other material
or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such
sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding poles, supports,
or uprights (see
Figure 21-7.1). Where a sign has two or more faces, the area shall be computed
as the largest area projected on the vertical plane.
Small Signs. Diminutive identification signs or signs advertising the days or
hours of operation of an establishment (other than as may be permitted as
window displays).
Standard: Not to exceed 1 square foot in sign area, with sign copy not to
exceed 2 inches in height, and the cumulative area of all small signs for a
single establishment shall not exceed 2 square feet.
FIGURE 21-7.1
SIGN AREA
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-231.png]
Street Clock. Any timepiece erected on a stand on the sidewalk or on the
exterior of any building or structure for the convenience of the public or
placed and maintained for the purpose of advertising a place of business.
Subdivision Name Signs. Signs identifying the street entrance to a subdivision.
Standard: One nonilluminated sign, not to exceed 24 square feet in area, or two
nonilluminated signs, not to exceed 24 square feet in total per exclusive
entrance and restricted to the subdivision name.
Temporary Signs.
(A)   Announcing Signs. Signs announcing the character of a building enterprise
or the purpose for which the building is intended, including names of
architects, engineers, contractors, developers, financiers, and others.
Standard: One sign per street frontage of a building under construction,
structural alteration or repair not to exceed 16 square feet of sign area in
residential districts or 32 square feet of sign area in other districts.
(B)   Real Estate Signs. Signs advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the
premises on which the sign is displayed.
Standard: One sign per street frontage, not to exceed 4 square feet in
residential districts or 8 square feet in other districts.
(C)   Special Event Displays. Signs erected on the premises of an establishment
having a grand opening or special event. Special event signs are to advertise
an opening, occasion, or particular event, and not an establishment, service,
price, product, or commodity.
Standard: The special event display may include portable signs, banners, and
wind signs erected on the premises of the event. Special event displays are
limited to one event per six-month period, and shall not be displayed for more
than seven consecutive days.
(D)   Subdivision Construction Signs. Signs at the entrance to the subdivision
and located on the property to be subdivided.
Standard: One sign per street entrance to the subdivision and located on the
property to be subdivided, not to exceed 32 square feet in sign area. The sign
may not be erected until the subdivision has been approved by the appropriate
city officials and may be displayed for a period of one year from the date of
erection, which date must be filed with the director within 30 days after
erection. Erection date will be determined to be the same as the subdivision
approval date if not filed within the 30-day period. The display period may be
extended by written approval of the director for a reasonable period of time,
not to exceed one year at any one time.
Wall Signs. Signs with a face generally parallel with, and affixed to an
exterior wall of any building.
Standard: Not to project more than 15 inches from the building wall, not to
extend above the exterior wall of the building and not to exceed a height of 20
feet or the third floor level of buildings over two stories in height,
whichever is the higher height; or, the roof level of the second floor for
second floor establishments in buildings of only two stories in height.
For the purposes of this definition, an exterior wall shall include a parapet
wall above the exterior wall and roof facade with face slope 60 percent or
greater with the horizontal plane; provided that where a wall sign is to be
located on a parapet wall or facade, the parapet wall or facade shall extend
entirely across the side of the building; and provided further, that no portion
of a wall sign shall exceed 6 feet above the roof level. Exterior wall and
parapet wall shall be as defined in
Chapter 16 (Building Code), as amended.
Window Display. The showing of any announcement, illustration, insignia, or
lettering relating to merchandise for sale on the premises of a ground floor
establishment, within a window or other similar building wall opening.
Standard: If the window display includes an announcement, illustration,
insignia, or lettering, the representations shall be limited to the inside of
the glass surface of the window. Any window display shall be limited to the
first floor of a building.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 7, § 21-7.20) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 03-37,
09-5, 10-19)
§ 21-7.30 Prohibited signs.
   It is unlawful to erect or maintain:
(a)   Any sign that is not included under the types of signs permitted in this
chapter;
(b)   Any sign that advertises or publicizes an activity not conducted on the
premises on which the sign is maintained;
(c)   Any wind or portable sign, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter;
(d)   Any sign that by reason of its size, location, movement, content,
coloring, or manner of illumination constitutes a traffic hazard or a detriment
to traffic safety by obstructing the vision of drivers, or by obstructing or
detracting from the visibility of any official traffic control device, or by
diverting or tending to divert the attention of drivers of moving vehicles from
the traffic movement of the public streets and roads; and
(e)   Flashing signs.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 7, § 21-7.30) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-7.40 Specific district sign standards.
   Except for the Chinatown special district and as otherwise provided, signs
shall be permitted as:
(a)   P-2 preservation district. Only one sign, not exceeding 12 square feet in
area, shall be permitted on any zoning lot in connection with any use. Only
indirectly illuminated or nonilluminated signs shall be permitted. No sign
shall be mounted closer than 10 feet to the property line fronting a street or
be higher than 8 feet above finished grade;
(b)   Agriculture districts. The sign standards applicable to the P-
2 preservation district shall apply to all agricultural districts;
(c)   Country and residential districts. Only one sign or bulletin board per
street front per zoning lot for a permitted nondwelling use shall be permitted,
which shall not exceed 24 square feet in area. No such sign shall be directly
illuminated, located in any required yard or erected to exceed a height of 8
feet above finished grade, except that signs for nondwelling uses can be
located up to the front yard setback line required for dwelling use;
(d)   Apartment and apartment mixed-use districts. In connection with any use
permitted other than single-unit, two-unit, or duplex-unit dwelling use, only
one wall or marquee fascia identification or directory sign, not directly
illuminated and not exceeding 12 square feet in area, will be permitted for
each street front having a principal pedestrian or vehicular entrance to the
building.
If all buildings on the street frontage of the zoning lot are set back a
minimum of 50 feet from the property line on their entry sides, one ground
identification or directory sign, not directly illuminated and not exceeding 8
square feet in area, will also be permitted for each such entry side. The
ground sign may not be located in any required yard. Instead of these signs,
one garden sign may be permitted;
(e)   Resort district.
(1)   In connection with any use permitted other than one- and two-family
dwellings, only one wall or marquee fascia sign, not directly illuminated and
not exceeding 12 square feet in area, shall be permitted for each ground floor
establishment with building frontage.
One nonilluminated ground sign for identification or directory purposes, not
exceeding 8 square feet in area and not exceeding 6 feet in height, shall also
be permitted for each street front having a principal pedestrian or vehicular
entrance. If the above ground sign is not used and all buildings on the street
frontage of the zoning lot are set back a minimum of 50 feet from the property
line, one ground identification or directory sign, not directly illuminated and
not exceeding 12 square feet in area, shall also be permitted on each side of
the building where a principal pedestrian or vehicular entrance is situated.
Instead of the above ground signs, one garden sign may be permitted; and
(2)   This subsection shall not apply to the Waikiki special district, which
shall be governed by subsection (l);
(f)   B-1 neighborhood business district.
(1)   One wall sign on the building frontage side for each ground floor
establishment is permitted. The sign shall not be directly illuminated. The
maximum sign area per establishment for each building side on which the sign is
permitted shall not exceed 1 square foot of sign area for each lineal foot of
building frontage nor exceed 100 square feet in sign area. No illuminated signs
shall be so placed or erected as to be visible in any portion of an adjoining
residential lot after 10:00 p.m.;
(2)   One garden sign per zoning lot instead of the signs permitted above;
(3)   One wall or ground sign per building frontage, not directly illuminated
and not exceeding 12 square feet in area, may be erected for building
identification or directory purposes as part of the total sign area permitted
on the building side on which it is located. When used, this ground sign shall
not be illuminated and shall not exceed 6 feet in height; and
(4)   For each second floor establishment with building frontage, one wall
identification sign may be permitted. The maximum sign area shall be 6 square
feet and the sign shall not be illuminated;
(g)   B-2 community business and BMX-3 community business mixed-use districts.
(1)   Two business signs on the building frontages for each ground floor
establishment. The signs may be illuminated and of the following types:
hanging, marquee fascia, projecting, or wall signs;
(2)   The maximum sign area per establishment for each building side on which
signs are permitted shall not exceed 1.5 square feet for each lineal foot of
building frontage; provided that no such sign area shall exceed 250 square feet
in area nor shall the total sign area exceed 15 percent of the wall area on
which it is displayed or attached;
(3)   One ground sign, not directly illuminated, per zoning lot for
identification or directory purposes may be erected as part of the total sign
area permitted on the building side on which it is located; provided that:
(A)   A maximum 24-square-foot sign is permitted if all buildings on the street
frontage of the zoning lot are set back greater than 50 feet from the front
property line;
(B)   The ground sign shall be counted as one of the two permissible business
signs against all ground floor establishments within the zoning lot on which it
is located; and
(C)   No portion of the sign shall be located in or overhang any required yard
or public right-of-way;
(4)   One garden sign per zoning lot; provided that such sign shall be counted
as one of the signs permitted in subdivision (1);
(5)   One wall, ground, or projecting sign per building frontage, which may be
illuminated but not exceed 12 square feet in area, may be erected for building
identification or directory purpose as part of the total sign area permitted on
the building side on which it is located; provided that the sign shall be
counted as one of the signs permitted in subdivision (1) for each
establishment. When used, this ground sign shall not be directly illuminated
and shall not exceed 6 feet in height; and
(6)   For each second floor establishment with building frontage, one wall
identification sign may be permitted. The maximum sign area shall be 6 square
feet and the sign shall not be illuminated;
(h)   BMX-4 central business mixed-use district. The sign standards applicable
to the B-2 community business and BMX-3 community business mixed-use districts
shall apply, except for the following:
(1)   Business signs. The maximum sign area per establishment for each building
side on which signs are permitted shall not exceed 2 square feet for each
lineal foot of building frontage;
(2)   No projecting signs are permitted; and
(3)   For each second floor establishment with building frontage, one wall
identification sign may be permitted. The maximum sign area shall be 6 square
feet and the sign shall not be illuminated;
(i)   Industrial and industrial-commercial mixed-use districts.
(1)   Two business signs on the building frontage for each ground floor
establishment. The signs may be illuminated or moving and of the following
types: hanging, marquee fascia, projecting, roof, or wall signs;
(2)   The maximum sign area per establishment for each building side on which
signs are permitted shall not exceed 2 square feet for each lineal foot of
building frontage; provided that no sign area shall exceed 250 square feet nor
shall the total sign area exceed 15 percent of the wall on which displayed;
(3)   One ground sign, not directly illuminated, per zoning lot for
identification or directory purposes may be erected as part of the total sign
area permitted on the building side on which it is located; provided that:
(A)   A maximum 32-square-foot sign is permitted if all buildings on the street
frontage of the zoning lot are set back greater than 50 feet from the front
property line;
(B)   The ground sign shall be counted as one of the two permissible business
signs against all ground floor establishments within the zoning lot on which it
is located; and
(C)   No portion of the sign shall be located in or overhang any required yard
or public right-of-way;
(4)   One garden sign per zoning lot; provided that such sign shall be counted
as one of the signs permitted in subdivision (1);
(5)   One wall, ground, or projecting sign per building frontage, not directly
illuminated and not exceeding 12 square feet in area for the ground sign or
otherwise 24 square feet in area, may be erected for building identification or
directory purposes as part of the total sign area permitted on the building
side where it is located; provided that the sign shall be counted as one of the
signs permitted in subdivision (1) for each establishment. When used, this
ground sign shall not be directly illuminated and shall not exceed 6 feet in
height; and
(6)   For each second floor establishment with building frontage, one wall
identification sign may be permitted. The maximum sign area shall be 6 square
feet and the sign shall not be illuminated;
(j)   Planned development-housing. Not more than one sign, with sign area not
exceeding 24 square feet, shall be permitted at any principal entrance to the
project;
(k)   Plan review uses. Signage for plan review uses shall be determined during
the review of the request for the plan review use permit;
(l)   Waikiki district. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the
following signs may be permitted for each ground floor establishment with
building frontage; provided that the signs shall not be directly illuminated,
and may be wall, marquee fascia, or hanging signs:
(1)   Apartment precinct and apartment mixed-use subprecinct.
(A)   In connection with any principal use permitted, other than one-family and
two-family dwellings, only one identification sign per building frontage, not
exceeding 12 square feet in area;
(B)   If all buildings on the street frontage of the zoning lot are set back a
minimum of 50 feet from the property line on their entry sides, one ground
identification or directory sign, not directly illuminated and not exceeding 8
square feet in area, shall also be permitted for each entry side. These ground
signs shall not be located in any required yard. In lieu of one of the above
signs, one garden sign may be permitted; and
(C)   In addition to the above, the following may be permitted in the apartment
mixed-use subprecinct:
(i)   One directory sign per zoning lot, not exceeding 12 square feet in area,
which may be a ground sign not exceeding 6 feet in height, a wall sign or a
garden sign; and
(ii)   One building identification sign per building frontage, not exceeding 4
square feet in area;
(2)   Resort mixed-use precinct.
(A)   In connection with any principal use permitted, other than one-family and
two-family dwellings, only one business sign, per building frontage, with a
maximum area of 1 square foot per one linear foot of the building frontage or
36 square feet, whichever is less; and
(B)   In addition to the sign referred to in paragraph (A), one building
directory or identification sign per building frontage may be erected, not
exceeding 12 square feet in area, which may be a ground sign not exceeding 6
feet in height, a wall sign or a garden sign;
(3)   A permitted outdoor vending cart, kiosk, or similar vending structure,
when visible from a street, sidewalk, or public space, may be permitted the
following:
(A)   One business identification sign not exceeding 3 square feet in area; and
(B)   One price sign, not exceeding 2 square feet in area, to advertise the
cost of goods and services provided by the establishment.
These signs shall be wholly attached to the vending structure;
(4)   For each second floor establishment with building frontage in the
apartment mixed-use subprecinct and resort mixed-use precinct, one wall
identification sign may be permitted. The maximum sign area shall be 6 square
feet and the sign shall not be illuminated; and
(5)   All signs shall feature English or Hawaiian as the dominant language
thereon; other languages are permitted but the lettering thereof must be
subordinate to the English or Hawaiian lettering.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 7, § 21-7.40) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 99-63,
03-37, 09-5, 11-30, 25-2)
§ 21-7.50 Special regulations for certain uses.
   When there is a direct conflict between the special standards in this
section and the underlying district standards, the special standards shall
apply.
(a)   Vehicle sales and rental lots separated from new car dealer showrooms or
service facilities.
(1)   A maximum of three business signs not to exceed a total of 1 square foot
of sign area for each lineal foot of street frontage or 200 square feet,
whichever is the lesser area, will be permitted. Signs may be either wall,
roof, marquee fascia, or projecting signs and may be illuminated.
(2)   One identification ground sign not to exceed 32 square feet of the total
sign area may be erected in addition to the above signs which may be
illuminated and rotating but may not overhang any required yard or public
right-of-way.
(b)   Car wash, vehicle fueling station, heavy repair, and vehicle service.
(1)   A maximum of four business signs not to exceed a total sign area of 1
square foot for each lineal foot of street frontage or 200 square feet,
whichever is the lesser area will be permitted. Signs may be illuminated and be
either marquee fascia, projecting, or wall signs.
(2)   One identification ground sign, which can be directly illuminated and not
to exceed 32 square feet of the total sign area, may be erected; provided that
it does not overhang the public right-of-way. The sign may be a rotating sign.
If there is more than one street frontage, two such signs may be erected;
provided that they are on separate sides of the parcel and are more than 75
feet from the point of intersection of the two street frontages.
(3)   Pump island information signs located at the pump islands, denoting “Full
Service, Self Service,” or similar, will be permitted; provided that each sign
may not exceed 3 square feet in sign area.
(4)   One price sign, not exceeding 1 square foot in sign area and located on
each gas pump, will be permitted.
(5)   In addition to the price signs allowed under subdivision (4), one price
sign may be erected for each street frontage; provided that such sign may not
exceed 24 square feet in sign area and may not be placed on the identification
ground sign specified in subdivision (2). The sign will be counted as one of
the business signs and as part of the total signage allowed under subdivision
(1), and, in addition to the types of signs permitted by subdivision (1), may
be a ground sign, but may not exceed 24 square feet in sign area.
(c)   Vehicle fueling accessory to small retail.
(1)   Pump island information signs located at the pump islands, denoting “Full
Service, Self Service,” or similar, will be permitted; provided that each sign
may not exceed 3 square feet in sign area.
(2)   One price sign, not exceeding 1 square foot in sign area and located on
each gas pump, will be permitted.
(3)   In addition to the price signs allowed under subdivision (2), one
business sign, which can be a price sign and which can be a ground sign, may be
erected, but not to exceed 24 square feet in area.
(d)   Drive-in theaters.
(1)   One ground or wall sign, not directly illuminated and not to exceed 300
square feet in sign area which may state the name of the theater, name of the
current showing or future motion pictures or other performances and the names
of the actors therein or other relevant information, will be permitted;
provided that it may not extend into the public right-of-way.
(2)   Directional signs that may be illuminated, not to exceed a combined area
of 60 square feet with 6 square feet maximum per sign, may be erected.
(3)   The restrictions imposed by this section do not apply to signs within the
walls or other enclosed parts of the drive-in and which are not visible from
outside the theater.
(e)   Theaters. Four signs either hanging, marquee fascia, projecting, or wall
signs, that may be illuminated, not to exceed a total sign area of 300 square
feet, may be erected for each theater establishment.
(f)   Commercial facilities with business establishments at different levels
and outdoor parking facilities at each level comparable to that established at
the ground level. Only wall signs are permitted at any level situated above the
ground level. “Ground level” means the first level of a shopping center that
contains outdoor parking facilities for the business establishments situated at
this level.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 7, § 21-7.50) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-7.60 Permits and fees.
(a)   It is unlawful for any person to install, construct, erect, alter,
relocate, reconstruct, or cause to be installed, constructed, erected, altered,
relocated, or reconstructed within the city any sign or signs without first
having obtained a permit in writing from the director and making payment of the
fees required by this section.
(b)   No permit shall be required nor shall district sign regulations apply to
the following types of signs:
(1)   Subdivision construction signs;
(2)   Pump island information signs, not to exceed three square feet in sign
area;
(3)   Gasoline price signs, not to exceed one square foot in sign area and
located on a gasoline pump;
(4)   Temporary signs;
(5)   Public signs;
(6)   Flags;
(7)   Plaques;
(8)   Small signs and address signs;
(9)   Directional signs; and
(10)   Political campaign signs.
(c)   Applicants for permits shall file applications signed by the owner of the
sign or the owner’s agent, on forms containing the following information:
(1)   The name and address of the applicant and of the person by whom such sign
is to be constructed, erected, altered, relocated, or reconstructed;
(2)   An accurate description of the location or proposed location, type, and
character of each sign;
(3)   A plan or design of the sign showing its weight, dimensions, lighting
equipment, materials, details of its attachment and hanging and its position
relative to the building, property lines, and street lines;
(4)   Any electrical design required and approved for the sign; and
(5)   Other information pertinent to the application as may be required by the
director of planning and permitting.
(d)   Every applicant, before being granted a permit, shall pay to the city,
for each sign regulated by this chapter, a fee that shall be as specified in
Chapter 6, Article 41.
(e)   Except when sign work may be commenced without a permit, the fee for a
permit for work commenced without a permit shall be $100 plus the fee specified
by the director.
(f)   If the applicant complies with all the requirements of this chapter and
all other applicable ordinances, statutes, and regulations, the director shall
issue a permit.
(g)   If the work on any sign authorized under a permit has not been completed
within six months after the date of permit issuance, then the permit shall
become void and any sign installed, constructed, erected, relocated, or altered
thereafter under the permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(h)   The director is authorized and empowered to revoke any issued permit on
failure of the holder to comply with any provision of this chapter or any other
applicable statute, ordinance, or regulation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 7, § 21-7.60) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 03-37,
09-5)
§ 21-7.70 Abatement and removal.
(a)   Whenever it appears to the director that any sign has been constructed,
erected, or is being maintained in violation of this chapter, or after a permit
has been revoked or becomes void, or that a sign is unsafe, insecure, or in
such condition as to be a menace to the safety of the public, a written notice
shall be issued to the owner of the sign or the tenant of the premises on which
the sign is erected or maintained.
(b)   This notice shall inform the person of the violation or the dangerous
condition of the sign and direct the person to make such alteration or repair
or do such things or acts necessary to make the sign comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
(c)   A reasonable time limit for this action shall be stated in the notice,
which in no case shall be more than 30 days. The notice may be given by
personal service, by depositing a copy in the U.S. mail in a postage prepaid
wrapper addressed to the street address of the premises on which the sign is
erected or maintained, or by posting a copy on the premises.
(d)   On failure to comply with the notice within the time allowed, the
director shall cause the sign, or such part of it as is constructed or
maintained in an unsafe condition or otherwise in violation of this chapter, to
be removed, altered, or repaired so as to make it a conforming sign and shall
charge the expenses to the person so notified.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 7, § 21-7.70) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 03-37)
§ 21-7.80 Signs for nonconforming uses.
   Nonconforming uses are allowed signage not to exceed the sign regulations of
the underlying zoning district for each establishment unless otherwise
specified.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 7, § 21-7.80) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-7.80-1 Nonconforming signs.
   Any sign erected which complied with existing statutes, ordinances, and
regulations applicable at that time shall be permitted; provided that:
(a)   Nonconforming signs shall be maintained in a safe condition and shall not
in any respect be dangerous to the public or to property; and
(b)   Upon the alteration or relocation of any nonconforming sign or the
discontinuance or removal from the premises of the activity to which such sign
relates, the sign shall cease to be a nonconforming sign and shall thereafter
be permitted to be maintained only upon compliance with all requirements of
this chapter. All framing, poles, mountings, supports, and other appurtenances
shall be removed with the sign. “Alteration” shall not be construed to mean
repairs and maintenance for the purpose of keeping the sign in a clean and safe
condition.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 7, § 21-7.80-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
ARTICLE 8: OPTIONAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Sections
   
21-8.10   Purpose and intent
   
21-8.20A   Housing—Multiple dwelling units on a single country or residential
district zoning lot
   
21-8.30   Farm dwellings—Agricultural site development plan
   
21-8.40   Housing—Zero lot line development
   
21-8.40-1   Zero lot line site plan
   
21-8.40-2   Zero lot line site design standards
   
21-8.50   Housing—Flexible site design
   
21-8.50-1   Cluster housing
   
21-8.50-2   Cluster site design standards
   
21-8.50-3   Cluster housing procedures
   
21-8.50-4   Planned development housing (PD-H)
   
21-8.50-5   PD-H applicability
   
21-8.50-6   PD-H use regulations
   
21-8.50-7   PD-H density and minimum land area
   
21-8.50-8   PD-H site design standards
   
21-8.50-9   PD-H procedures
   
21-8.50-10   Application requirements
   
21-8.50-11   Director’s decision
   
21-8.60   Exclusive agricultural sites
§ 21-8.10 Purpose and intent.
   It is the purpose of this article to enable flexibility in the design and
development of land to promote its most efficient use in a manner consistent
with the city’s adopted land use policies and desired public objectives; to
encourage creative and cost-effective methods of housing development; to allow
the integrated and unified development of structures and facilities within a
single site or district, and to encourage the development or redevelopment of
land which cannot be used to its fullest potential through the conventional
application of this chapter or the city’s subdivision rules.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.10) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-8.20A Housing—Multiple dwelling units on a single country or residential
district zoning lot.
   A maximum of eight dwelling units may be placed on a single zoning lot in a
country or residential district; provided that:
(a)   The zoning lot must have a lot area equal to or greater than the required
minimum lot size for the underlying country or residential district multiplied
by the number of dwelling units on or to be placed on the lot;
(b)   If the applicant proposes to construct additional dwelling units under §
21-5.50-3(c), relating to ohana units, the zoning lot must be subdivided;
(c)   The number of dwelling units contained in each structure must not be
greater than permitted in the applicable zoning district;
(d)   This section does not apply to more than eight dwelling units on a single
zoning lot in the country or residential zoning district, which must be
processed under the established procedures for cluster housing, planned
development housing, or subdivision; and
(e)   For more than two dwelling units, the zoning lot must be located with
access to a street or right-of-way of sufficient access width as determined by
the director to assure public health and safety.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.20A) (Added by Ord. 10-19) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-8.30 Farm dwellings—Agricultural site development plan.
   Three to six farm dwellings may be placed on a single zoning lot in an
agricultural district; provided that an agricultural site development plan for
the lot is approved by the director.
(a)   Any agricultural zoning lot that has at least twice the required minimum
lot size for the underlying agricultural zoning district may have two farm
dwellings. If the applicant proposes to construct additional farm dwellings
under §
21-5.50-3(c), relating to ohana units, the zoning lot must be subdivided.
(b)   The agricultural site development plan must be in accordance with the
requirements of the preliminary subdivision map as stated in the subdivision
rules.
(c)   Prior to granting approval, the director shall determine that:
(1)   The agricultural site development plan would qualify for approval under
the subdivision rules if submitted as a subdivision application; and roadways,
utilities, and other improvements comply with the subdivision rules and
subdivision standards, unless modified by the director under applicable
provisions specified in the subdivision rules;
(2)   The number of farm dwellings contained in each structure is not greater
than permitted in the underlying zoning district; and
(3)   Except where otherwise provided in this article, each existing and future
farm dwelling must be located as if the zoning lot were subdivided in
accordance with the agricultural site development plan, applicable provisions
of this article, and the subdivision rules.
(d)   This section does not apply to applications for more than six farm
dwellings on a zoning lot, which must be processed under the established
procedures for cluster housing, planned development housing, or subdivision.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.30) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 10-19,
25-2)
§ 21-8.40 Housing—Zero lot line development.
   The purposes of this section are as follows:
(a)   To allow housing that has the attributes of single-unit dwellings, but
with cost savings due to less street frontage per zoning lot and smaller lot
sizes, without changing the underlying zoning district density controls; and
(b)   To offer more usable yard space and allow more efficient use of land.
It is the intent that zero lot line housing be applied to both new and existing
neighborhoods, and be used as a method for urban infill.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.40) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-8.40-1 Zero lot line site plan.
   All zero lot line housing projects shall be processed in accordance with the
subdivision rules, including application requirements; provided that a site
plan shall be submitted with other application materials which meets the
criteria of §
21-8.40-2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.40-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-8.40-2 Zero lot line site design standards.
(a)   Zero lot line housing may be constructed in the R-7.5, R-5, and R-3.5
residential districts.
(b)   The minimum lot and yard dimensions shall be the underlying district
requirements for duplex units, except that a side or a rear yard, or both, need
not be provided, and corner lots in a zero lot line project shall have a
minimum lot width of 10 feet more than the underlying district minimum lot
width for duplex units.
(c)   The maximum building area shall be 50 percent of the zoning lot.
(d)   The maximum building height shall be the underlying district
requirements.
(e)   Height setbacks on the zero lot line shall be measured from 5 feet on the
other side of the property line.
(f)   The following siting standards shall be applied to all zero lot line
housing projects:
(1)   To create useful outdoor areas, dwelling units may be sited on any side
or rear lot line, or both;
(2)   Dwelling units shall not be sited on lot lines between a zero lot line
dwelling and a lot not included in the project;
(3)   A minimum distance equivalent to double the yard requirement in the
underlying zoning district shall be maintained between any two dwelling units.
This requirement can be met entirely on one zoning lot or shared between the
lots. This control shall be made a part of deed restrictions as a use easement;
and
(4)   Siting of dwelling units shall be staggered a minimum of 2 feet on
adjacent zoning lots. Setbacks shall be varied in a random manner to avoid
repetition.
(g)   Walls of structures built along the lot line shall not contain windows,
doors, or other openings, except that windows may be allowed for light and
ventilation purposes; provided that the height from window sill to finished
floor shall be at least 6 feet.
(h)   For the purposes of construction, upkeep, and repair of structures
located on a lot line, a minimum 5 foot maintenance easement shall be recorded
between the owner of the property containing the structure and the owner of the
property where entry must take place.
(i)   All zoning lots within a zero lot line housing project shall carry a
record of agreement or deed restriction limiting the use of the lots to zero
lot line housing, including all restrictions on yards.
(j)   The director may establish supplemental design guidelines further
illustrating the above site design standards.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.40-2) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-8.50 Housing—Flexible site design.
   The purpose of this section is to provide for cluster housing and planned
development housing, two development options which offer more flexible site
design opportunities than conventional subdivisions.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-8.50-1 Cluster housing.
   The intent of cluster housing is:
(a)   To allow development of housing sites that would otherwise be difficult
to develop under conventional city subdivision standards;
(b)   To allow flexibility in housing types, including two-unit, duplex-unit,
and multi-unit dwellings;
(c)   To encourage innovative site design and efficient open space;
(d)   To minimize grading by allowing private roadways, narrower roadway
widths, and steeper grades than otherwise permitted; and
(e)   To provide common amenities, when appropriate.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-8.50-2 Cluster site design standards.
   Cluster housing may be constructed in all residential and apartment zoning
districts, subject to the following standards:
(a)   Within residential and apartment zoning districts, the minimum land area
and maximum number of dwelling units for a cluster housing project are as
follows:
 
District  Minimum Land Area  Maximum No. of Units
R-20      60,000 square feet Total project area/20,000
R-10      30,000 square feet Total project area/10,000
R-7.5     22,500 square feet Total project area/7,000
R-5       15,000 square feet Total project area/3,750
R-3.5     10,500 square feet Total project area/3,500
A-1 - A-3 10,500 square feet Total project area/3,500
 
(b)   Within cluster housing projects, single-unit, two-unit, duplex-unit, and
multi-unit dwellings are permitted. Multi-unit dwellings must not exceed eight
dwelling units in one structure;
(c)   The director may waive the following requirements if suitable landscaping
or buffering with a fence or wall is provided:
(1)   All structures containing more than two units must be set back a minimum
of twice the required side and rear yards from adjoining properties not
otherwise separated by a permanent open space in excess of 15 feet in width;
and
(2)   All common activity areas, such as tot lots, play courts, swimming pools,
and barbecue facilities, must be set back a minimum of 25 feet from all
adjoining property lines and walls of the units in the project;
(d)   To minimize the visual dominance of parking areas, while encouraging
pitched roofs, the director may allow buildings to exceed the underlying
district height limit; provided that the following conditions are satisfied:
(1)   The exemption will allow the required parking to be provided underneath
the units, and therefore create more opportunities for open space;
(2)   The building contains multi-unit dwellings with gabled or hipped roof
forms;
(3)   The highest exterior wall line, equivalent to the structural top plate,
must not exceed a height limit of 30 feet. This excludes gable ends above the
structural plate line;
(4)   The building must be sited a minimum of 20 feet from any property line in
common with a zoning lot in a residential zoning district. The distance between
any three-story buildings must be at least 30 feet;
(5)   The building must not exceed a height limit of 34 feet; and
(6)   The exemption will not adversely detract from the surrounding
neighborhood character;
(e)   If a private roadway abuts a neighboring property, with a setback less
than the front yard required in the underlying zoning district of the abutting
property, then either a wall must be constructed or landscaped buffering must
be installed along the roadway, or a combination of a wall and landscaping must
be provided, subject to the approval of the director;
(f)   The maximum building area is 50 percent of the total land area for the
project. Maximum building area for any zoning lot of record may be more than 50
percent in response to design considerations, but must not exceed 80 percent;
(g)   Yards and height setbacks abutting the boundaries of the entire cluster
development site must not be less than minimum requirements for the underlying
zoning district. Additionally, the front yard for all zoning lots fronting
public streets must not be less than the front yard requirement of the
underlying zoning district; and
(h)   The director may establish supplemental design guidelines further
illustrating the above site design standards.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-2) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-8.50-3 Cluster housing procedures.
   All cluster housing applications shall be processed in accordance with §
21-2.110-1.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-3) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-8.50-4 Planned development housing (PD-H).
   The PD-H option is intended for higher density residential development on
large parcels of vacant land or large parcels being redeveloped, while
complementing the surrounding neighborhood, with:
(a)   A variety of housing types, including multi-unit dwellings;
(b)   Innovative site design and efficient open space;
(c)   Common amenities;
(d)   Reduced construction costs for the developer and housing costs for the
consumer;
(e)   A mixing of uses other than allowed in the underlying zoning district;
(f)   Adequate provision for public services; and
(g)   More flexibility for infrastructure improvements.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-4) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-8.50-5 PD-H applicability.
   PD-H projects may be constructed in all residential and apartment districts.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-5) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-8.50-6 PD-H use regulations.
   Within a PD-H project, all of the following uses and structures are
permitted:
(a)   Public, civic, and institutional uses; provided that facilities where the
conduct of commercial affairs is a principal activity are not permitted;
(b)   Adult or child daycare facilities;
(c)   Dwellings—single-unit, two-unit, duplex-unit, and multi-unit; and
(d)   General outdoor recreation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-6) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-8.50-7 PD-H density and minimum land area.
   The following floor area ratios and minimum land area requirement shall
apply to PD-H projects, based on the underlying zoning district:
 
District FAR Minimum Land Area
R-20     .13 4 acres
R-10     .24 2 acres
R-7.5    .26 1.5 acres
R-5      .35 1 acre
 
District FAR Minimum Land Area
District FAR  Minimum Land Area
R-3.5    .40  1 acre
A-1      .79  .5 acre
         1.00 if project size is greater than 1 acre
A-2      1.61 .5 acre
         2.00 if project size is greater than 1 acre
A-3      2.60 .5 acre
         3.00 if project size is greater than 1 acre
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-7)
§ 21-8.50-8 PD-H site design standards.
   All PD-H projects shall comply with the following design review criteria:
(a)   When a PD-H project adjoins a residential zoning district without an
intervening secondary or major street or a permanent open space at least 15
feet wide, then a 15-foot open space buffer shall be provided. This buffer
requirement may be waived by the director when topography makes buffering
unnecessary;
(b)   All intensive recreational uses, such as play courts, ball fields, tot
lots, and swimming pools, shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from all
adjoining residential districts and 25 feet from the walls of dwelling units
within the planned development project. This requirement may be waived by the
director when topography or the installation of landscaping or a fence or wall
or other design features makes the setback unnecessary;
(c)   A minimum of 50 percent of the land area of the project shall be
maintained in open space;
(d)   Minor streets within the project shall not be connected to streets
outside the development in such a way as to encourage the use of minor streets
for through traffic;
(e)   Walkways may be required for pedestrian access to all dwelling units and
project facilities; and
(f)   The director may establish supplemental design guidelines further
illustrating the above site design standards.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-8) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-8.50-9 PD-H procedures.
   All PD-H applications shall be processed in accordance with §
21-2.40-2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-9) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-8.50-10 Application requirements.
   Any application for a cluster or a PD-H project shall be accompanied by:
(a)   Project name;
(b)   A location map showing the project in relation to the surrounding area
and the location of all major community facilities within a 0.5 mile radius of
the project;
(c)   A site plan showing:
(1)   A metes and bounds map of site, prepared and certified by a registered
engineer or surveyor, including any deed restrictions;
(2)   Lot layout and approximate dimensions, lot number of each lot, area of
each lot, proposed use of each lot, total number of lots, and total area of
project;
(3)   Locations, names, dimensions, approximate gradients and radius of curves
of existing and proposed streets within and adjacent to the project;
approximate location and area dimensions of existing and proposed easements;
existing and proposed drainage facilities; and existing and proposed utilities,
including sewers, water, electric, telephone, and refuse;
(4)   Approximate location of areas subject to inundation or stormwater
overflow, and all areas covered by waterways, including ditches, gullies,
streams, and drainage courses within or abutting the site and features such as
slide areas or falling boulder areas likely to be harmful to the project or the
surrounding area;
(5)   Existing contours at vertical intervals of 5 feet where the slope is
greater than 10 percent, and contours not more than 2 feet where the slope is
less than 10 percent;
(6)   The finished condition to be achieved by proposed grading to be shown by
contours, cross-sections, spot elevations, or other means, and estimated
quantities of cut and fill. Elevations shall be marked on such contours based
on established benchmark;
(7)   Approximate location and general description of any historical or
significant landmarks or other natural features, and trees with a trunk
diameter of 6 inches or more at 5 feet above ground, and an indication of the
proposed retention or disposition of such features;
(8)   Location, size, spacing, setbacks and dimensions of all existing and
proposed structures, and improvements, including the number and type of
dwelling units;
(9)   The shoreline, shoreline setback lines, beach access and stream and other
setback lines, when applicable;
(10)   Location with notations, and the sizes of all parcels of land, including
streets, improvements, facilities, and easements, proposed to be dedicated to
the city, or whether the streets, improvements, facilities, and easements are
to be private;
(11)   Number and location of dwelling units and guest parking (covered and
uncovered); and
(12)   Abutting land uses.
(d)   Architectural plans which show prototype dwelling units, including floor
plans and elevation drawings, with sections, dimensions, and floor area;
(e)   A landscape plan which includes identification of proposed trees by
caliper and other plant material by species;
(f)   A prose description of the project including: objectives of the design
concept; unique site conditions; and development schedule (number of units and
other development features for each phase); and
(g)   Proposals for maintenance and conservation of all common elements.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-10) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-8.50-11 Director’s decision.
   The director shall approve, approve with modifications, or deny with reasons
the cluster housing or the PD-H application, based on the following criteria:
(a)   The applicant’s compliance with §
21-8.50-2, for cluster housing projects, or §
21-8.50-8, for PD-H projects;
(b)   The applicant’s compliance with requirements of other government
agencies;
(c)   The applicant’s compliance with all other application requirements, as
specified in §
21-8.50-10, application requirements;
(d)   Assurance that the proposed development will be of quality and character
compatible with surrounding land uses and will have the same beneficial effect
on the health, safety, and welfare of persons living or working in the area, as
would any use or uses generally permitted in the district; and
(e)   No cluster or PD-H shall be granted approval if the land is found by the
director, upon consultation with other governmental agencies, to be unsuitable
for the proposed use, based on the following conditions:
(1)   Susceptibility to flooding;
(2)   Poor drainage;
(3)   Unstable subsurface;
(4)   Groundwater or seepage conditions;
(5)   Inundation or erosion by seawater;
(6)   Susceptibility to slides or similar hazards;
(7)   Adverse earth or rock formation or topography; and
(8)   Other features or conditions likely to be harmful or dangerous to the
health, safety, or welfare of future residents of the proposed project or to
the surrounding neighborhood or community.
Approval shall not be granted unless satisfactory protective improvements or
other measures have been proposed by the applicant and approved by the director
in consultation with other governmental agencies.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-11) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-8.60 Exclusive agricultural sites.
   The director may approve exclusive agricultural sites under the following
conditions:
(a)   The minimum leasable area within an exclusive agricultural site shall be
5 acres, irrespective of the minimum lot size of the applicable zoning
district;
(b)   All structures for temporary, seasonal, or permanent residential
occupancy or habitation shall be prohibited;
(c)   Exclusive agricultural site provisions shall be applicable only to
leasehold lands located within an agricultural-zoned district and shall require
a lease term of no less than 10 years. The term of the lease shall be clearly
defined in the lease agreement;
(d)   If a resource concern is identified by the United States Department of
Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service or appropriate State of
Hawaii Soil and Water Conservation District, the owner of the parcel and
lessees shall submit a conservation plan approved by a certified conservation
planner upon application for an exclusive agricultural site;
(e)   The owner of the parcel shall also submit a map, drawn to scale, of the
parcels indicating the land area under consideration for the exclusive
agricultural site, the number of existing or proposed leasable areas and acres,
and a copy of the executed lease agreements;
(f)   Before final approval of the site by the director, the leases within or a
master lease for an exclusive agricultural site shall be recorded in the bureau
of conveyances or the land court, or both, as is appropriate, and a certified
copy of the recorded document shall be filed with the director. Each lease
shall:
(1)   Restrict uses to those principal and accessory agricultural uses as
defined in this chapter, except that farm dwellings or structures suitable for
residential occupancy or habitation shall be prohibited;
(2)   Provide a roadway maintenance agreement for all roadways within the
exclusive agricultural site; and
(3)   Assure implementation of the conservation plan required in subsection (d)
and compliance with such plan, including maintenance of conservation
improvements specified therein;
(g)   Notwithstanding
Chapter 22, the following infrastructure standards shall apply:
(1)   A water system shall not be required for an exclusive agricultural site;
and
(2)   Roadway improvements, including street lights and utility lines, may be
approved within an exclusive agricultural site which do not meet the standards
established under
Chapter 22; provided that they shall be the property and the responsibility of
any one or more of the following: the subdivider, lot owner, or lessees,
pursuant to an executed roadway maintenance agreement;
(h)   If conditions in the area in which an exclusive agricultural site is
located change to such extent that the exclusive agricultural site no longer
promotes diversified agriculture, the fee owner may apply to the director to
nullify the site permit; provided that the consent of all lessees within the
site is secured. Upon the approval of the nullification of the exclusive
agricultural site by the director, the parcel shall revert to its original
status; and
(i)   In the event of expiration or termination of the lease before its stated
term, the exclusive agricultural site shall be nullified, and the parcel shall
revert to its original status.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.60) (Added by Ord. 02-63)
ARTICLE 9: SPECIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sections
   
21-9.10   Developments in flood hazard areas
   
21-9.20   Special districts—Purpose
   
21-9.20-1   Design controls
   
21-9.20-2   Major, minor, and exempt projects
   
21-9.20-3   Time limits
   
21-9.20-4   Utility lines
   
21-9.20-5   Design advisory committee
   
21-9.20-6   Conflicting regulations
   
21-9.30   Hawaii capital special district
   
21-9.30-1   Objectives
   
21-9.30-2   District boundaries
   
21-9.30-3   Prominent views and historic places
   
21-9.30-4   Design controls
   
21-9.30-5   Project classification
   
21-9.40   Diamond Head special district
   
21-9.40-1   Objectives
   
21-9.40-2   District boundaries
   
21-9.40-3   Prominent public vantage points
   
21-9.40-4   Design controls
   
21-9.40-5   Single-unit, two-unit, and duplex-unit dwellings
   
21-9.40-6   Project classification
   
21-9.50   Punchbowl special district
   
21-9.50-1   Objectives
   
21-9.50-2   Boundaries
   
21-9.50-3   Prominent vistas and viewing areas
   
21-9.50-4   Design controls
   
21-9.50-5   Single-unit, two-unit, and duplex-unit dwellings
   
21-9.50-6   Project classification
   
21-9.60   Chinatown special district
   
21-9.60-1   Overall objectives
   
21-9.60-2   District boundaries
   
21-9.60-3   Prominent view corridors
   
21-9.60-4   Historic and architecturally significant structures
   
21-9.60-5   Design controls
   
21-9.60-6   Mauka precinct objectives
   
21-9.60-7   Mauka precinct development standards
   
21-9.60-8   Historic core precinct objectives
   
21-9.60-9   Historic core precinct development standards
   
21-9.60-10   Makai precinct objectives
   
21-9.60-11   Makai precinct development standards
   
21-9.60-12   Street facade guidelines
   
21-9.60-13   Project classification
   
21-9.70   King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square/Honolulu Museum of Art special
district
   
21-9.70-1   Objectives
   
21-9.70-2   District boundaries
   
21-9.70-3   Significant public views
   
21-9.70-4   Design controls
   
21-9.70-5   Project classification
   
21-9.80   Waikiki special district—Findings
   
21-9.80-1   Waikiki special district—Objectives
   
21-9.80-2   District boundaries and land use control system
   
21-9.80-3   Prominent view corridors and historic properties
   
21-9.80-4   General requirements and design controls
   
21-9.80-5   Apartment precinct
   
21-9.80-6   Resort mixed-use precinct
   
21-9.80-7   Reserved
   
21-9.80-8   Public precinct
   
21-9.80-9   Tables for permitted uses and structures, development standards and
project classification
   
21-9.90   Haleiwa special district
   
21-9.90-1   Objectives
   
21-9.90-2   District boundaries
   
21-9.90-3   Significant public views and resources
   
21-9.90-4   Design controls
   
21-9.90-5   Dwelling units
   
21-9.90-6   Project classification
   
21-9.100   Transit-oriented development (TOD) special district
   
21-9.100-1   TOD special district findings
   
21-9.100-2   Neighborhood TOD plans
   
21-9.100-3   Processing of proposed ordinances establishing the TOD special
district and development regulations applicable thereto
   
21-9.100-4   TOD development regulations minimum requirements
   
21-9.100-5   Interim planned development-transit (IPD-T) projects
   
21-9.100-6   TOD special district objectives
   
21-9.100-7   Use regulations
   
21-9.100-8   General requirements and development standards
   
21-9.100-9   TOD special district permits
   
21-9.100-10   Planned development-Transit (PD-T) projects
   
21-9.100-11   TOD special district–project classification
   
21-9.100-12   TOD special district boundaries
§ 21-9.10 Developments in flood hazard areas.
(a)   All permit applications subject to this chapter must, at the time of
processing, be reviewed for compliance with Chapter 21A. Whenever applicable,
the flood hazard area requirements of a development project must be determined
before processing for other approvals mandated by other laws and regulations.
(b)   Dwellings in country, residential, and agricultural zoning districts, as
well as single-unit, two-unit, and duplex-unit dwellings in apartment and
apartment mixed-use zoning districts, may exceed the maximum height in the
district by no more than 5 feet if required to have its lowest floor elevated
to or above the base flood elevation; provided that such additional height must
not be greater than 25 feet above the base flood elevation.
(c)   Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, no more than two
dwelling units are permitted on a single zoning lot whose only buildable area
is in the floodway. This provision, designed to reduce flood losses, takes
precedence over any less restrictive, conflicting laws, ordinances, or rules.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.10) (Added by Ord. 14-9) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-9.20 Special districts—Purpose.
   The purpose of a special district is to provide a means by which certain
areas in the community in need of restoration, preservation, redevelopment, or
rejuvenation may be designated as special districts to guide development to
protect or enhance the physical and visual aspects of an area for the benefit
of the community as a whole.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.20) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.20-1 Design controls.
(a)   To fulfill district design objectives, each special district may contain
regulations which provide guidance for the design of new development and the
renovation of existing development.
(b)   Rules may supplement or modify underlying zoning district regulations.
Sections
21-9.20-2 through
21-9.20-5 shall apply to all special districts.
(c)   The director may establish supplemental design guidelines for special
districts to illustrate further the objectives and design controls of each
special district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.20-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.20-2 Major, minor, and exempt projects.
   All development in any special district is classified into one of three
categories: major, minor, or exempt. Major and minor projects must obtain a
special district permit and must be processed under §§
21-2.40-2 and
21-2.40-1, respectively.
Tables 21-9.1 through
21-9.8 are to be used by the department as a guide to determine the category of
a particular project within each special district.
(a)   Major permits. These permits are intended for projects that may
significantly change the intended character of the special district. All major
permits, other than TOD special district permits, will be reviewed by the
design advisory committee as specified in §
21-2.40-2.
(b)   Minor permits. Minor permits are intended for projects that will have
limited impact and are considered minor in nature. The director shall have the
right to review and modify such projects.
(c)   Exempt projects. Exempt projects will have negligible or no impact and
therefore do not require review. They include projects that require emergency
repairs or interior work, and do not change the exterior appearance of a
structure. Within a TOD special district, projects that are less than 1 acre in
area or that do not require discretionary review because they meet the
development standards in §
21-9.100-8, are also exempt projects.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.20-2) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 17-54)
§ 21-9.20-3 Time limits.
   The special district permit shall be void if the applicant fails to secure
building permits within two years of the date of issuance of the permit. The
applicant shall be notified in writing of the change in the time period. On
show of cause, the applicant may request the director to extend the time limit.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.20-3) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.20-4 Utility lines.
   Notwithstanding any ordinance or regulation to the contrary, utility
companies shall place their utility lines underground within any special
district. The director may grant an exemption to utility lines based on the
applicant’s satisfactory justification that no other alternative will better
achieve the district’s purpose and objectives.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.20-4) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.20-5 Design advisory committee.
(a)   The director shall appoint a design advisory committee which shall
provide design input to the director on significant proposals in the special
districts. The committee shall hear proposals for major special district
permits and advise the director concerning the approval, denial, or
modification of these projects based on the purposes, objectives, and design
controls of the particular special district.
(b)   The committee shall consist of a minimum of seven members as follows:
(1)   Two architects;
(2)   Two landscape architects;
(3)   Two urban planners; and
(4)   State historic preservation officer from the State department of land and
natural resources or designated representative.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.20-5) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.20-6 Conflicting regulations.
   If any regulation pertaining to the special districts conflicts with any
provision contained within
Article 3, the more restrictive regulation takes precedence; provided however,
that this section does not apply to TOD development regulations enacted
pursuant to §
21-9.100 and its accompanying sections, which take precedence in the event of
conflict with
Article 3 or special district regulation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.20-6) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 09-4,
17-54)
§ 21-9.30 Hawaii capital special district.
(a)   As the seat of State and county government, Honolulu enjoys the
clustering of government facilities and buildings. Many of the buildings are
listed on the State and national registers of historic places. Because of their
close proximity, these facilities, and the areas adjacent to them, contribute
significantly to the urban design of Honolulu.
(b)   The purpose of this section is to establish a special district to be
called the “Hawaii capital special district” and to provide for its protection,
preservation, enhancement, and orderly development.
(c)   It is also the purpose of this section to emphasize that the Hawaii
capital special district and its landmarks are sources of education, pleasure,
and intangible benefit for the people of the State of Hawaii and to foster
civic pride in the beauty of the district and accomplishments of the past.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.30) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.30-1 Objectives.
   The objectives of the Hawaii capital special district are:
(a)   To provide safeguards for the preservation and enhancement of buildings
and landmarks within the Hawaii capital special district which represent or
reflect elements of the State’s civic, aesthetic, cultural, social, economic,
political, and architectural heritage, and encourage new development which is
compatible with and complements those buildings and sites; and
(b)   To preserve and enhance the park-like setting of the Hawaii capital
special district, including its view from the Punchbowl lookout.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.30-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.30-2 District boundaries.
   The Hawaii capital special district and its precinct boundaries are shown on
Exhibit 21-9.1.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.30-2) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.30-3 Prominent views and historic places.
(a)   The following streets and locations identify important pedestrian and
vehicular corridors by which one experiences the Hawaii capital special
district, as well as views of the mountains and the waterfront. The design of
all proposed projects within the district shall be guided by the required yards
as shown on
Exhibit 21-9.1:
(1)   Beretania Street between Alapai Street and Alakea Street;
(2)   The Hotel Street Mall between Alapai Street and Richards Street;
(3)   Hotel Street between Richards Street and Alakea Street;
(4)   King Street between South Street and Alakea Street;
(5)   Kapiolani Boulevard at the intersection of South Street and King Street;
(6)   Ala Moana Boulevard between Punchbowl Street and the district boundary;
(7)   Mililani Street and Mall between Halekauwila Street and King Street;
(8)   Punchbowl Street between Beretania Street and Ala Moana Boulevard;
(9)   South Street between King and Pohukaina Streets;
(10)   Richards Street between Halekauwila and Beretania Streets;
(11)   Alapai Street between King and Beretania Streets; and
(12)   The fifth floor lanais of the State Capitol Building, emphasizing a
mauka-makai orientation.
(b)   The following is a listing of sites, structures and objects which are on
the State or national registers of historic sites, or both, and, therefore, are
worthy of preservation. They are identified by number on
Exhibit 21-9.3:
(1)   Kawaiahao Church and grounds;
(2)   Adobe School House;
(3)   Lunalilo Mausoleum;
(4)   Kekuanaoa Building;
(5)   Kapuaiwa Building;
(6)   Hale Auhau;
(7)   Kamehameha I Statue;
(8)   Aliiolani Hale;
(9)   U.S. Post Office;
(10)   Hawaiian Electric Building;
(11)   Honolulu Hale and grounds;
(12)   Mission Memorial Building Annex;
(13)   Honolulu Hale Annex (Mission Memorial Building and Auditorium);
(14)   Iolani Palace and grounds;
(15)   Iolani Barracks;
(16)   Royal Burial Ground and Fence;
(17)   Coronation Bandstand;
(18)   Captain Cook Memorial Tablet;
(19)   YWCA and grounds;
(20)   Banyan tree on the Iolani Palace grounds;
(21)   Old Archives Building (Attorney General’s Building);
(22)   Hawaii State Library;
(23)   State Capitol and grounds;
(24)   Armed Services YMCA and grounds (No. 1 Capitol District);
(25)   St. Andrew’s Cathedral, including St. Andrew’s Close, Davies and Tenney
Halls and Parke Memorial Chapel adjacent to the cathedral;
(26)   Washington Place and grounds;
(27)   Mission Houses;
(28)   Aloha Tower;
(29)   Royal Brewery;
(30)   Podmore Building; and
(31)   Old Kakaako Fire Station.
(c)   Several other buildings contribute to the character of the district. In
reviewing applications for modifications or removal, or both, of the following
structures, efforts to retain them are to be encouraged.
(1)   St. Andrew’s Priory;
(2)   St. Peter’s Church;
(3)   Aliiolani Hale Annex;
(4)   Mabel Smythe Building;
(5)   Harkness Nurses Home;
(6)   Board of Water Supply Buildings;
(7)   Arcade Building; and
(8)   1919 Hawaiian Electric Company Building.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.30-3) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.30-4 Design controls.
(a)   Landscaping.
(1)   Open space and yard requirements for each precinct shown on
Exhibits 21-9.1 and
21-9.2, respectively, shall be landscaped in accordance with landscape
guidelines and regulations contained in this subsection. If no yard or open
space requirement is shown, underlying zoning district regulations shall
prevail.
(2)   All required yards shall be landscaped and maintained with a minimum of
75 percent of the area devoted exclusively to plant material rooted directly in
the ground or permanently fixed plant containers.
(3)   Vertical form trees shall be planted and maintained along the front yard
perimeter of parking structures to reduce the visual impact of blank walls and
parked vehicles. A tree shall be planted for every 20 feet of linear building
length. Acceptable tree species include coconut palms, paperbark, and
eucalyptus. If there is sufficient space, canopy form trees may be substituted.
Alternatively, planter boxes with vines may be provided on the facades of every
parking level.
(4)   Rooftop parking and mechanical equipment shall be substantially screened
or painted, or both, to soften their appearance from the Capitol building and
the Punchbowl lookouts.
(5)   All required trees shall be provided in conformance with subdivision (8),
and shall be a minimum 2-inch caliper, except palms which shall have a minimum
trunk height of 15 feet. All tree planting shall be in conformance with the
requirements and standards shown on
Exhibit 21-9.4, except that alternative species, especially native Hawaiian or
species long present and common to the Hawaiian Islands, including flowering
varieties, shall be encouraged and may be substituted in all instances upon
approval by the director. Other exceptions to accommodate special conditions
may be approved by the director.
(6)   Landscaping for the Iolani Palace grounds shall be in conformance with
the master plan as approved by the department, the National Council on Historic
Preservation and the State department of land and natural resources.
(7)   Landscaping for the Queen’s Medical Center shall include retention of its
existing large front lawn along Punchbowl Street, except for the Queen Emma
Tower expansion and the Hawaii Medical Library parking garage authorized by
Res. 04-244, CD1, FD1; necessary driveways providing vehicular access through
the campus; and pedestrian accessways. Main entrances that exit to ground level
shall include a view of landscaping, including trees wherever possible.
(8)   Street trees shall be provided along major streets as delineated below,
and shown on
Exhibit 21-9.4.
(A)   Beretania Street, except fronting the State Capitol:
(i)   Species. Monkeypod (Samanea saman);
(ii)   Maximum spacing. 60 feet on center; and
(iii)   Location. Within the required front yard.
(B)   King Street, except fronting the Iolani Palace grounds and Aliiolani
Hale:
(i)   Species. Rainbow Shower (Cassia hybrida) or Monkeypod (Samanea saman);
(ii)   Maximum spacing. 50 feet on center; and
(iii)   Location. First 5 feet of required front yard.
(C)   Richards Street, except fronting Iolani Palace grounds:
(i)   Species. Royal Poinciana (Delonix regia);
(ii)   Maximum spacing. 60 feet on center; and
(iii)   Location. First 5 feet of required front yard.
(D)   Punchbowl Street:
(i)   Species. Monkeypod (Samanea saman);
(ii)   Maximum spacing. 60 feet on center; and
(iii)   Location. Within the required front yard.
(E)   Alapai Street:
(i)   Species. Monkeypod (Samanea saman);
(ii)   Maximum spacing. 60 feet on center; and
(iii)   Location. Within the required front yard.
(F)   Ala Moana/Nimitz Highway:
(i)   Species. Coconut Palm (Cocos nucifera);
(ii)   Maximum spacing. Three palm trees shall be provided per 50 feet of
street frontage; and
(iii)   Location. First 5 feet of required front yard.
(G)   South Street:
(i)   Species. Autograph (Clusea rosea);
(ii)   Maximum spacing. 40 feet on center; and
(iii)   Location. Within the required front yard.
(H)   Alakea Street and Queen Emma Street:
(i)   Species. False Olive;
(ii)   Maximum spacing. 20 feet on center; and
(iii)   Location. Within the sidewalk area.
(I)   Vineyard Boulevard:
(i)   Species. Monkeypod (Samanea saman);
(ii)   Maximum spacing. 60 feet on center; and
(iii)   Location. Within the required front yard.
(9)   For all other streets, except those along the State Capitol and Iolani
Palace grounds, street trees shall be provided at a minimum 2-inch caliper.
Species and spacing shall be chosen from an approved tree list on file with the
department and the department of parks and recreation.
(10)   If location of street trees in the sidewalk area is infeasible, the
trees shall be located in the required front yard.
(11)   In the event there are no feasible locations for street trees,
substitute landscaping may be permitted upon approval by the director.
(12)   Credit shall be given, at a ratio of one to one, for existing trees that
are to be preserved.
(13)   Any tree 6 inches or greater in trunk diameter shall not be removed or
destroyed except as follows:
(A)   The tree is not visible from any street, park, or other public viewing
area;
(B)   Appropriate development of the site cannot be achieved without removal of
the tree;
(C)   The tree is a hazard to the public safety or welfare;
(D)   The tree is dead, diseased, or otherwise irretrievably damaged; and
(E)   The applicant can demonstrate the tree is unnecessary due to overcrowding
of vegetation.
(14)   Any tree removed which is visible from any street, park, or other public
viewing area shall be replaced by an approved tree of a minimum 2-inch caliper
or by alternative approved landscaping material, unless the replacement results
in overcrowded vegetation.
(15)   Where possible, trees proposed for removal shall be relocated to another
area of the project site.
(b)   Design guidelines for the historic precinct. The following design
guidelines shall be used in the design and review of new construction and
renovation in the historic precinct. They are intended to promote the concept
of “contextualism,” wherein new developments are sensitive to the existing
historic and other significant structures;
(1)   Roof treatment. Roof treatment should reflect existing roofscape by using
combinations of overhanging eaves and pitches greater than 1:3. Roofing
materials should be green or reddish earth-toned tile or gray slate roofing
surfaces, or roofing surfaces that closely resemble existing tile or slate roof
in color, texture, and appearance;
(2)   Architectural style. Architectural elements to be encouraged are the open
design of arcades, porches, entryways, internal pedestrian spaces, and
courtyards. New developments should be influenced by the following
architectural styles: modified Mediterranean, Spanish mission, Victorian, U.S.
Greek revival, Italianate revival, and French second empire;
(3)   Facade. Facade elements common to the precinct include recessed window
openings and strong horizontal lines expressed by combinations of
fenestrations, openings, wall edges, and decorations. New development should
incorporate and employ these elements to visually relate new buildings to
adjacent facades of established historic value. Typical is the use of
projections, columns, balconies, and recessed openings;
(4)   Color and surface.
(A)   Colors and surfaces in the precinct are characterized by being absorptive
rather than reflective. The use of shiny metal or reflective surfaces,
including paints and smooth or plastic-like surfaces should be avoided. Colors
and surfaces that predominate include warm white walls, earth tones, natural
colors of stone, coral, and cast concrete. Concrete, stone, terra cotta,
plaster, and wood should be principal finish materials; and
(B)   If the use of metal surfaces is required, they should be used with black
or dark earth-toned matte finishes. Copper and brass may be acceptable metal
surfaces. Glass surfaces, where used, should be recessed and clear, or of light
earth-toned tints;
(5)   Texture. Characteristic textures include those of stucco, tile, concrete,
cut coral, cut stone, cast iron, grass, and foliage. Development should employ
surface qualities that are sympathetic to historic and original uses of
material;
(6)   Details.
(A)   Details are of prime interest and importance at the pedestrian scale and
constitute an important design element. The use of terra cotta, plaster work,
ironwork, ornament painting, and sculptural elements is highly encouraged; and
(B)   Respect for historic design including detailing should be maintained on
elements such as pavers, curbs, signs, planters, benches, trash cans,
fountains, lighting, bus shelters, and flag and utility poles;
(7)   Entry treatment. Characteristic of places within the precinct is the
treatment of building entry which provides comfortable transitions from outside
to inside. These elements include arcades and porches recessed or projecting
from the building mass;
(8)   Orientation. To protect mauka views within the precinct, new development
should be oriented on a mauka-makai axis;
(9)   Signs. Signs shall not be directly illuminated, have moving parts,
luminous paints, or reflective materials. Any illumination should be from a
detached source shielded from direct view. No box fluorescent signs shall be
allowed;
(10)   Landscape treatment.
(A)   Large open spaces, lawns and canopy-type shade trees, fountains, and
sculptures shall be compatible with the grounds of Iolani Palace and the
Capitol building;
(B)   In small open areas, combinations of ground covers, shrub masses,
flowering trees, and palms may be used either to introduce rich foliage
patterns, for screening purposes, or to provide contrast to large, open lawn
areas; and
(C)   Small-scale landscape features such as courtyards, resting places,
entrances, and intimate gardens are encouraged and should be compatible with,
and secondary to, the larger park-like landscape;
(c)   Design guidelines for other precincts.
(1)   Open space. All parcels shall comply with the minimum open space
expressed as a percentage of lot area designated on
Exhibit 21-9.1; and
(2)   Visual impacts. All major development, especially on those parcels and
building facades visible and adjacent to the historic precinct, shall be
reviewed to ensure that new structures do not visually intrude into the
historic precinct. Articulated building walls are encouraged. The use of
recessed windows, lanais, projecting eyebrows, offsets in the wall planes and
exterior colors may be used to achieve this articulation; and
(d)   Height regulations.
(1)   Heights for all precincts are identified on
Exhibit 21-9.1.
(2)   The director may exempt the following architectural features from the
height regulations of the Hawaii capital special district; provided that they
are erected only to such height as is necessary to accomplish the purpose for
which they serve, but in no case exceeding 12 feet above the maximum height
limit. These building elements may be exempted only if the director finds they
do not obstruct any significant views which are to be preserved, protected, and
enhanced, and are consistent with the intent and objectives of the Hawaii
capital special district:
(A)   Necessary mechanical appurtenances of the building on which they are
erected; provided that they are screened from view;
(B)   Necessary utilitarian features, including stairwell enclosures,
ventilators, and skylights;
(C)   Decorative or recreational features, including rooftop gardens, planter
boxes, flagpoles, parapet walls, or ornamental cornices; and
      (3)   Except for flagpoles and smokestacks, all items listed in §
21-4.60(c) shall also be exempt from the height provisions of this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.30-4) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 07-8)
§ 21-9.30-5 Project classification.
   Refer to
Table 21-9.1 to determine whether specific projects will be classified as
major, minor, or exempt.
Table 21-9.1
Hawaii Capital Special District Project Classification
Activity/Use Required Permit Special Conditions
Table 21-9.1
Hawaii Capital Special District Project Classification
Activity/Use        Required Permit Special Conditions
Signs               E               Directly illuminated signs prohibited in
                                    historic precinct
Tree removal over 6 m                
inches in diameter
Single-unit, two-
unit, or duplex-
unit dwellings, and E                
accessory
structures
Grading and         E                
stockpiling
Major modification,
alteration,                         This also includes structures listed in §
addition, or repair M               21-9.30-3 (c)
to historic
structures
Major exterior
repair, alteration,
or addition to      m                
nonhistoric
structures
Minor exterior
repair, alteration,
or addition to all
structures that
does not adversely  m/E             Minor in historic precinct only
change the
character or
appearance of the
structure
Exterior repainting
that significantly
alters the          m/E             Minor in historic precinct only
character or
appearance of the
structure
Interior repairs,
alterations, and    E                
renovations to all
structures
Demolition of       M               This also includes structures listed in §
historic structures                 21-9.30-3 (c)
Demolition of
nonhistoric         E                
structures
Fences and walls    E                
Streetscape
improvements,
including street
furniture, light
fixtures, sidewalk  m                
paving, bus
shelters, and other
elements in public
rights-of-way
Major above-grade
infrastructure*
improvements not
covered elsewhere,
including new
roadways, road      m                
widenings, new
substations, new
parks, and
significant
improvements to
existing parks
Minor above-grade
infrastructure*
improvements not
covered elsewhere;
all below-grade     E                
infrastructure
improvements; and
all emergency and
routine repair and
maintenance work
New buildings not   M/m             Minor for accessory structures
covered above
*Notes:
“Infrastructure” includes roadways, sewer, water, electrical, gas, cable
television, telephone, drainage, and recreational facilities.
   A special district permit is not required for activities and uses classified
as exempt, as well as other project types which do not fall into one of the
categories listed above. These activities and uses, however, must still conform
to the applicable objectives and standards of the special district. This
conformance will be determined at the building permit application stage.
Legend—Project classification:
M = Major
m = Minor
E = Exempt
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.30-5) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 03-37,
25-2)
§ 21-9.40 Diamond Head special district.
(a)   Diamond Head is a volcanic crater that has been declared a State and
national monument. Its natural appearance and prominent public views have
special values of local, State, national, and international significance and
are in danger of being lost or seriously diminished through changes in land use
and accompanying land development.
(b)   In accordance with these findings and established public policies, it is
necessary to preserve and protect the views of the Diamond Head monument.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.40) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.40-1 Objectives.
   The objectives of the Diamond Head special district are:
(a)   To preserve existing prominent public views and the natural appearance of
Diamond Head by modifying construction projects that would diminish these
resources; and
(b)   To preserve and enhance the park-like character of the immediate slopes
of the Diamond Head monument, including Kapiolani Park.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.40-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.40-2 District boundaries.
   The Diamond Head special district boundaries are designated on
Exhibit 21-9.5.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.40-2) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.40-3 Prominent public vantage points.
   The prominent public vantage points from which significant public views of
Diamond Head exist are the following:
(a)   Public streets.
(1)   Ala Wai Boulevard from McCully Street to Kapahulu Avenue;
(2)   Paki Avenue from Kapahulu Avenue to Diamond Head Road;
(3)   Diamond Head Road;
(4)   Date Street from the Manoa-Palolo Drainage Canal to Kapahulu Avenue;
(5)   Campbell Avenue from Kapahulu Avenue to Monsarrat Avenue;
(6)   Kalakaua Avenue from Kapahulu Avenue to Coconut Avenue;
(7)   Kapahulu Avenue in the vicinity of the intersection of Date Street and
Campbell Avenue;
(8)   Monsarrat Avenue;
(9)   12th Avenue from Maunaloa Avenue to Alohea Avenue;
(10)   18th Avenue from Kilauea Avenue to Diamond Head Road; and
(11)   Kilauea Avenue from Elepaio Street to 12th Avenue.
(b)   Public viewing sites.
(1)   Ala Moana Beach, including Magic Island;
(2)   The beaches extending from the Ala Wai Yacht Harbor to Sans Souci Beach;
(3)   Kapiolani Park;
(4)   Honolulu Zoo;
(5)   Ala Wai Golf Course;
(6)   Ala Wai Park;
(7)   Kapaolono Field;
(8)   Fort Ruger Park (Kahala Triangle Park);
(9)   Ala Wai Elementary School;
(10)   Jefferson Elementary School;
(11)   Waikiki Elementary School;
(12)   Kilauea Playground;
(13)   Kaimuki Intermediate School;
(14)   H-1 Freeway near the Kapahulu Avenue overpass;
(15)   Punchbowl lookouts; and
(16)   Puu Ualakaa State Park lookout.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.40-3) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.40-4 Design controls.
   Implementation of the district objectives shall consist primarily of
landscaping requirements, height limitations, and architectural design review.
Specific regulations are enumerated below:
(a)   Landscaping.
(1)   All required yards within the district shall be landscaped and
maintained;
(2)   On the ocean side of Diamond Head, including makai of Kalakaua Avenue,
palm trees are appropriate since they convey the tropical characteristics of
Hawaii, and provide vertical accents in counterpoint to the high crater behind
them;
(3)   Within the core area, along Diamond Head Road, Monsarrat Avenue, and
Kalakaua Avenue, all fences or walls exceeding 36 inches in height shall be set
back a minimum of 18 inches along all street frontages and landscaped with
vine, hedge, or other approved planting on the street sides;
(4)   Street trees shall be provided at a minimum 2-inch caliper. Species and
spacing shall be chosen from an approved tree list on file with the department
and the department of parks and recreation;
(5)   If location of street trees in the sidewalk area is infeasible, the trees
shall be located in the required front yard;
(6)   In the event there are no feasible locations for street trees, substitute
landscaping may be permitted upon approval by the director;
(7)   Credit shall be given, at a ratio of one to one, for existing trees that
are to be preserved;
(8)   Any tree 6 inches or greater in trunk diameter located within the core
area identified on
Exhibit 21-9.5 shall not be removed or destroyed except as follows:
(A)   The tree is not visible from any street, park, or other public viewing
area;
(B)   Appropriate development of the site cannot be achieved without removal of
the tree;
(C)   The tree is a hazard to the public safety or welfare;
(D)   The tree is dead, diseased, or otherwise irretrievably damaged; and
(E)   The applicant can demonstrate the tree is unnecessary due to overcrowding
of vegetation;
(9)   Any tree removed which is visible from any street, park, or other public
viewing area identified in §
21-9.40-3(b) shall be replaced by an approved tree of a minimum 2-inch caliper
or by alternative- approved landscaping material, unless the replacement
results in overcrowded vegetation;
(10)   Where possible, trees proposed for removal shall be relocated to another
area of the project site; and
(11)   Vertical form trees shall be planted and maintained along the front yard
perimeter of parking structures to reduce the visual impact of blank walls and
parked vehicles. A minimum 2-inch caliper tree, or in the case of palm trees, a
minimum trunk height of 15 feet, shall be planted for every 20 feet of linear
building length. Acceptable tree species include coconut palms, paperbark, and
eucalyptus. If there is sufficient space, canopy form trees may be substituted.
Alternatively, planter boxes with vines may be provided on the facades of every
parking level;
(b)   Heights.
(1)   Height precincts for the district are identified on
Exhibit 21-9.5;
(2)   The director may grant exceptions to special district height limits, not
to exceed the height regulations for the underlying zoning district, if the
applicant can demonstrate the following:
(A)   That the proposed construction would not substantially diminish any views
from any of the prominent public vantage points described for the special
district; or
(B)   That the extra height is necessary to achieve some public objective of
importance. Such demonstrations shall include:
(i)   Information that provides a basis for the objective in terms of a public
need or problem;
(ii)   Other reasonable alternatives to achieve the objective; and
(iii)   An appropriate analysis of the alternatives that indicates that the
proposed construction is the most beneficial to the public’s interest;
(3)   The director may exempt the following architectural features from the
height regulations of the special district; provided that they are erected only
to such height as is necessary to accomplish the purpose for which they serve,
but in no case exceeding 12 feet above the maximum height limit. These building
elements may be exempted only if the director finds they do not obstruct any
significant views which are to be preserved, protected, and enhanced, and are
consistent with the intent and objectives of the Diamond Head special district:
(A)   Necessary mechanical appurtenances of the building on which they are
erected; provided that they are screened from view;
(B)   Necessary utilitarian features, including stairwell enclosures,
ventilators, and skylights;
(C)   Decorative or recreational features, including rooftop gardens, planter
boxes, flagpoles, parapet walls, or ornamental cornices; and
(D)   Except for flagpoles and smokestacks, all items listed in §
21-4.60(c) shall also be exempt from the height provisions of this section; and
(c)   Architectural appearance and character.
      (1)   The exterior facades of all structures and structural forms shall
be designed to have architectural scale, exterior finish, material, colors,
components, and features that relate in a compatible manner to nearby existing
structures, particularly small-scale development; and
      (2)   Materials, finishes, and colors, including roofs, shall be
nonreflective and subdued in nature.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.40-4) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.40-5 Single-unit, two-unit, and duplex-unit dwellings.
   Single-unit, two-unit, and duplex-unit dwellings are exempt from the
requirements of the Diamond Head special district, except that those dwellings
located within the “core area” identified on Exhibit 21-9.5 must comply with §§
21-9.40-4(a) and (c).
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.40-5) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-9.40-6 Project classification.
   Refer to
Table 21-9.2 to determine whether specific projects will be classified as
major, minor, or exempt.
Table 21-9.2
Diamond Head Special District Project Classification
Activity/Use Required Permit Special Conditions
Table 21-9.2
Diamond Head Special District Project Classification
Activity/Use    Required Special Conditions
                Permit
Signs           E         
Tree removal
over 6 inches   m/E      Minor only within “core” area
in diameter
Single-unit,
two-unit, or
duplex-unit     E         
dwellings, and
accessory
structures
Grading and     E         
stockpiling
Major exterior
repair,
alteration, or  m         
addition to all
structures
Minor exterior
repair,
alteration, or
addition to all
structures,
which does not  E         
adversely
change the
character or
appearance of
the structure
Exterior
repainting that
significantly            Minor only within “core” area and if visible from street or public vantage
alters the      m/E      points
character or
appearance of
the structure
Interior
repairs,
alterations,    E         
and renovations
to all
structures
Demolition of   E         
all structures
Fences and      E         
walls
Streetscape
improvements,
including
street
furniture,
light fixtures, E         
sidewalk
paving, bus
shelters and
other elements
in public
rights-of-way
Major above-
grade
infrastructure*
improvements
not covered
elsewhere,
including new   m         
roadways, road
widenings, new
substations,
new parks and
significant
improvements to
existing parks
Minor above-
grade
infrastructure*
improvements
not covered
elsewhere; all
below-grade     E         
infrastructure
improvements;
and all
emergency and
routine repair
and maintenance
work
New buildings            Major in “core” area only, except for accessory structures; minor outside
not covered     M/m      “core” area and for accessory structures in “core” area
above
*Notes:
“Infrastructure” includes roadways, sewer, water, electrical, gas, cable television, telephone,
drainage, and recreational facilities.
   A special district permit is not required for activities and uses classified as exempt, as well as
other project types which do not fall into one of the categories listed above. These activities and
uses, however, must still conform to the applicable objectives and standards of the special district.
This conformance will be determined at the building permit application stage.
Legend—Project classification:
M = Major
m = Minor
E = Exempt
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.40-6) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-9.50 Punchbowl special district.
(a)   The significance of the National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific as a
national monument and as one of Hawaii’s important landmarks has long been
recognized. Over the years, however, land development and land use changes in
the area have posed a serious threat to the views of its slopes and diminished
the serenity of the natural appearance and sanctity of the national cemetery
and its environs.
(b)   The natural appearance of Punchbowl and the prominent public views of
Punchbowl have special values of local, State, national, and international
significance, and are in danger of being lost or further diminished through
adjacent and surrounding land development. Therefore, it is necessary to
preserve and protect the public views of Punchbowl, and the appearance of its
slopes and surrounding areas.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.50) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.50-1 Objectives.
   The specific objectives of the Punchbowl special district are to:
(a)   Preserve and enhance Punchbowl’s form and character as a significant
landmark;
(b)   Preserve and enhance the park-like character of the immediate slopes of
Punchbowl and its major streets;
(c)   Preserve and enhance significant public views to and from Punchbowl,
especially those from the Punchbowl lookouts and long-range views of Punchbowl,
by modifying construction projects that would diminish those views;
(d)   Provide landscaping and open space which will enhance views and the
general character of the Punchbowl area; and
(e)   Preserve, enhance, and restore to the extent possible, the serene and
scenic qualities within the national cemetery.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.50-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.50-2 Boundaries.
   The Punchbowl special district boundaries are designated on
Exhibit 21-9.6.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.50-2) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.50-3 Prominent vistas and viewing areas.
   Prominent vistas and viewing areas are identified on
Exhibit 21-9.7.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.50-3) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.50-4 Design controls.
   Implementation of the district objectives shall consist primarily of height
and lot coverage limits, architectural design review, and landscaping controls.
Specific regulations are enumerated below:
(a)   Height regulations.
(1)   The district’s height limit precincts are delineated on
Exhibit 21-9.6;
(2)   The maximum heights of structures at the required front yard shall not
exceed 15 feet. An additional height setback equal to 1 foot for each 2 feet in
height shall be provided to extend a maximum of 30 feet from the street
property line, at which point the permitted maximum height shall prevail;
(3)   The director may grant exceptions to zero height limits, not to exceed
the height regulations for the underlying zoning district, if the applicant can
demonstrate the following:
(A)   That the proposed construction would not substantially diminish any views
of Punchbowl from any of the prominent vistas and viewing areas identified on
Exhibit 21-9.7; or
(B)   That the extra height is necessary to achieve some public objective of
importance. Such demonstrations shall include:
(i)   Information which provides a basis for the objective in terms of a public
need or problem;
(ii)   Other reasonable alternatives to achieve the objective; and
(iii)   An appropriate analysis of the alternatives which indicate that the
proposed construction is the most beneficial to the public’s interest;
(4)   The director may exempt the following architectural features from the
height regulations of the special district; provided that they are erected only
to such height as is necessary to accomplish the purpose for which they serve,
but in no case exceeding 12 feet above the maximum height limit. These building
elements may be exempted only if the director finds they do not obstruct any
significant views which are to be preserved, protected, and enhanced, and are
consistent with the intent and objectives of the Punchbowl special district:
(A)   Necessary mechanical appurtenances of the building on which they are
erected; provided that they are screened from view;
(B)   Necessary utilitarian features, including stairwell enclosures,
ventilators, and skylights; and
(C)   Decorative or recreational features, including rooftop gardens, planter
boxes, flagpoles, parapet walls, or ornamental cornices;
(5)   Except for flagpoles and smokestacks, all items listed in §
21-4.60(c) shall also be exempt from the height provisions of this subsection;
(b)   Maximum building area. In addition to the requirements for maximum
building area in underlying residential, apartment, and apartment mixed use
zoning districts, the percentage of maximum building area for zoning lots in
business, business mixed-use, and industrial districts shall be 50 percent;
(c)   Architectural appearance and character.
(1)   Articulated facades are encouraged to break up building mass. The use of
recessed windows, lanais, projecting eyebrows, offsets in the wall planes, and
exterior colors may be used to achieve this articulation; and
(2)   Materials, finishes, and colors, including roofs, shall be nonreflective
and subdued in appearance;
(d)   Required yards. The minimum required front yard shall be as designated by
the underlying zoning district, except that those streets identified as major
streets on
Exhibit 21-9.7  shall have a minimum 20-foot front yard;
(e)   Landscaping.
(1)   All required yards shall be landscaped;
(2)   Street trees shall be provided at a minimum 2-inch caliper. Species and
spacing shall be chosen from an approved tree list on file with the department
and the department of parks and recreation;
(3)   If location of street trees in the sidewalk area is infeasible, the trees
shall be located in the required front yard;
(4)   In the event there are no feasible locations for street trees, substitute
landscaping may be permitted upon approval by the director;
(5)   Credit shall be given, at a ratio of one to one, for existing trees that
are to be preserved;
(6)   Flat rooftop areas visible from the Punchbowl lookout shall incorporate
landscaping or architectural features, or both, such as screening, to
substantially offset any adverse visual impact on views from the lookout areas;
(7)   All fences and walls exceeding 36 inches in height shall be set back a
minimum of 18 inches along all streets identified as major streets on
Exhibit 21-9.7, and landscaped with vine or hedge planting or other approved
vegetation on the street side. The setback and landscaping requirement may be
waived by the director if the wall is moss rock or similar material;
(8)   Any tree 6 inches or greater in trunk diameter, located within the “core
area,” or along major streets, as identified on
Exhibits 21-9.8 and
21-9.7, respectively, shall not be removed or destroyed except as follows:
(A)   The tree is not visible from any street, park, or other public viewing
area;
(B)   Appropriate development of the site cannot be achieved without removal of
the tree;
(C)   The tree is a hazard to the public safety or welfare;
(D)   The tree is dead, diseased, or otherwise irretrievably damaged; and
(E)   The applicant can demonstrate the tree is unnecessary due to overcrowding
of vegetation;
(9)   Any tree removed which is visible from any street, park, or other public
viewing area shall be replaced by an approved tree of a minimum 2-inch caliper
or by alternative-approved landscaping material, unless the replacement results
in overcrowded vegetation;
(10)   Where possible, trees proposed for removal shall be relocated to another
area of the project site; and
(11)   Vertical form trees shall be planted and maintained along the front yard
perimeter of parking structures to reduce the visual impact of blank walls and
parked vehicles. A minimum 2-inch caliper tree, or in the case of palm trees, a
minimum trunk height of 15 feet shall be planted for every 20 feet of linear
building length. Acceptable tree species include coconut palms, paperbark, and
eucalyptus. If there is sufficient space, canopy form trees may be substituted.
Alternatively, planter boxes with vines may be provided on the facade of every
parking level.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.50-4) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.50-5 Single-unit, two-unit, and duplex-unit dwellings.
   Single-unit, two-unit, and duplex-unit dwellings are exempt from the
requirements of the Punchbowl special district, except that those dwellings
located in the “core area” identified on Exhibit 21-9.8 must comply with § 21-
9.50-4(c) and (e).
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.50-5) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-9.50-6 Project classification.
   Refer to
Table 21-9.3 to determine whether specific projects will be classified as
major, minor, or exempt.
Table 21-9.3
Punchbowl Special District Project Classification
Activity/Use Required Permit Special Conditions
Table 21-9.3
Punchbowl Special District Project Classification
Activity/Use    Required Special Conditions
                Permit
Signs           E         
Tree removal
over 6 inches   m/E      Minor in “core” area or along major streets
in diameter
Single-unit,
two-unit, and
duplex-unit     E         
dwellings, and
accessory
structures
Grading and     m/E      Minor in “core” area if results in greater than 15-foot change in
stockpiling              elevation
Major exterior
repair,
alteration, or  m         
addition to all
structures
Minor exterior
repair,
alteration, or
addition to all
structures that
does not        E         
adversely
change the
character or
appearance of
the structure
Exterior
repainting that
significantly
alters the      m/E      Minor only within “core” area and if visible from viewing areas
character or
appearance of
the structure
Demolition of   E         
all structures
Interior
repairs,
alterations,    E         
and renovations
to all
structures
Fences and      E         
walls
Streetscape
improvements,
including
street
furniture,
light fixtures, E         
sidewalk
paving, bus
shelters, and
other elements
in public
rights-of-way
Major above-
grade
infrastructure*
improvements
not covered
elsewhere,
including new   m         
roadways, road
widenings, new
substations,
new parks, and
significant
improvements to
existing parks
Minor above-
grade
infrastructure*
improvements
not covered
elsewhere; all
below-grade     E         
infrastructure
improvements;
and all
emergency and
routine repair
and maintenance
work
New buildings            Major in “core” area only, except for accessory structures; minor
not covered     M/m      outside “core” area and for accessory structures in “core” area
above
*Notes:
“Infrastructure” includes roadways, sewer, water, electrical, gas, cable television,
telephone, drainage, and recreational facilities.
   A special district permit is not required for activities and uses classified as exempt, as
well as other project types which do not fall into one of the categories listed above. These
activities and uses, however, must still conform to the applicable objectives and standards of
the special district. This conformance will be determined at the building permit application
stage.
Legend—Project classification:
M = Major
m = Minor
E = Exempt
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.50-6) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-9.60 Chinatown special district.
(a)   Chinatown is the oldest section of downtown Honolulu. In addition to its
historic role in the growth of the city, and its architectural significance as
reflected in its placement on the National Register of Historic Places, it
reflects a dynamic ethnic population and business community.
(b)   However, like other central city areas, it has faced numerous physical,
social, and economic problems in the past, resulting in the deterioration of
commercial and residential structures, a decline in business activity, and an
erosion in housing stock. While government programs, including urban renewal
and tax incentives for renovation of older buildings, have been introduced to
address these problems, there is a concern that architectural and historic
elements of the district may still be lost. Further, Chinatown’s location
adjacent to the central business district continues to produce pressures to
redevelop the area to a higher density.
(c)   Therefore, it is necessary to preserve the historic significance and
architectural characteristics of Chinatown, and to ensure the compatibility of
new development within this context. The perpetuation of architectural
character dominant during the 1880s to the 1940s is particularly important.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.60-1 Overall objectives.
   The overall objectives of the Chinatown special district are as follows:
(a)   Help promote the long-term economic viability of the Chinatown special
district as a unique community of retail, office, and residential uses;
(b)   Retain the low-rise urban form and character of the historic interior
core of Chinatown while allowing for moderate redevelopment at the mauka and
makai edges of the district;
(c)   Retain and enhance pedestrian-oriented commercial uses and building
design, particularly on the ground level;
(d)   Preserve and restore, to the extent possible, buildings and sites of
historic, cultural, or architectural significance, and encourage new
development that is compatible with and complements these buildings and sites,
primarily through building materials and finishes, architectural detailing, and
provisions for pedestrian amenities, such as storefront windows and historic
signage details;
(e)   Improve traffic circulation with emphasis on pedestrian linkages within
and connecting outside Chinatown;
(f)   Retain makai view corridors as a visual means of maintaining the historic
link between Chinatown and the harbor;
(g)   Encourage a variety of signage and graphics that reflect and complement
the district’s ethnic vitality and diversity, and that are compatible with and
complement buildings and sites within the district; and
(h)   Encourage outdoor lighting for the purpose of contributing to a lively,
friendly, and safe urban environment.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.60-2 District boundaries.
   The Chinatown special district and its three precinct boundaries are
designated on
Exhibit 21-9.9.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-2) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.60-3 Prominent view corridors.
(a)   Maunakea Street and Nuuanu Avenue are makai view corridors, and provide a
visual connection between Honolulu Harbor and the heart of Chinatown,
reflecting the historic ties between the two areas.
(b)   In addition, the street level view along River Street, in an Ewa
direction, including Aala Park, is an important public viewing area.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-3) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.60-4 Historic and architecturally significant structures.
(a)   The Chinatown and Merchant Street historical districts, as included on
the National Register of Historic Places, are identified on
Exhibit 21-9.10.
(b)   Structures within the Chinatown special district that are of historic and
architectural significance are identified on
Exhibit 21-9.10-A.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-4) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.60-5 Design controls.
(a)   Implementation of the district objectives shall consist primarily of open
space, landscaping and yard regulations, use regulations, architectural review,
and sign controls. Specific regulations are enumerated below.
(b)   Unless specified herein, all development shall comply with the underlying
district permitted uses and development standards, including density.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-5) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.60-6 Mauka precinct objectives.
(a)   Provide multi-family dwellings for a range of household incomes, while
supporting and contributing to Chinatown’s retail-commercial function,
particularly at street level;
(b)   Create a transition between the high-rise Kukui Urban Renewal district
and the low-rise historic core of Chinatown;
(c)   Promote pedestrian movement and linkages within the district by providing
pedestrian malls and adequate sidewalks; and
(d)   Provide commercial, cultural, recreational, and public facilities for
residents by encouraging them on the ground floor street exposure of buildings.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-6) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.60-7 Mauka precinct development standards.
(a)   Maximum heights.
(1)   Within the mauka precincts, height limits are identified on
Exhibit 21-9.9.
(2)   To minimize the visual intrusion of towers on Chinatown streetscapes, the
following height setback shall apply to any portion of a building over 40 feet
in height: each foot of additional height shall be set back 1 foot from every
front property line for the first 40 feet measured horizontally across the lot
(refer to sketch on
Exhibit 21-9.9).
(b)   Open space and landscaping.
(1)   Where there are low-level rooftops, roof gardens should be provided,
particularly for residents. Otherwise, open space is encouraged in the form of
landscaped interior courts.
(2)   With the exception of Beretania and River Streets, street trees shall not
be required. Any trees planted within a front yard or sidewalk area shall take
into consideration the objectives of the district, including the provisions of
sidewalk canopies, a strong continuous street frontage, and traffic safety.
(3)   Along Beretania and River Streets, street trees shall be provided at a
minimum 2-inch caliper. Species and spacing shall be chosen from an approved
tree list on file with the department and the department of parks and
recreation. If location of street trees in the sidewalk area is infeasible, the
trees may be located within the front yard, if present. In the event there are
no feasible locations for street trees, the director may approve substitute
landscaping or waive this requirement.
(A)   Along Beretania Street, street trees shall strengthen the streetscape
image of this major travel corridor, and help maintain a human-scaled
orientation at the ground level.
(B)   Along River Street, street trees shall help to emphasize this “edge” of
Chinatown, and shall serve as a transition to Aala Park.
(4)   The block bounded by Smith, Beretania, Pauahi, and Maunakea Streets shall
have an informal, landscaped character with large canopy form trees.
(c)   Required yards. There shall be a minimum front yard of 15 feet along
Beretania Street. There shall be no required front yards along other streets.
(d)   Permitted uses. In addition to required entryways, ground level spaces
should be used for uses that contribute to a vital streetscape. Appropriate
uses include but are not limited to commercial retail and light manufacturing.
(e)   Design guidelines.
(1)   Except for those facades fronting Beretania Street, street facades shall
meet the requirements of §
21-9.60-12, street facade guidelines.
(2)   Buildings above 40 feet shall avoid a long axis aligned in an Ewa-Diamond
Head direction. Their design shall relate to the lower level street facades,
including architectural scale, embellishments, color, and detailing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-7) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 20-41)
§ 21-9.60-8 Historic core precinct objectives.
   Historic core precinct objectives are as follows:
(a)   Encourage the retention and renovation of buildings of historic,
architectural, or cultural value;
(b)   Ensure the design compatibility of new structures with historic
structures through low building heights, continuous street frontages, and
characteristic street facade elements;
(c)   Encourage the continuation and concentration of the long-established
ethnic retail and light manufacturing activities by providing space for these
uses, particularly on the ground level; and
(d)   Encourage a variety of dwelling unit types, including single-unit, two-
unit, duplex-unit, and multi-unit dwellings that would contribute to the
precinct’s social and economic vitality.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-8) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 04-30,
25-2)
§ 21-9.60-9 Historic core precinct development standards.
(a)   Maximum heights. Within the historic core precinct, new structures must
not exceed 40 feet.
(b)   Open space and landscaping.
(1)   Open space is encouraged in the form of small-scaled interior landscaped
courtyards and interior pedestrian walkways.
(2)   Street trees are not required. The planting of trees within a front yard
or sidewalk must shall take into consideration the objectives of the precinct,
especially the desire for continuous building frontages and sidewalk canopies,
as well as traffic and pedestrian safety.
(3)   Along Hotel Street, street trees may complement its strong retail
character and public transit corridor function. They must be a minimum of 2-
inch caliper. Species and spacing must be chosen from an approved tree list on
file with the department and the department of parks and recreation.
(c)   Required yards.
(1)   There are no required yards.
(2)   All buildings on the same block face must form a continuous street
facade, except for necessary driveways, pedestrian entryways, and small open
space pockets.
(d)   Permitted uses. Ground floor spaces may be used exclusively for retail
commercial uses, or food manufacturing of an ethnic nature such as noodle-
making, compatible with the objectives for Chinatown.
(e)   Design guidelines. All street facades must meet the requirements of §
21-9.60-12.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-9) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 04-30,
20-41, 25-2)
§ 21-9.60-10 Makai precinct objectives.
   Makai precinct objectives are as follows:
(1)   Provide for expansion of housing and office development from the central
business district, compatible with the overall revitalization of Chinatown,
including an active retail-oriented ground level and distinctive facade
treatments;
(2)   Create a transition between the high-rise central business district and
the historic core of Chinatown;
(3)   Provide a visible connection between Nimitz Highway and the interior of
Chinatown; and
(4)   Develop a continuous street landscaping theme along Nimitz Highway to
emphasize its role as a major accessway into the central business district and
Waikiki.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-10) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.60-11 Makai precinct development standards.
(a)   Maximum heights.
(1)   Within the makai precinct, height limits are identified on
Exhibit 21-9.9.
(2)   To minimize the visual intrusion of towers on Chinatown streetscapes, the
following height setback shall apply to any portion of a building over 40 feet
in height: each foot of additional height shall be set back 1 foot from every
front property line for the first 40 feet measured horizontally across the lot
(refer to sketch on
Exhibit 21-9.9).
(b)   Open space and landscaping.
(1)   Where there are low-level rooftops, roof gardens should be provided.
Otherwise, open space shall be provided in the form of landscaped front yards
along Nimitz Highway. Landscaped interior courts are also encouraged.
(2)   With the exception of Nimitz Highway, street trees shall not be required.
(3)   Along Nimitz Highway, three coconut palm trees (Cocos nucifera) shall be
provided for every 50 feet of street frontage. Palm trees with a minimum trunk
height of 15 feet shall be clustered together rather than evenly spaced. In
addition, all parking structures fronting Nimitz Highway shall have planter
boxes along the length of the facade on all floors. Bougainvillea shall be
planted and maintained in these planter boxes. The director may approve
substitute plants due to physical constraints.
(c)   Required yards. There shall be a minimum front yard of 10 feet along
Nimitz Highway. There shall be no required front yards along other streets.
(d)   Permitted uses.
(1)   In addition to required entryways, ground level spaces should be used for
uses that contribute to a vital streetscape. Appropriate uses include but are
not limited to commercial retail, community centers, and light manufacturing.
Lower levels other than the ground level should be used for residential,
office, or commercial uses.
(2)   Parking may be located on any level within a block’s interior and
fronting Nimitz Highway.
(e)   Design guidelines.
(1)   Except for those facades fronting Iwilei Road and Nimitz Highway, all
facades shall meet the requirements of §
21-9.60-12, street facade guidelines.
(2)   Parking structures should have vehicular entrances and exits on Nimitz
Highway, when practical.
(3)   Buildings above 40 feet shall avoid a long axis aligned in an Ewa-Diamond
Head direction. Their design shall relate to the design of the lower level
street facades, including architectural scale, embellishments, color, and
detailing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-11) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 20-41)
§ 21-9.60-12 Street facade guidelines.
(a)   Building materials, colors, and textures.
(1)   Building finishes should be of materials such as wood, brick, stone,
masonry, and plaster. Brick and stone are particularly appropriate.
(2)   Where existing buildings are to be rehabilitated, any underlying natural
finishes should be retained. To expose brick facades, sand blasting, and other
cleaning methods that will damage the historic building materials should not be
undertaken.
(3)   The colors of natural materials should predominate. Accent colors may be
used on trim and details around window and door openings.
(b)   Architectural design.
(1)   Building facades or fenestration should be “contextual” to existing
structures, and incorporate representative architectural features, such as
arches, lintel columns, cornices, and variated parapets. Uninterrupted blank
walls shall be avoided.
(2)   Storefronts shall be as open as possible to reveal merchandise within and
create an inviting environment. Closed fronts shall use as much glass as
possible. A typical storefront should have double doors centered between
splayed display windows, or flat display windows and clerestory windows above.
(3)   Above the ground floor, there shall be a regulated “rhythm” to the
facades, particularly expressed through window treatments and other detailing.
(4)   Facades oriented along streets should have canopies at approximately the
first floor ceiling level, extending over the sidewalk to 30 inches from the
street curb. Where necessary for public safety, lighting under canopies shall
be provided.
(c)   Streetscape. Street furnishings include planters, benches, street signs,
lampposts, sidewalk paving, and covered shelters. They shall be designed to
complement the designs of older facades. Styles and detailing inappropriate to
Chinatown’s period of significance, which is from the 1880s to the 1940s, shall
not be permitted.
(d)   Signs and graphics.
(1)   Lettering should be reminiscent of styles used from the turn of the
century to the 1940s.
(2)   Symbols, shapes, and objects used as signs (such as barber poles) are
encouraged.
(3)   Use of calligraphy or Asian characters and symbols on signs and
storefront decorations for ethnic-related functions is also encouraged.
(4)   The following sign provisions shall apply to the Chinatown special
district and shall supersede the specific district sign standards enumerated in
§
21-7.40.
(A)   Not more than four business signs per ground floor establishment with
building frontage may be permitted; provided that the maximum sign area for
each ground floor establishment does not exceed 2 square feet for each lineal
foot of building frontage of the establishment. Signs may be of the following
types: hanging; marquee fascia; or wall signs. Ground floor establishments in
multistory buildings also may use one projecting sign as one of the signs and
as part of the total sign area permitted for each establishment, subject to the
following additional limitations:
(i)   The sign shall be located on the second floor, above the establishment;
and
(ii)   The sign shall not exceed 18 square feet in area.
A projecting sign permitted under this paragraph shall not be an off-premises
sign under §
21-7.30(b).
(B)   One of the following signs per building frontage of the building may be
erected:
(i)   One wall sign for building identification purposes (not to exceed 24
square feet in area) or for directory purposes (not to exceed 12 square feet in
area);
(ii)   One ground sign, not to exceed 12 square feet in area, for building
identification or directory purposes; or
(iii)   One garden sign, not to exceed 6 square feet in area, for building
identification or directory purposes.
The sign shall be counted as one of the signs permitted in paragraph (A) for
each ground floor establishment, and the sign area shall count as part of the
total sign area permitted for all ground floor establishments on the building
side on which the sign is located; provided that this sentence shall not apply
to building identification signs which are in existence on October 1, 1998 and
which are certified by the State historic preservation officer as authentic to
the period of the Chinatown special district. A wall sign shall not extend
above the exterior wall of the building or exceed a height of 40 feet,
whichever is the lower height. Ground signs shall be limited to a maximum
height of 10 feet. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no ground or garden signs
shall be permitted within the historic core precinct.
(C)   For each second floor establishment with building frontage, one wall
identification sign may be permitted. The maximum sign area for such an
establishment shall be 6 square feet.
(D)   Projecting signs shall not extend above the roof level or top of the
parapet, whichever is higher; provided that on buildings with more than two
stories, the projecting signs shall not extend above the second story.
(5)   Direct and indirect illumination will be encouraged and allowed for all
sign types; provided that:
(A)   Garden signs shall not be directly illuminated;
(B)    For each ground floor establishment, not more than two permitted signs
shall be illuminated; and
(C)   Directly illuminated signs shall be neon or bulbs that are affixed to the
exterior of signs, and shall be appropriate to the period and ambiance of
Chinatown. Box fluorescents are prohibited.
(6)   No sign shall extend over window openings and trims, or architectural
features and embellishments (e.g., cornices, lintels, arches, rosettes, etc.).
(7)   Exceptions to these sign requirements may be permitted by the director
when it can be demonstrated that such exemptions are appropriate to the
Chinatown special district.
(8)   See
Article 7, except §
21-7.40, for additional sign requirements.
(e)   Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting that highlights and accents the
building facade is encouraged. Light fixtures shall be shielded from street
view and be integrated with the architectural design of the building. Lighting
shall be subdued or shielded so as to prevent glare and light trespass onto
surrounding properties and public rights-of-way.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-12) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.60-13 Project classification.
(a)   Refer to
Table 21-9.4 to determine whether specific projects will be classified as
major, minor, or exempt.
(b)   Projects involving the demolition of, or the major or minor exterior
repair, alteration, or addition to structures listed on
Exhibit 21-9.10-A may be referred to the State historic preservation officer
and other appropriate agencies for review.
Table 21-9.4
Chinatown Special District Project Classification
Activity/Use Required Permit Special Conditions
Table 21-9.4
Chinatown Special District Project Classification
Activity/Use                    Required Permit Special Conditions
Signs                           E                
Tree removal over 6 inches in   E                
diameter
Single-unit, two-unit, and
duplex-unit dwellings, and      E                
accessory structures
Grading and stockpiling         E                
Major exterior repair,                          Major for structures listed on
alteration, or addition to all  M/m             Exhibit 21-9.10-A
structures
Minor exterior repair,
alteration, or addition to all                  Minor for structures listed on
structures, which does not      m/E             Exhibit 21-9.10-A
adversely change the character
or appearance of the structure
Exterior repainting that
significantly alters the        m/E             Minor if visible from street
character or appearance of the
structure
Interior repairs, alterations,
and renovations to all          E                
structures
                                                Major for structures listed on
Demolition of structures        M/m/E           Exhibit 21-9.10-A. Exempt for
                                                accessory structures such as
                                                sheds
Fences and walls                E                
Streetscape improvements,
including street landscaping,
street furniture, light         m                
fixtures, sidewalk paving, bus
shelters, and other elements in
public rights-of-way
Major above-grade
infrastructure* improvements
not covered elsewhere,
including new roadways, road    m                
widenings, new substations, new
parks, and significant
improvements to existing parks
Minor above-grade
infrastructure* improvements
not covered elsewhere; all
below-grade infrastructure      E                
improvements; and all emergency
and routine repair and
maintenance work
New buildings not covered above M/m             Minor for accessory structures
*Notes:
“Infrastructure” includes roadways, sewer, water, electrical, gas, cable
television, telephone, drainage, and recreational facilities.
   A special district permit is not required for activities and uses classified
as exempt, as well as other project types which do not fall into one of the
categories listed above. These activities and uses, however, must still conform
to the applicable objectives and standards of the special district. This
conformance will be determined at the building permit application stage.
Legend—Project classification:
M = Major
m = Minor
E = Exempt
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-13) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-9.70 King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square/Honolulu Museum of Art special
district.
(a)   King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square and the Honolulu Museum of Art are
designated for preservation on the State and National Register of Historic
Places. King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square is an urban park with a formal
symmetrical design. It has historic significance as the site where the
sovereignty of the Hawaiian kingdom was restored to King Kamehameha III by
Great Britain. It is a focal point for the Honolulu Museum of Art, the Neal S.
Blaisdell Center, and Linekona School and has been increasingly used for
recreation and special activities. The Honolulu Museum of Art has architectural
significance as an example of nationally renowned architect Bertram Goodhue’s
work, and cultural significance as a major art gallery and museum.
(b)   Without special controls, high-rise buildings in the immediate vicinity
will have a negative impact on the serenity of these two landmarks. In view of
this threat and established public policies to protect important resources, it
is necessary to preserve and protect King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square and
the Honolulu Museum of Art.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.70) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.70-1 Objectives.
   The objectives of the King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square/Honolulu Museum
of Art special district are as follows:
(a)   Preserve and enhance King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square’s formal park
design by modifying construction projects, which would diminish its serene and
scenic quality;
(b)   Protect the serene scenic quality of the interior courts of the Honolulu
Museum of Art by prohibiting the visual intrusion of neighboring high-rise
buildings;
(c)   Create a landscaping theme that takes into consideration the park
qualities of King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square and the Honolulu Museum of
Art, and the transition from these two low-rise sites to taller developments
nearby and their location as a gateway to the Hawaii capital district; and
(d)   Notwithstanding the underlying zoning, the Honolulu Museum of Art shall
be treated as a principal permitted use within the King Kamehameha III at
Thomas Square/Honolulu Museum of Art special district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.70-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.70-2 District boundaries.
   The boundaries of the district are shown on
Exhibit 21-9.11.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.70-2) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.70-3 Significant public views.
   The following are significant public views within the King Kamehameha III at
Thomas Square/Honolulu Museum of Art special district:
(a)   Views of King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square from Ward Avenue, Victoria
Street, Beretania Street, Hotel Street, Young Street, King Street, the Neal S.
Blaisdell Center, and the Honolulu Museum of Art;
(b)   Views of the Honolulu Museum of Art and the Neal S. Blaisdell Center from
King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square; and
(c)   Views from the museum courtyards skywards.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.70-3) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.70-4 Design controls.
   Implementation of the district objectives shall consist primarily of open
space requirements, building height limitations, yard requirements, tree
plantings along streets, and sign controls. Specific regulations are enumerated
below.
   The district shall consist of four precincts as indicated on
Exhibit 21-9.11. Special restrictions for the precincts are as follows:
(a)   Open space. The percentage of open space shall be as required by the
underlying zoning district, except for the following precincts:
(1)   One hundred percent for precinct one, King Kamehameha III at Thomas
Square. The intent is to maintain the existing character and landscape elements
in the square and to prohibit all permanent structures, except for public
restrooms and the enhancement and function of the landscaped square as a
passive park;
(2)   Fifty percent for precinct two, Honolulu Museum of Art. The intent is to
maintain a maximum amount of open space along Beretania Street to complement
and extend the landscaped qualities of King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square;
and
(3)   Sixty percent for Neal S. Blaisdell Center within precinct three. The
intent is to maintain a park-like setting for the structures of the center by
maximizing landscaping on the site and extending the visual open space
qualities of King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square along Ward Avenue to and
including Kapiolani Boulevard;
(b)   Building heights and setbacks.
(1)   Permitted maximum heights of buildings and structures, and height
setbacks shall be as indicated in
Exhibits 21-9.11 and
21-9.12.
(2)   The director may exempt the following architectural features from the
height regulations; provided that they are erected only to such height as is
necessary to accomplish the purpose for which they serve, but in no case
exceeding 12 feet above the maximum height limit. These building elements may
be exempted only if the director finds they do not obstruct any significant
views which are to be preserved, protected, and enhanced, and are consistent
with the intent and objectives of the King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square/
Honolulu Museum of Art special district:
(A)   Necessary mechanical appurtenances of the building on which they are
erected; provided that they are screened from view;
(B)   Necessary utilitarian features, including stairwell enclosures,
ventilators, and skylights; and
(C)   Decorative or recreational features, including rooftop gardens, planter
boxes, flagpoles, parapet walls, or ornamental cornices; and
(3)   Except for flagpoles and smokestacks, all items listed in §
21-4.60(c) shall also be exempt from the height provisions of this subsection;
(c)   Landscaping.
(1)   All required yards shall be landscaped and maintained with a minimum of
75 percent of the area devoted exclusively to plant material rooted directly in
the ground or permanently fixed plant containers;
(2)   Street trees shall be provided in conformance with subdivision (4) and
shall be a minimum 2-inch caliper, except palms which shall have a minimum
trunk height of 15 feet. Exceptions to this subsection to accommodate special
conditions shall be reviewed and may be approved by the director;
(3)   Vertical form trees shall be planted and maintained along the front yard
perimeter of parking structures to reduce the visual impact of blank walls and
parked vehicles. One tree shall be planted for every 20 feet of linear building
length. Acceptable tree species include coconut palms, paperbark, and
eucalyptus. If there is sufficient space, canopy form trees may be substituted.
Alternatively, planter boxes with vines may be provided on the facade of every
parking level;
(4)   The character and standards for major landscaping in the sidewalk area
and required yards are delineated below. All tree planting shall be in
conformance with the requirements and standards shown on
Exhibit 21-9.4, except that alternative species, especially native Hawaiian or
species long present and common to the Hawaiian islands, including flowering
varieties, shall be encouraged and may be substituted in all instances upon
approval by the director;
(A)   King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square and the Honolulu Museum of Art.
(i)   Unless otherwise provided, all landscaping and tree planting located in,
or adjacent to required yards shall be subject to review and approval; and
(ii)   All new landscaping and tree planting shall preserve, enhance, and
complement the existing trees and landscaping;
(B)   Kinau Street and Victoria Street (from Kinau Street to H-1 Freeway).
(i)   Character. Continuous planting of medium- sized canopy street trees
between the sidewalk and buildings to provide a transition of scale to taller
structures;
(ii)   Street tree species. Alibangbang (Bahina binata);
(iii)   Maximum spacing. 25 feet on center; and
(iv)   Location. In the sidewalk area;
(C)   Beretania Street (except from Ward Avenue to Victoria Street).
(i)   Character. A major approach street to the Hawaii capital district with a
continuous canopy of large trees. Hedges, walls, fences, and high plant
material or shrubs near the sidewalk would not be appropriate;
(ii)   Street tree species. Monkeypod (Samanea saman) or True Kou (Cordia
Subcordata);
(iii)   Maximum spacing. 60 feet on center;
(iv)   Location. Within the required front yard; and
(v)   Other landscaping and landscape elements. Shall not exceed 2 feet in
height within the first 10 feet of the front yard, including fences and walls;
(D)   Hotel Street and Young Street.
(i)   Character. A formal continuation of the entry walks focusing on the
fountain and banyan trees of King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square with
preservation of views to and from King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square;
(ii)   Street tree species. Alibangbang (Bahina binata);
(iii)   Maximum spacing. 25 feet on center; and
(iv)   Location. In the sidewalk area;
(E)   South King Street (except from Ward Avenue to Victoria Street).
(i)   Character. A major street of flowering trees. Other trees and landscaping
should give evidence of variety to contrast and complement the continuity of
the street trees;
(ii)   Street tree species. Rainbow Shower (Cassia hybrida) or Monkeypod
(Samanea saman);
(iii)   Maximum spacing. 30 to 50 feet on center for Rainbow Shower and 50 feet
on center for Monkeypod; and
(iv)   Location. First 5 feet of required front yard;
(F)   Ward Avenue (from South King Street to H-1 Freeway except for the Diamond
Head side at King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square and the Honolulu Museum of
Art) and Victoria Street (from South King Street to Kinau Street except for the
Ewa side at King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square and the Honolulu Museum of
Art).
(i)   Character. Large canopy trees to complement the Honolulu Museum of Art
and King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square and provide continuity of streetscape
from Kapiolani Boulevard to the H-1 Freeway;
(ii)   Street tree species. Royal Poinciana (Delonix regia): in combination
with Monkeypod (Samanea saman) opposite King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square
only;
(iii)   Maximum spacing. 60 feet on center;
(iv)   Location. Within the first 5 feet of the front yard; and
(v)   Other landscaping and landscape elements. Fronting King Kamehameha III at
Thomas Square and the Honolulu Museum of Art shall not exceed 2 feet in height
within the first 10 feet of the front yard;
(G)   Ward Avenue (from Kapiolani Boulevard to South King Street) and South
King Street (makai side from Ward Avenue to Victoria Street).
(i)   Character. Extension of the open “palm grove” at the Neal S. Blaisdell
Center with interspersed lower canopy planting to vary scale and provide color
along the street, and to provide continuity of streetscape from Kapiolani
Boulevard to the H-1 Freeway;
(ii)   Street tree species. Royal Poinciana (Delonix regia), and coconut palm
(Cocos nucifera);
(iii)   Quantity. Three palm trees and one Royal Poinciana tree shall be
provided per 100 feet of street frontage;
(iv)   Location. Palm trees within the front yard and informally grouped; Royal
Poinciana trees within 5 feet of the front yard and interspersed with the
palms. Royal Poinciana trees shall be used only on the Ewa side of Ward Avenue
and along the front of the Neal S. Blaisdell Center Exhibition Hall; and
(v)   Other landscaping and landscape elements. Shall not exceed 2 feet in
height except at the last 5 feet of the front yard; and
(H)   Except as provided, all fences or walls exceeding 36 inches in height
shall be set back a minimum of 18 inches along all street frontages and
landscaped with vine, hedge, or other approved planting on the street sides;
(5)   Any tree 6 inches or greater in trunk diameter shall not be removed or
destroyed except as follows:
(A)   The tree is not visible from any street, park, or other public viewing
area;
(B)   Appropriate development of the site cannot be achieved without removal of
the tree;
(C)   The tree is a hazard to the public safety or welfare;
(D)   The tree is dead, diseased, or otherwise irretrievably damaged; and
(E)   The applicant can demonstrate the tree is unnecessary due to overcrowding
of vegetation;
(6)   Any tree removed which is visible from any street, park, or other public
viewing area shall be replaced by an approved tree of minimum 2-inch caliper or
by alternative-approved landscaping material, unless the replacement results in
overcrowded vegetation; and
(7)   Where possible, trees proposed for removal shall be relocated to another
area of the project site;
(d)   Signs. Signs that directly front King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square or
the Honolulu Museum of Art, or both, shall not be directly illuminated, have
moving parts, luminous paints, or reflective materials. Any illumination shall
be from a detached source shielded from direct view. Box fluorescent signs
shall not be allowed; and
(e)   Exterior lighting. Lighting fronting King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square
or the Honolulu Museum of Art, or both, shall recognize the serene quality of
these resources, and shall be subdued so as not to produce glare to surrounding
property and public viewing areas. Fluorescent or high intensity lamps shall
not be permitted.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.70-4) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.70-5 Project classification.
   Refer to
Table 21-9.5 to determine whether specific projects will be classified as
major, minor, or exempt.
Table 21-9.5
King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square/Honolulu Museum of Art Special District
Project Classification
Activity/Use Required Permit Special Conditions
Table 21-9.5
King Kamehameha III at Thomas Square/Honolulu Museum of Art Special District
Project Classification
Activity/Use                    Required Permit Special Conditions
                                                Directly illuminated signs
Signs                           E               prohibited fronting King
                                                Kamehameha III at Thomas Square
Tree removal over 6 inches in   m/E             Minor in front yard and
diameter                                        sidewalk area only
Single-unit, two-unit, and
duplex-unit dwellings, and      E                
accessory structures
Grading and stockpiling         E                
Major exterior modification,
alteration, repair, or addition
to King Kamehameha III at       M                
Thomas Square or Honolulu
Museum of Art
Major exterior repair,
alteration, or addition to all
structures except King          m                
Kamehameha III at Thomas Square
or Honolulu Museum of Art
Minor exterior repair,
alteration, or addition to all                  Minor only when involving King
structures, that does not       m/E             Kamehameha III at Thomas Square
adversely change the character                  or Honolulu Museum of Art
or appearance of the structure
Interior repairs, alterations,
and renovations to all          E                
structures
Demolition of historic          M                
structures
Demolition of nonhistoric       E                
structures
Fences and walls                E                
Streetscape improvements,
including street furniture,
light fixtures, sidewalk        m                
paving, bus shelters, and other
elements in public rights-of-
way
Major above-grade
infrastructure* improvements
not covered elsewhere,
including new roadways, road    m                
widenings, new substations, new
parks, and significant
improvements to existing parks
Minor above-grade
infrastructure* improvements
not covered elsewhere; all
below-grade infrastructure      E                
improvements; and all emergency
and routine repair and
maintenance work
New buildings not covered above m                
*Notes:
“Infrastructure” includes roadways, sewer, water, electrical, gas, cable
television, telephone, drainage, and recreational facilities.
   A special district permit is not required for activities and uses classified
as exempt, as well as other project types which do not fall into one of the
categories listed above. These activities and uses, however, must still conform
to the applicable objectives and standards of the special district. This
conformance will be determined at the building permit application stage.
Legend—Project classification:
M = Major
m = Minor
E = Exempt
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.70-5) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-9.80 Waikiki special district—Findings.
(a)   To the world, Waikiki is a recognized symbol of Hawaii; and the allure of
Waikiki continues, serving as the anchor for the State’s tourist industry. In
addition to its function as a major world tourist destination, Waikiki serves
as a vital employment center and as a home for thousands of full-time
residents.
(b)   The creation of the Waikiki special district was largely a response to
the rapid development of the 1960s and 1970s, and the changes produced by that
development. Now, Waikiki can be described as a mature resort plant and
residential locale. Waikiki needs to maintain its place as one of the world’s
premier resorts in an international market; yet, the sense of place that makes
Waikiki unique needs to be retained and enhanced.
(c)   Because of the city’s commitment to the economic, social, and physical
well-being of Waikiki, it is necessary to guide carefully Waikiki’s future and
protect its unique Hawaiian identity.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.80) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.80-1 Waikiki special district—Objectives.
   The objectives of the Waikiki special district are to:
(a)   Promote a Hawaiian sense of place at every opportunity;
(b)   Guide development and redevelopment in Waikiki with due consideration to
optimum community benefits. These shall include the preservation, restoration,
maintenance, enhancement, and creation of natural, recreational, educational,
historic, cultural, community, and scenic resources;
(c)   Support the retention of a residential sector to provide stability to the
neighborhoods of Waikiki;
(d)   Provide for a variety of compatible land uses which promote the unique
character of Waikiki, emphasizing mixed uses;
(e)   Support efficient use of multimodal transportation in Waikiki, reflecting
the needs of Waikiki workers, businesses, residents, and tourists. Encourage
the use of public transit rather than the private automobile, and assist in the
efficient flow of traffic;
(f)   Provide for the ability to renovate and redevelop existing structures
which otherwise might experience deterioration. Waikiki is a mature,
concentrated urban area with a large number of nonconforming uses and
structures. The zoning requirements of this special district may not,
therefore, function as barriers to desirable restoration and redevelopment lest
the physical decline of structures in Waikiki jeopardize the desire to have a
healthy, vibrant, attractive, and well-designed visitor destination;
(g)   Enable the city to address concerns that development maintain Waikiki’s
capacity to support adequately, accommodate comfortably, and enhance the
variety of worker, resident, and visitor needs;
(h)   Provide opportunities for creative development capable of substantially
contributing to rejuvenation and revitalization in the special district, and
able to facilitate the desired character of Waikiki for areas susceptible to
change;
(i)   Encourage architectural features in building design which complement
Hawaii’s tropical climate and ambience, while respecting Waikiki’s urbanized
setting. The provision of building elements such as open lobbies, lanais, and
sunshade devices is encouraged;
(j)   Maintain, and improve where possible: mauka views from public viewing
areas in Waikiki, especially from public streets; and a visual relationship
with the ocean, as experienced from Kalakaua Avenue, Kalia Road, and Ala Moana
Boulevard. In addition, improve pedestrian access, both perpendicular and
lateral, to the beach and the Ala Wai Canal;
(k)   Maintain a substantial view of Diamond Head from the Punchbowl lookouts
by controlling building heights in Waikiki that would impinge on this view
corridor;
(l)   Emphasize a pedestrian-orientation in Waikiki. Acknowledge, enhance, and
promote the pedestrian experience to benefit both commercial establishments and
the community as a whole. Walkway systems shall be complemented by adjacent
landscaping, open spaces, entryways, inviting uses at the ground level, street
furniture, and human-scaled architectural details. Where appropriate, open
spaces should be actively used to promote the pedestrian experience;
(m)   Provide people-oriented, interactive, landscaped open spaces to offset
the high-density urban ambience. Open spaces are intended to serve a variety of
objectives including visual relief, pedestrian orientation, social interaction,
and fundamentally to promote a sense of “Hawaiianness” within the district.
Open spaces, pedestrian pathways, and other ground level features should be
generously supplemented with landscaping and water features to enhance their
value, contribute to a lush, tropical setting and promote a Hawaiian sense of
place; and
(n)   Support a complementary relationship between Waikiki and the convention
center.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.80-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.80-2 District boundaries and land use control system.
(a)   The district is identified on
Exhibit 21-9.13.
(b)   Within the district, there are four types of zoning precincts and one
type of zoning subprecinct, the boundaries of which are indicated on
Exhibit 21-9.13.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.80-2) (Added by Ord. 99-12)
§ 21-9.80-3 Prominent view corridors and historic properties.
(a)   The following streets and locations identify significant public views of
Waikiki landmarks, the ocean, and the mountains from public vantage points:
(1)   Intermittent ocean views from Kalia Road across Fort DeRussy Park and
from the Ala Wai Bridge on Ala Moana Boulevard;
(2)   Continuous ocean views along Kalakaua Avenue, from Kuhio Beach to
Kapahulu Avenue;
(3)   Ocean views from Ala Wai Yacht Harbor;
(4)   Ocean views from Kuhio Beach Park;
(5)   Views of Ala Wai Yacht Harbor from Ala Moana Park (Magic Island Park);
(6)   Mauka views from the portions of the following streets mauka of Kuhio
Avenue:
(A)   Nohonani Street;
(B)   Nahua Street;
(C)   Kanekapolei Street;
(D)   Kaiolu Street;
(E)   Lewers Street;
(F)   Walina Street; and
(G)   Seaside Avenue; and
(7)   View of Diamond Head from Ala Wai Boulevard between McCully Street and
Kapahulu Avenue.
(b)   Development should preserve, maintain, and enhance these views whenever
possible. Additional yard area and spacing between buildings may be required by
the director, in connection with the issuance of special district permits, and
the council or the director, in connection with planned development-resort and
planned development-apartment approvals pursuant to §
21-2.110-2, to protect these significant views.
(c)   Development should preserve, maintain, and enhance historic properties
whenever possible. Special district permit applications involving buildings
over 50 years old shall be submitted to the State department of land and
natural resources for review and comments.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.80-3) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 17-40)
§ 21-9.80-4 General requirements and design controls.
   The design of buildings and structures in the Waikiki special district
should always reflect a Hawaiian sense of place, as outlined in the design
controls of this section. These design controls shall be supplemented by a
design guidebook prepared and made available to the public by the director. The
design guidebook shall be used as a principal tool by the director to express
those various planning and architectural design elements which demonstrate
consistency with the intent, objectives, guidelines, and standards of the
Waikiki special district. The director shall submit the design guidebook and
any revisions thereof to the council for review and comment before making the
guidebook and any revisions available to the public. The following requirements
shall be applied in all precincts within the district. Where the following
requirements are silent, the applicable provisions of this chapter shall apply.
(a)   Uses and structures allowed in required yards and setbacks. Section 1-
4.30 shall apply except as provided by this subsection. No business activity of
any kind, including advertising, promotion, solicitation, merchandising, or
distribution of commercial handbills, or structures or any other use or
activity, except as provided by this subsection, shall be located or carried
out within any required yard, street or building setback area, except those
areas occupied by enclosed nonconforming buildings. The following may be
allowed in required yards and setbacks, and when used as provided by this
subsection shall not be considered to change a yard’s status as open space:
(1)   Newspaper sales and distribution;
(2)   Garden signs;
(3)   Porte cocheres no less than 5 feet back from the property line or road
widening setback;
(4)   Roof eaves, awnings (including retractable awnings), and other sunshade
devices not more than 42 inches vertically or horizontally beyond the building
face, except as otherwise provided by this subsection. On buildings over 60
feet in height, roof eaves may extend more than 42 inches into a required yard,
street setback, or height setback area if the resulting roof form is integral
to a cohesive, coherent design character for the structure. In no case,
however, shall such extension exceed one-half the width of the required yard or
height setback;
(5)   Outdoor dining areas accessory to permitted eating establishments in
required front yards, subject to the following:
(A)   A planter or hedge of not more than 30 inches in height may be provided
to define the perimeter of the outdoor dining area. A decorative railing may be
permitted in lieu of a planter or hedge subject to the approval of the
director;
(B)   An outdoor dining area shall be no less than 5 feet from any property
line;
(C)   Outdoor dining facilities shall be limited to portable chairs, tables,
serving devices, and umbrellas. When umbrellas are used, they shall not be
counted against open space calculations;
(D)   Up to 100 percent of the front yard may be used as an accessory outdoor
dining area, subject to an acceptable design. The remainder of the front yard
shall be landscaped, except for necessary access drives and walkways, and where
lei stands are used as permitted under subdivision (6);
(E)   Retractable awnings directly associated with an outdoor dining area may
extend from the building face into the front yard;
(F)   Sidewalk improvements, such as but not limited to street trees, paving,
and landscaping, may be required;
(G)   Outdoor dining areas shall not be used after 11:00 p.m. and before 7:00
a.m;
(H)   No dancing, entertainment, or live or recorded music shall be permitted
in outdoor dining areas; provided that strolling musicians using nonamplified
acoustic stringed instruments or traditional Hawaiian wind instruments shall be
permitted to perform no later than 10:00 p.m. when the dining areas are in use;
and
(I)   The requirements under paragraphs (A) through (F) may be modified,
subject to a major or minor special district permit, as required by
Table 21-9.6(C), to a reasonable extent as may be necessary and appropriate to
adequately accommodate outdoor dining areas associated with structures that are
nonconforming due to required yards, landscaping, or open spaces;
(6)   Lei making and selling in required front yards on zoning lots where
retail establishments are a permitted principal use; provided that the
following standards are met:
(A)   The activity shall be no less than 5 feet from any property line;
(B)   No more than 10 percent of the front yard may be used for lei stands. The
remainder of the front yard shall be landscaped, except for necessary access
drives or walkways, and where outdoor dining is used as permitted under
subdivision (5);
(C)   Signs. Refer to
Article 7 for permitted signs; and
(D)   The operator of a lei stand shall provide for the concealed disposal of
trash associated with the use;
(7)   Vending carts in required front yards on zoning lots where retail
establishments are a permitted principal use; provided that the following
standards are met:
(A)   The front yard shall conform to the applicable front yard standard set
forth in
Table 21-9.6(B);
(B)   Only food, nonalcoholic drinks, and fresh cut or picked flowers may be
sold. Food consistent with a Hawaiian sense of place shall be encouraged;
(C)   The cart shall be no less than 5 feet from any property line;
(D)   One cart per front yard per zoning lot or one cart per front yard per 100
feet of lot frontage shall be permitted, whichever is greater. When computation
of the total number of permitted carts results in a fractional number with a
major fraction (i.e., 0.5 or greater), the number of carts permitted shall be
the next highest whole number;
(E)   Permitted signs shall be in accordance with
Article 7; and
(F)   The cart operator shall provide for the concealed disposal of trash
associated with the use;
(8)   Walls and fences for dwelling uses, other than nonconforming hotels or
transient vacation units, in the apartment precinct, up to a maximum height of
6 feet; provided that the wall or fence shall be set back not less than 24
inches from the front property line and shall be acceptably screened with
planting material from the street side. The wall or fence shall consist of an
open material, preferably wrought iron or lattice work, but not chain link.
Solid walls are discouraged, but may be permitted when constructed of an
acceptable material, such as wood, moss rock, or stucco-finished masonry, set
back at least 5 feet from the front property line and acceptably screened with
planting material from the street side; and
(9)   Interactive informational displays; provided that the following standards
are met:
(A)   Only one interactive informational display per common entryway to a
project site shall be permitted, that shall not encroach into or otherwise
obstruct any public sidewalk or pedestrian easement. For the purposes of this
subdivision, a “common entryway” means an opening providing public pedestrian
access to two or more business establishments from any public sidewalk,
pedestrian easement, or right-of-way;
(B)   The interactive informational display shall consist of a freestanding
structure, not exceeding 48 inches in height;
(C)   The display area shall not exceed 8 square feet, and shall be essentially
horizontal in its orientation so as not to be functionally viewable from
adjoining streets or sidewalks; and
(D)   No signs regulated under
Article 7 shall be attached to the interactive informational display structure,
nor shall there be any speaker boxes, public address systems, or other devices
for reproducing or amplifying voices or sound attached to or associated with
the structure.
(b)   Curb cuts. Curb cuts for driveway openings and sight distances at all
intersections shall comply with the design standards of the department of
transportation services unless modified by the council. The number of curb cuts
should be kept to a minimum to enhance pedestrian movement along sidewalks.
(c)   Design guidelines.
(1)   General guidelines. All structures, open spaces, landscape elements, and
other improvements within the district must conform to the guidelines for urban
design controls specified in
Exhibit 21-9.15; the design standards of this section; and other design
guidelines adopted by the director to further define and implement these
guidelines and standards.
(2)   Yards. Yard requirements will be as provided under the development
standards for the underlying zoning precinct under
Table 21-9.6(B).
(3)   Car rental establishments. Car rental establishments must comply with the
following requirements:
(A)   Side and rear yards must be a minimum of 5 feet; with a solid fence or
wall at least 6 feet in height on the property line, and the required yard
substantially landscaped with planting and maintained;
(B)   The car rental establishment must be illuminated so that no unshielded,
unreflected, or undiffused light source is visible from any public area or
private property immediately adjacent to the establishment;
(C)   All areas not landscaped must be provided with an all-weather surface;
and
(D)   No water produced by activities on the zoning lot may fall upon or drain
across public streets or sidewalks.
(4)   Small, medium, and large utilities. Except for antennas, small, medium,
and large utilities must be designed and installed in an aesthetic manner so as
to hide or screen wires and equipment completely from view, including views
from above; provided that any antenna located at a height of 40 feet or less
from existing grade should take full advantage of stealth technologies to be
adequately screened from view at ground level without adversely affecting
operational capabilities.
(5)   Building materials. Selection and use of building materials should
contribute to a Hawaiian sense of place through the use of subdued and natural
materials, such as plaster finishes, textured concrete, stone, wood, and
limited use of color-coated metal. Freestanding walls and fences should be
composed of moss rock, stucco-finished masonry, or architectural concrete
whenever possible. Colors and finishes should be characterized as being
absorptive rather than reflective. The use of shiny metal or reflective
surfaces, including paints and smooth or plastic-like surfaces, should be
avoided.
(6)   Building scale, features, and articulation. Project designs should
provide a human scale at ground level. Buildings composed of stepped forms are
preferred. Articulated facades are encouraged to break up building bulk. Use of
the following building features is encouraged: sunshades; canopies; eaves;
lanais; hip-form roofs for low-rise, freestanding buildings; recessed windows;
projecting eyebrows; and architectural elements that promote a Hawaiian sense
of place.
(7)   Exterior building colors. Project colors should contribute to a tropical
resort destination. They should complement or blend with surrounding colors,
rather than call attention to the structure. Principal colors, particularly for
high-rise towers, should be of neutral tones with more vibrant colors relegated
to accent work. Highly reflective colors are not permitted.
(8)   Ground level features.
(A)   Within a development, attention should be given to pedestrian-oriented
ground level features. A close indoor-outdoor relationship should be promoted.
Design priority should include the visual links through a development
connecting the sidewalk and other public areas with on-site open spaces,
mountains, and the ocean.
(B)   Building facades at the ground level along open spaces and major streets
(including Kalakaua Avenue, Kuhio Avenue, Kapahulu Avenue, Ala Wai Boulevard,
and Ala Moana Boulevard) must be devoted to open lobbies, arcade entrances,
display windows, and permitted outdoor dining areas.
(C)   Where commercial uses are located at ground level, other than as required
by paragraph (B), at least one-half of the total length of the building facade
along streets must be devoted to open lobbies, arcade entrances, display
windows, and permitted outdoor dining areas.
(D)   The street facades of ground level hotel lobbies should include wide,
open entryways. Ventilation in these lobbies should primarily depend on natural
air circulation.
(E)   Where buildings are situated between a street and the shoreline, or
between a street and open spaces, ground level lobbies, arcades, and pedestrian
ways should be provided to create visual links between the street and the
shoreline or open space.
(F)   Where blank walls necessarily front a street or open space, they must be
screened with heavy landscaping or appropriately articulated exterior surfaces.
(G)   Effective December 1, 2025, ground level parking facilities should not be
located along any street, park, beachfront, public sidewalk, or pedestrian way.
Where the site plan precludes any other location, the garage may front these
areas if landscaping is provided for screening. Principal landscaping must
include trees, and secondary landscape elements may include tall hedges and
earth berms.
(H)   For the purposes of the Waikiki special district, an “open lobby” means a
ground-floor lobby that is not enclosed along the entire length of at least two
of its sides or 50 percent of its perimeter, whichever is greater, and that
provides adequate breezeways and views to interior or prominent open spaces,
intersecting streets, gateways, or significant pedestrian ways.
(9)   Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting must be subdued or shielded so as to
prevent glare and light spillage onto surrounding properties and public rights-
of-way. Outdoor lighting must not be used to attract attention to structures,
uses, or activities; provided that indirect illumination that is integrated
with the architectural design of a building may be allowed when it is utilized
to highlight and accentuate exterior building facades, and architectural or
ground level features. Rotating, revolving, moving, flashing, or flickering
lights must not be visible to the public, except lighting installed by a public
agency for traffic safety purposes or temporary lighting related to holiday
displays.
(d)   Planned development-resort (PD-R) and planned development-apartment (PD-
A) projects. The purpose of the PD-R and PD-A options is to provide
opportunities for creative redevelopment not possible under a strict adherence
to the development standards of the special district. Flexibility may be
provided for project density, height, precinct transitional height setbacks,
yards, open space, and landscaping when timely, demonstrable contributions
benefitting the community and the stability, function, and overall ambiance and
appearance of Waikiki are produced.
Reflective of the significance of the flexibility represented by this option,
it is appropriate to approve projects conceptually by legislative review and
approval before more detailed review and approval by the department.
PD-R and PD-A projects will be subject to the following:
(1)   PD-R and PD-A applicability.
(A)   PD-R projects are only permitted in the resort mixed-use precinct, and
PD-A projects are only permitted in the apartment precinct; and
(B)   The minimum project size is 1 acre. Multiple zoning lots may be part of a
single PD-R or PD-A project if the owners, lessees, developers, or other
designated representatives, including but not limited to a board or association
of homeowners, condominium owners, timeshare owners, or cooperative housing
owners, in lieu of individual owners, consent. Zoning lots may be added to or
removed from existing PD-R or PD-A projects upon the application of the owners,
lessees, developers, or other designated representatives of the zoning lots to
be added or removed with the written consent of the original applicant for the
existing PD-R or PD-A project, or the original applicant’s successor.
Applications for the addition or removal of zoning lots will be processed in
accordance with other applicable regulations contained in this chapter. Zoning
lots to be removed must be able to comply on their own with applicable zoning
regulations as a separate project. Multiple zoning lots in a single project
must be contiguous; provided that lots that are not contiguous may be part of a
single project if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
(i)   The zoning lots are not contiguous solely because they are separated by a
street or right-of-way that is not a major street as shown on Exhibit 21-9.15;
and
(ii)   Each noncontiguous portion of the project, whether composed of a single
zoning lot or multiple contiguous zoning lots, must have a minimum area of
20,000 square feet, but subject to the minimum overall project size of 1 acre.
When a project consists of noncontiguous zoning lots as provided in this
paragraph, bridges or other design features connecting the separated zoning
lots are strongly encouraged to unify the project site. Multiple zoning lots
that are part of an approved single PD-R or PD-A project will be considered and
treated as one zoning lot for purposes of the project; provided that no
conditional use permit-minor for a joint development will be required therefor;
(2)   PD-R and PD-A use regulations. Permitted uses and structures are as set
forth for the underlying precinct in
Table 21-9.6(A);
(3)   PD-R and PD-A site development and design standards. The standards set
forth by this subdivision are general requirements for PD-R and PD-A projects.
When, in the paragraphs in this subdivision, the standards are stated to be
subject to modification or reduction, the modification or reduction must be for
the purpose of accomplishing a project design consistent with the goals and
objectives of the Waikiki special district and this subsection.
(A)   In PD-R projects, the maximum project floor area must not exceed an FAR
of 4.0; provided that:
(i)   If the existing FAR is greater than 3.33, then an increase in maximum
density by up to 20 percent may be allowed, up to but not exceeding a maximum
FAR of 5.0; or
(ii)   If the existing FAR is greater than 5.0, then the existing FAR is the
maximum density.
In computing project floor area, the FAR may be applied to the zoning lot area,
plus one-half the abutting right-of-way area of any public street or alley.
Floor area devoted to acceptable public uses within the project, such as a
museum or performance area (e.g., stage or rehearsal area), may be exempt from
floor area calculations.
The foregoing maximum densities may be reduced;
(B)   In PD-A projects, the maximum project floor area must not exceed an FAR
of 3.0; provided that:
(i)   If the existing FAR is greater than 3.0, then an increase in maximum
density by up to 20 percent may be allowed, up to but not exceeding a maximum
FAR of 4.0; or
(ii)   If the existing FAR is greater than 4.0, then the existing FAR is the
maximum density.
In computing project floor area, the FAR may be applied to the zoning lot area,
plus one-half the abutting right-of-way area of any public street or alley.
Floor area devoted to acceptable public uses within the project, such as a
museum or performance area (e.g., stage or rehearsal area), may be exempt from
floor area calculations.
The foregoing maximum densities may be reduced;
(C)   The maximum building height is 350 feet, but this standard may be
reduced;
(D)   The precinct transitional height setbacks are as set forth in
Table 21-9.6(B), but these standards may be modified;
(E)   The minimum for yards is 15 feet, but this standard may be modified;
(F)   The minimum open space is at least 50 percent of the zoning lot area, but
this standard may be modified when beneficial public open spaces and related
amenities are provided;
(G)   The landscaping requirements are as set forth in subsection (f), but
these standards may be modified; and
(H)   Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, all development and
design standards applicable to the precinct in which the project is located
apply;
(4)   Approval of PD-R or PD-A projects.
(A)   Application requirements. An application for approval of a PD-R or PD-
A project must contain:
(i)   A project name;
(ii)   A location map showing the project in relation to the surrounding area;
(iii)   A site plan showing the locations of buildings and other major
structures, proposed open space and landscaping system, and other major
activities. The site plan must also note property lines, the shoreline,
shoreline setback lines, beach access, and other public and private access,
when applicable;
(iv)   A narrative description of the overall development and design concept;
the general mix of uses; the basic form and number of structures; the estimated
number of proposed hotel and other dwelling or lodging units; general building
height and density; how the project achieves and positively contributes to a
Hawaiian sense of place; proposed public amenities, development of open space
and landscaping; how the project achieves a pedestrian orientation; and
potential impacts on, but not limited to traffic circulation, parking and
loading, security, sewers, potable water, and public utilities;
(v)   An open space plan and integrated pedestrian circulation system;
(vi)   A narrative explanation of the project’s architectural design relating
the various design elements to a Hawaiian sense of place and the requirements
of the Waikiki special district; and
(vii)   A parking and loading management plan;
(B)   Procedures. Applications for approval of PD-R or PD-A projects will be
processed in accordance with §
21-2.110-2;
(C)   No project will be eligible for PD-R or PD-A status, unless the council
has first approved a conceptual plan for the project;
(D)   Guidelines for review and approval of the conceptual plan for a project.
Before its approval of a conceptual plan for a PD-R or PD-A project, the
council shall find that the project concept, as a unified plan, is in the
general interest of the public, and that:
(i)   Requested project boundaries and design flexibility with respect to
standards relating to density (floor area), height, precinct transitional
height setbacks, yards, open space, and landscaping are consistent with the
Waikiki special district objectives and this subsection;
(ii)   Requested flexibility with respect to standards relating to density
(floor area), height, precinct transitional height setbacks, yards, open space,
and landscaping is commensurate with the public amenities proposed; and
(iii)   When applicable, there is no conflict with any visitor unit limits for
Waikiki as set forth in
Chapter 24;
(E)   Deadline for obtaining building permit for project.
(i)   A council resolution approving a conceptual plan for a PD-R or PD-
A project must establish a deadline within which the building permit for the
project must be obtained. For multiphase projects, deadlines must be
established for obtaining building permits for each phase of the project. The
resolution must provide that the failure to obtain any building permit within
the prescribed period will render void the council’s approval of the conceptual
plan and all approvals issued thereunder; provided that in multiphase projects,
any prior phase that has complied with the deadline applicable to that phase
will not be affected. A revocation of a building permit pursuant to §
18-5.4 after the deadline is a failure to comply with the deadline.
(ii)   The resolution must further provide that a deadline may be extended as
follows: the director may extend the deadline if the applicant demonstrates
good cause, but the deadline may not be extended beyond one year from the
initial deadline without the approval of the council, which may grant or deny
the approval in its complete discretion. If the applicant requests an extension
beyond one year from the initial deadline and the director finds that the
applicant has demonstrated good cause for the extension, the director shall
prepare and submit to the council a report on the proposed extension that must
include the director’s findings and recommendations thereon and a proposed
resolution approving the extension. The council may approve the proposed
extension or an extension for a shorter or longer period, or deny the proposed
extension, by resolution. If the council fails to take final action on the
proposed extension within the first to occur of:
(aa)   Sixty days after the receipt of the director’s report; or
(bb)   The applicant’s then-existing deadline for obtaining a building permit,
the extension will be deemed denied. The director shall notify the council in
writing of any extensions granted by the director that do not require council
approval; and
(F)   Approval by director. Upon council approval of the conceptual plan for
the PD-R or PD-A project, the application for the project, as approved in
concept by the council, will continue to be processed by the director as
provided under §
21-2.110-2. Additional documentation may be required by the director as
necessary. The following criteria will be used by the director to review
applications:
(i)   The project must conform to the approved conceptual plan and any
conditions established by the council in its resolution of approval;
(ii)   The project also must implement the objectives, guidelines, and
standards of the Waikiki special district and this subsection;
(iii)   The project must exhibit a Hawaiian sense of place. The document
“Restoring Hawaiianness to Waikiki” (July 1994) and the supplemental design
guidebook to be prepared by the director should be consulted by applicants as a
guide for the types of features that may fulfill this requirement;
(iv)   The project must demonstrate a high level of compliance with the design
guidelines of the Waikiki special district and this subsection;
(v)   The project must contribute significantly to the overall desired urban
design of Waikiki;
(vi)   The project must reflect appropriate “contextual architecture”;
(vii)   The project must demonstrate a pedestrian system, open spaces, and
landscaping and water features (such as water gardens and ponds) that must be
integrated and prominently conspicuous throughout the project site at ground
level;
(viii)   The open space plan must provide useable open spaces, green spaces,
water features, public places, and other related amenities that reflect a
strong appreciation for the tropical environmental setting reflective of
Hawaii;
(ix)   The system of proposed pedestrian elements must contribute to a strong
pedestrian orientation that must be integrated into the overall design of the
project, and must enhance the pedestrian experience between the project and
surrounding Waikiki areas; and
(x)   The parking management plan must minimize impacts upon public streets
where possible, must enhance local traffic circulation patterns, and must make
appropriate accommodations for all anticipated parking and loading demands. The
approved parking management plan will constitute the off-street parking and
loading requirements for the project.
(e)   Nonconformity. The provisions of §§
21-4.110 et seq. shall apply, except as provided in this subsection.
(1)   A nonconforming use or structure may be replaced by a new structure with
up to the maximum permitted floor area of the precinct for similar uses or
existing floor area, whichever is greater; provided that all other special
district standards are met. To achieve this, the following special district
standards may be modified, subject to a major special district permit approval:
(A)   Open space. Minimum required open space may be adjusted, as follows:
(i)   For each square foot of public open space provided on the lot, the open
space may be reduced by 1 square foot. If provided, front yards may be included
as public open space;
(ii)   For every 2 square feet of arcade space provided on the lot, the open
space may be reduced by 1 square foot;
(iii)   For every 4 square feet of open lobby space on the lot, the open space
may be reduced by 1 square foot; and
(iv)   If the cumulative area of the required yards exceeds the minimum open
space requirement for the lot, the resultant cumulative yards may be considered
the minimum open space requirement for the lot.
The total open space must not be less than: (aa) 25 percent of the lot area; or
(bb) the cumulative area of the required yards, whichever is greater. In
addition, the open space arrangement must not obstruct or diminish any
significant views which are to be preserved, protected, or enhanced; must not
obstruct, prevent, or interfere with any identified gateways or pedestrian
ways; and must be consistent with the intent and objectives of the Waikiki
special district;
(B)   Off-street parking. Parking and loading requirements may be adjusted,
subject to the submission of a parking management plan that is reviewed and
approved by the director;
(C)   Height. If the height of an existing structure exceeds the maximum height
for the lot, then the height of the existing structure may be retained;
provided that the new structure or structures:
(i)   Do not obstruct or diminish any significant views which are to be
preserved, protected, and enhanced;
(ii)   Do not obstruct, prevent, or interfere with an identified gateway or
pedestrian way, or both; and
(iii)   Are consistent with the intent and objectives of the Waikiki special
district;
(2)   In case of the accidental destruction of a nonconforming structure
devoted to a conforming use which contains multi-unit dwelling units, it may be
restored to its original condition in accordance with §
21-4.110;
(3)   Nonconforming uses must not be limited to “ordinary repairs” or subject
to value limits on repairs or renovation work performed. Exterior repairs and
renovations that will not modify the arrangement of buildings on a zoning lot
may be permitted; provided that all special district standards are met;
(4)   Elements of nonconforming structures including but not limited to signs,
menu displays, awnings, and building facades may be renovated, reconfigured, or
replaced; provided that the work:
(A)   Results in a reduction of the nonconformity;
(B)   Is an improvement over the existing condition of the structure;
(C)   Implements the design intents and requirements of the special district;
and
(D)   Does not increase floor area;
(5)   The floor area of a structure which already meets or exceeds maximum
permitted density may be increased to replace or retrofit electrical or
mechanical equipment, utilitarian spaces, or improvements specifically required
to comply with federal mandates such as the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) or National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA); provided that:
(A)   The increase in floor area is relatively insignificant in relation to the
existing structure;
(B)   Adequate screening of building equipment or machinery is provided when
necessary to protect the design intents of the special district;
(C)   The increase does not result in a net loss in required open space,
arcades, or landscaping; and
(D)   Other than for dwelling units, existing on-site parking spaces may be
removed; provided that:
(i)   There are no feasible alternatives to the location of the equipment or
utility room; and
(ii)   The number of off-street parking spaces removed is less than:
(aa)   Five percent of the total number of existing spaces, if the total number
of existing spaces is 100 or less; or
(bb)   Three percent of the total number of existing spaces, if the total
number of existing spaces is more than 100;
(6)   Notwithstanding any ordinance to the contrary, nonconforming hotel units
may be time sharing units, subject to applicable State law; and
(7)   Unless voluntarily abandoned, nonconforming uses that have been
temporarily discontinued for purposes of redevelopment or renovation, as
permitted by this subsection, must not otherwise be subject to the
discontinuation of use provisions in §
21-4.110(c)(2).
(f)   Landscaping.
(1)   Any tree 6 inches or greater in trunk diameter shall not be removed or
destroyed except as follows:
(A)   The tree is not visible from any street, park, or other public viewing
area;
(B)   Appropriate development of the site cannot be achieved without removal of
the tree;
(C)   The tree is a hazard to the public safety or welfare;
(D)   The tree is dead, diseased, or otherwise irretrievably damaged; and
(E)   The applicant can demonstrate the tree is unnecessary due to overcrowding
of vegetation.
(2)   Any tree removed which is visible from any street, park, or other public
viewing area shall be replaced by an approved tree of a minimum 2-inch caliper,
except palms, which shall have a minimum trunk height of 15 feet, or by
alternative approved landscaping material, unless the replacement results in
overcrowded vegetation. Larger replacement trees may be required depending on
the size of the trees removed.
(3)   Where possible, trees proposed for removal shall be relocated to another
area of the project site.
(4)   Parking structures shall be landscaped. Rooftop parking areas shall also
be landscaped wherever they are visible to the public.
(5)   Landscaped screening shall be required to prevent undesirable vistas and
sight lines, and to reduce the visual impact of blank walls and parked
vehicles. Spacing and other design elements shall be determined by species,
plant size, and mix of plant material.
(6)   Whenever landscaping is required, the use of fragrant, lush, tropical
vegetation and native plant species is encouraged.
(7)   All fences and walls exceeding 36 inches in height, except for moss rock
walls, shall be landscaped with vine or hedge planting, or other approved
vegetation on the street side.
(8)   All landscaped areas shall include an adequate irrigation system.
(g)   Height regulations.
(1)   Rooftop height exemption. The director may exempt necessary mechanical
appurtenances, and utilitarian and architectural features from the height
regulations of the special district; provided that they are erected only to
such height as is necessary to accomplish the purpose they serve, but in no
case exceeding 18 feet above the maximum height limit for roof forms and 12
feet above the maximum height limit for all other appurtenances and features.
These building elements may be exempted only if the director finds they do not
obstruct any significant views which are to be preserved, protected, and
enhanced, and are consistent with the intent and objectives of the Waikiki
special district. The design of roof treatment shall be attractive, contextual,
and an integral part of the building’s design scheme. Except for flagpoles and
smokestacks, all items listed in §
21-4.60(c) shall also be exempt from the height provision of this subsection.
(2)   Coastal height setbacks. In addition to the above limits, there is a need
to step back tall buildings from the shoreline to maximize public safety and
the sense of open space and public enjoyment associated with coastal resources.
Accordingly, the following minimum setbacks shall apply to all zoning lots
along the shoreline:
(A)   There shall be a building height setback of 100 feet in which no
structure shall be permitted. This setback shall be measured from the certified
shoreline; and
(B)   Beyond the 100-foot line there shall be a building height setback of 1:1
(45 degrees) measured from the certified shoreline. (See
Exhibit 21-9.15.)
(3)   The council, by resolution, may approve a building that exceeds the
building height limits established in
Exhibit 21-9.15 and on the zoning map; provided that the council determines
that the building with the added height would not be visible within the view
cones from the Punchbowl lookouts towards Diamond Head and the horizon line of
the ocean or from the Kalakaua Avenue frontage of Fort DeRussy towards the
slopes and ridgeline of the Koolau Range, and the building does not exceed a
height of 350 feet.
(h)   Parking. Off-street parking must be provided in accordance with
Article 6, unless otherwise noted in this section.
(i)   Vending carts. Outdoor vending carts located at ground level, except for
those permitted in required yards, shall be generally screened from view to the
general public from any street, sidewalk, or public space by landscaping or a
wall or fence no less than 42 inches in height, which shall be located at the
front property line.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.80-4) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 01-66,
03-38, 10-19, 11-30, 17-40, 18-19, 20-41, 25-2)
FIGURE 21-9.1
FRONT YARD – WAIKIKI
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-233.png]
§ 21-9.80-5 Apartment precinct.
(a)   Permitted uses. Within the apartment precinct, including the apartment
mixed-use subprecinct, permitted uses and structures are as set forth in
Table 21-9.6(A).
(b)   Development standards. Uses and structures within the apartment precinct
and the apartment mixed-use subprecinct must conform to the development
standards set forth in
Table 21-9.6(B).
(c)   Additional development standards.
(1)   Commercial use location within the apartment mixed-use subprecinct. Any
of the permitted uses designated in
Table 21-9.6(A) as a principal use only within the apartment mixed-use
subprecinct, either occurring as a single use on a zoning lot or in combination
with other uses, are limited to the basement, ground floor, or second floor of
a building.
(2)   Transitional height setbacks. For any portion of a structure above 40
feet in height, additional front, side, and rear height setbacks equal to 1
foot for each 10 feet in height, or fraction thereof, must be provided. Within
the height setback, buildings with graduated, stepped forms are encouraged (see
Figure 21-9.2).
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.80-5) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 03-38,
25-2)
FIGURE 21-9.2
TRANSITIONAL HEIGHT SETBACK – WAIKIKI
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-235.png]
(Added by Ord. 03-38)
§ 21-9.80-6 Resort mixed-use precinct.
(a)   Permitted uses. Within the resort mixed-use precinct, permitted uses and
structures are as set forth in
Table 21-9.6(A).
(b)   Development standards. Uses and structures within the resort mixed-use
precinct must conform to the development standards set forth in
Table 21-9.6(B).
(c)   Additional development standards.
(1)   Floor area bonus.
(A)   For each square foot of public open space provided, exclusive of required
yards, 10 square feet of floor area may be added.
(B)   For each square foot of open space devoted to pedestrian use and
landscape area at ground level provided, exclusive of required yards, 5 square
feet of floor area may be added.
(C)   For each square foot of arcade area provided, exclusive of required
yards, 3 square feet of floor area may be added.
(D)   For each square foot of rooftop landscaped area provided, 1 square foot
of floor area may be added.
(2)   Transitional height setbacks. For any portion of a structure above 40
feet in height, additional front, side, and rear height setbacks equal to 1
foot for each 10 feet in height, or fraction thereof, must be provided. Within
the height setback, buildings with graduated, stepped forms are encouraged (see
Figure 21-9.2).
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.80-6) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 03-38,
11-30, 25-2)
§ 21-9.80-7 Reserved.
§ 21-9.80-8 Public precinct.
(a)   Permitted uses. Within the public precinct, permitted uses and structures
are as set forth in
Table 21-9.6(A). Additionally:
(1)   In the public precinct, public facilities may include accessory
activities operated by private lessees under supervision of a public agency
solely to fulfill a governmental function, activity, or service for public
benefit and in accordance with public policy; and
(2)   All structures within the public precinct must comply with the guidelines
established by the urban design controls in
Exhibit 21-9.15.
(b)   Development standards. Uses and structures within the public precinct
must conform to the development standards set forth in
Table 21-9.6(B). The director shall approve FAR, height, and yard requirements
for structures.
(c)   Signs. The director shall approve signs, which must not exceed a total of
24 square feet in area.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.80-8) (Added by Ord. 99-12) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-9.80-9 Tables for permitted uses and structures, development standards and
project classification.
   Refer to
Table 21-9.6(A) for permitted uses and structures for each precinct. Refer to
Table 21-9.6(B) for development standards for each precinct. Refer to
Table 21-9.6(C) to determine whether specific categories of projects will be
classified as major, minor, or exempt.
(Added by Ord. 99-12)
Table 21-9.6(A)
Waikiki Special District Precinct Permitted Uses and Structures
Use or Structure Precinct
                 Apartment Resort Mixed- Use Public
Table 21-9.6(A)
Waikiki Special District Precinct Permitted Uses and Structures
Use or Structure                      Precinct
                                      Apartment        Resort Mixed- Use Public
Agricultural Uses
None
Residential Uses
Dwellings, multi-unit2                P                P
Group living, small State regulated   P*               P*
Group living, small not State         C*               C*
regulated
Group living, large                   C*               C*
Home occupation                       Ac*              Ac*
Public, Civic, and Institutional Uses
Accessory receive only antenna        Ac               Ac                Ac
Communication support structure       P*               P*                P*
Communication tower                   Cm               Cm                Cm
Dish antenna                          Cm               Cm                Cm
Meeting facility                      C                P
Public facility                       P                P                 P
School, vocational, minor                              P
Utility, small                        P*               P*                P*
Utility, medium                       Cm               Cm                Cm
Utility, large                        C                C                 C
Commercial Uses
Bar, nightclub                                         P
Bed and breakfast home*               P*               P*
Daycare, adult                        C                P*
Daycare, child                        C                P*
Eating and drinking, general1         P-AMX            P
Hotel                                                  P
Marine, general, minor                                 P
Medical services, general             P-AMX            P
Medical laboratory                                     P
Office, general                       P-AMX            P
Parking, commercial                                    P
Parking, remote                       Cm               Cm
Personal services, general            P-AMX            P
Recreation, general indoor            C (Museums only) P
Recreation, general outdoor                            C
Retail, general, small, medium, or    P-AMX            P
large
Theater                                                P
Timeshare                                              P
Transient vacation unit               P*               P*
Vehicle fueling station
Vehicle sales and rental                               P
Miscellaneous Uses
Historic structure reuse              C                Cm                Cm
Joint development                     Cm               Cm
Ministerial uses:
Ac = Special accessory use. Also see: Article 10, Accessory use; and 21-5.50-3
(c), Home occupations
P = Permitted principal use
P* = Permitted use subject to standards in Article 5
P-AMX = Within the apartment precinct, a permitted principal use only within
the apartment mixed-use subprecinct
Discretionary uses:
Cm = Requires an approved conditional use permit - minor subject to standards
in Article 5; no public hearing required
C = Requires an approved conditional use permit - major subject to standards in
Article 5; public hearing required
Other:
N/A = Not applicable as a land use category in that precinct, since it is
already regulated under another land use category.
Note: An empty cell in the above matrix indicates that use or structure is not
permitted in that precinct.
1   Provided that a solid wall 6 feet in height is constructed and maintained
on any side or rear boundary adjoining the apartment precinct.
2   Provided that where these uses are integrated with other uses, pedestrian
access must be independent from the other uses, and no building floor may be
used for both dwelling and commercial purposes.
 
(Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 03-38, 11-30, 19-18, 22-7, 25-2)
Table 21-9.6(B)
Waikiki Special District Precinct Development Standards
Development Standard Precinct
                     Apartment Resort Mixed-Use Public
Table 21-9.6(B)
Waikiki Special District Precinct Development Standards
Development Standard         Precinct
                             Apartment        Resort Mixed-Use Public
Minimum lot area (square     10,000           10,000
feet)                                                          n/a
Minimum lot width and depth  50               50
(feet)
              Front          15 2             15—20 2        As approved by
Yards1 (feet) Side and rear  10 2             0—10 3         director

                             Lot Area (sq.    FAR Calculation
Maximum density (FAR)        ft.)
apartment precinct only 4, 5 Less than 20,000 FAR = (.00003 x lot area) + 1.3
                             20,000 or more   FAR = 1.9
Maximum density (FAR) other  n/a              1.0 5            As approved by
precincts                                                      director
                             FAR less than
Minimum open space (percent  1.5 = 35% of lot 0.00
of zoning lot)               FAR 1.5 or more
                             = 50% of lot                      n/a
Open space    Available      No               Yes – See §
bonus                                         21-9.80-6 (c)(1)
              Max FAR        n/a              3.5 5
                             Per zoning map and
Maximum height (feet)        Exhibit 21-9.15  or as provided
                             in §                             As approved by
                             21-9.80-4 (g)(3)                  director
Transitional height setbacks Per §           Per §
                             21-9.80-5 (c)(2) 21-9.80-6 (c)(2)
n/a = Not applicable
1   Except for necessary access drives and walkways, all yards shall be
landscaped.
2   An average of 20 feet for zoning lots fronting Kuhio Avenue, Kalakaua
Avenue, Ala Moana, and Ala Wai Boulevard within the resort mixed-use
precinct, and an average of 15 feet for all other zoning lots; provided that:
(1) the average yard may vary between the front property line and twice the
minimum front yard; provided that the yard area street-side of the required
yard is equal to the yard area behind the required yard; (2) the yard
configuration shall be integrated to the extent feasible with yards and open
spaces provided by adjoining lots; and (3) the undulation of the setback line
shall result in a design acceptable by the director (see
Figure 21-9.1). In the apartment precinct, required yards on lots that are
less than 10,000 square feet in area may be adjusted as follows: (1) porches
and entry canopies may project into the required yards by up to 5 feet; and
(2) the minimum side and rear yard for buildings that are lower than 40 feet
in height is 5 feet, plus 1 foot additional setback for every 4 feet for
building height above 20 feet.
3   Except for zoning lots adjoining an apartment precinct, side and rear
yards shall not be required. Ten feet where a zoning lot adjoins an apartment
precinct, unless there is a parking structure or lot on the adjacent
apartment precinct zoning lot located within 10 feet of the common property
line for more than 75% of the length of the common property line. In this
case, there shall not be a required yard.
4   See §
21-9.80-5(c)(1) for commercial use location standards within the apartment
mixed-use subprecinct.
5   In computing the permissible floor area, the FAR may be applied to the
zoning lot area, plus one-half the abutting right-of-way area of any public
street or alley. Portions of buildings devoted to lanais and balconies shall
not count as floor area.
 
(Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 03-38, 11-30)
Table 21-9.6(C)
Waikiki Special District Project Classification
Activity/Use Required Permit Special Conditions
Table 21-9.6(C)
Waikiki Special District Project Classification
Activity/Use                              Required Special Conditions
                                          Permit
Signs                                     E         
Tree removal over 6 inches in diameter    m/E      Minor only when visible from a street, park, or other
                                                   public viewing area; otherwise exempt
Single-unit, two-unit, and duplex-unit    E         
dwellings
Grading and stockpiling                   E         
Major modification, alteration, repair,   M         
or addition to historic structures
Minor modification, alteration, repair,   m         
or addition to historic structures
Major exterior repair, alteration, or     m         
addition to nonhistoric structures
Minor exterior repair, alteration, or
addition to nonhistoric structures, that  E         
does not adversely change the character
or appearance of the structure
Planned development projects (PD-R and    M        Prior council approval of conceptual plan required. See §
PD-A)                                              21-9.80-4 (d)(4)
Permitted uses and structures under §§
21-9.80-4 (a), uses and activities                 Major for the reconstruction of existing nonconforming
allowed in required yards and setbacks;            structures and/or adjustment of open space, off-street
21-9.80-4 (e), nonconformity; and         M/m      parking, and/or height provided for nonconforming
21-9.80-4 (g)(1), rooftop height                   structures under §
exemption; when not otherwise covered by           21-9.80-4 (e)(1)
this table
Exterior repainting that significantly             Major for murals exceeding length or width dimensions of 12
changes the character or appearance of    M/m      feet
the structure
Interior repairs, alterations, and        E         
renovations to all structures
Demolition of historic structures         M         
Demolition of nonhistoric structures      m/E      Minor only when structure is over 50 years old; otherwise
                                                   exempt
Fences and walls                          E         
Streetscape improvements, including
street furniture, light fixtures,         m         
sidewalk paving, bus shelters, and other
elements in public rights-of-way
Major above-grade infrastructure*
improvements not covered elsewhere,
including new roadways, road widenings,   m         
new substations, new parks, and
significant improvements to existing
parks
Minor above-grade infrastructure*
improvements not covered elsewhere; all
below-grade infrastructure improvements;  E         
and all emergency and routine repair and
maintenance work
New buildings not covered above           M/m      Minor for accessory structures
*Notes:
“Infrastructure” includes roadways, sewer, water, electrical, gas, cable television, telephone, drainage, and
recreational facilities.
   A special district permit is not required for activities and uses classified as exempt, as well as other
project types which do not fall into one of the categories listed above. These activities and uses, however,
must still conform to the applicable objectives and standards of the special district. This conformance will
be determined at the building permit application stage.
Legend—Project classification:
M = Major
m = Minor
E = Exempt
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.80-9) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 03-38,
25-2)
§ 21-9.90 Haleiwa special district.
   Established in the late 1800s, Haleiwa town provides a historical encounter
with a rural commercial setting which is an integral part of Hawaii's history.
It is necessary to preserve and enhance its plantation era character. By
designating a special district, it is intended that the character of future
developments be compatible with that of the existing community.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.90) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 18-44)
§ 21-9.90-1 Objectives.
   The objectives of the Haleiwa special district are to:
(a)   Preserve and enhance Haleiwa's existing rural low-rise, human-scaled form
and character, especially along Kamehameha Highway and Haleiwa Road;
(b)   Preserve and restore to the extent possible buildings and sites of
scenic, historic, cultural, or architectural significance, and encourage new
development that is compatible with and complements those buildings and sites,
primarily through low building heights, appropriate period design features, and
subdued materials and plantation color schemes;
(c)   As entry points to Haleiwa, Weed Junction and Anahulu Bridge should be
given special attention through landscaping and painting embellishment,
respectively;
(d)   Encourage new development that will complement the significant physical
features, waterways, open space, mature trees, and sites in Haleiwa;
(e)   Retain a distinctive pedestrian-oriented commercial area for residents
and visitors;
(f)   Provide for safe and pleasant pedestrian and vehicular circulation;
(g)   Enhance the attractiveness and general landscaped open space character of
the area;
(h)   Preserve and enhance significant views in Haleiwa, especially those of
the Waianae Range and of the ocean from Haleiwa Beach Park, within the highly
developed and heavily traveled areas; and
(i)   Provide public improvements such as roadways, street lights, street
furniture, and signage compatible with the rural character of the community,
rather than at conventional urban standards.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.90-1) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 18-44)
§ 21-9.90-2 District boundaries.
   The boundaries of the district are designated on
Exhibit 21-9.16. The district is generally composed of parcels abutting
Kamehameha Highway between Weed Junction south and Puaena Point north.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.90-2) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 18-44)
§ 21-9.90-3 Significant public views and resources.
   The following are significant views within the Haleiwa special district.
(a)   Views of Mount Kaala, the Waianae Range, Lokoea Pond, and Waialua Bay
from Kamehameha Highway.
(b)   Views of Anahulu Stream from Kamehameha Highway, at the old arched
Anahulu (“Haleiwa”) Bridge.
(c)   Views of Paukauila Stream, with landscaped buffer material, from
Kamehameha Highway.
(d)   Views of the ocean from Kamehameha Highway.
(e)   Views of other significant features delineated on
Exhibit 21-9.18.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.90-3) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 18-44)
§ 21-9.90-4 Design controls.
   Implementation of the district objectives shall consist primarily of use
restrictions, building height limitations, yard and landscaping requirements,
parking, architectural design requirements, choice of exterior colors, and sign
and exterior furniture design controls. Specific regulations are enumerated
below:
(a)   Permitted uses. All uses permitted in the respective underlying zoning
district are permitted in the Haleiwa special district;
(b)   Heights.
(1)   Permitted maximum heights of buildings and structures within the district
shall not exceed 30 feet, except as provided under subdivision (2). Where the
underlying zoning district has a lower height limit, the lower height limit
shall prevail;
(2)   The director may exempt the following architectural features from the
height regulations; provided that they are erected only to such height as is
necessary to accomplish the purpose which they serve, but in no case may they
exceed 12 feet above the maximum height limit. These building elements may be
exempted only if the director finds they do not obstruct any significant views
that are to be preserved, protected, and enhanced, and are consistent with the
intent and objectives of the Haleiwa special district:
(A)   Necessary mechanical appurtenances of the building on which they are
erected; provided that they are screened from view;
(B)   Necessary utilitarian features, including stairwell enclosures,
ventilators, and skylights;
(C)   Decorative or recreational features, including rooftop gardens, planter
boxes, parapet walls, or ornamental cornices;
(3)   Except for flagpoles and smokestacks, all items listed in §
21-4.60(c) shall also be exempt from the height provisions of this subsection;
(c)   Required yards.
(1)   The required front yard for any building or structure shall be 10 feet.
Ground level porches, walkways, roof canopies, or eaves for other than
residential structures may extend a maximum of 5 feet into the front yard;
(2)   Business uses and structures, except for service stations shall be
located at the front yard setback line for a minimum of 50 percent along the
front yard setback line; and
(3)   The minimum required setback for any new building or structure from any
significant waterways as identified on
Exhibit 21-9.18 shall be 20 feet as measured from the water’s edge;
(d)   Landscaping.
(1)   All required front yards shall be landscaped. A minimum 10-foot-wide
buffer landscape strip shall be provided for all service stations, between the
Kamehameha Highway property line or street setback lines, whichever is greater,
and the service lanes or area;
(2)   The setback area within 20 feet from any significant waterways shall be
maintained in an indigenous state. Additional planting material shall be
provided in this area to screen any new structures or parking and drive areas
as viewed from Kamehameha Highway. This requirement may be reduced for roadways
and access drives where visibility is required for the safety of vehicles and
pedestrians; and
(3)   Street trees shall be provided along Kamehameha Highway and Haleiwa Road
in an informal arrangement, planted within front yards or the sidewalk area,
and shall be a minimum 2-inch caliper. Species shall be chosen from the list
shown on
Exhibit 21-9.18. Number, spacing, and location of trees shall be determined by
the director;
(4)   Any tree 6 inches or greater in trunk diameter shall not be removed or
destroyed, except as follows:
(A)   The tree is not visible from any street, park, or other public viewing
area;
(B)   Appropriate development of the site cannot be achieved without removal of
the tree;
(C)   The tree is a hazard to the public safety or welfare;
(D)   The tree is dead, diseased, or otherwise irretrievably damaged; and
(E)   The applicant can demonstrate the tree is unnecessary due to overcrowding
of vegetation; and
(5)   Any tree removed which is visible from any street, park, or other public
viewing area shall be replaced by an approved tree of minimum 2-inch caliper or
by alternative approved landscaping material, unless the replacement results in
overcrowded vegetation. Where possible, trees proposed for removal shall be
relocated;
(e)   Parking.
   (1)    Open parking areas of five or more cars shall be screened from view
of Kamehameha Highway and adjacent lots and streets by fences, walls, earth
berms, depression, or landscaping a minimum of 48 inches high. This height may
be reduced, subject to review and approval of the director, where visibility is
required for the safety of vehicles and pedestrians;
(2)   All other landscaping requirements of §
21-4.70 shall apply;
(3)   Except for necessary access drives, parking and loading spaces shall be
prohibited in all required yards; and
(4)   Off-street parking and loading shall be located at the side and rear of
buildings only;
(f)    Architectural appearance and character.
(1)   General. The architectural form, scale, and character for new or
renovated structures and modifications of existing structures shall be similar
to the existing traditional building forms of Haleiwa. Typical characteristics
for business districts are low structures with sloped roof canopies or
overhanging second floors, false front facades or parapets, metal roofs, ground
floors with entrances to the street, wood porches, generous window openings,
and small-scale architectural detailing of facades;
(2)   Roofs. Roof projections or canopies shall be provided at the first floor
roof level along Kamehameha Highway. Roofs visible from Kamehameha Highway
shall have a minimum slope of 5 inches vertically to 12 inches horizontally.
Flat roofs are prohibited in the district except for screened portions to
accommodate mechanical equipment or enclosed by parapets or otherwise not
visible from within the district. Roof materials shall be limited to wood
shingles or shakes, patterned metal, patterned clay, or concrete tiles for all
sloping roofs visible from the district;
(3)   Sun control. Awnings shall be either roll up construction, or fixed and
projecting. They shall be subdued in color and pattern. Fixed commercially made
metal awnings or “modern style” sun control devices are not permitted, except
by approval of the director in accordance with the purpose and objectives of
the district;
(4)   Railings, fences, and walls. Within the front yard, railings and fences
shall be constructed from wood and refined in detail. Walls exceeding 36 inches
in height shall be set back a minimum of 18 inches along Kamehameha Highway and
Haleiwa Road and landscaped with vine or hedge planting or other approved
vegetation on the street side. The setback and landscaping requirement may be
waived by the director if the wall is moss rock or similar material;
(5)   Exterior lighting. Private light fixtures shall complement the character
of the architecture of the district. Lighting shall be subdued so as not to
produce glare to surrounding property and public viewing areas. Fluorescent or
high intensity lamps shall not be permitted;
(6)   Exterior wall materials. Wall materials shall be subdued and visually
compatible with existing materials. Materials should be selected to weather and
mature with time and exposure such as stained or natural finish wood, coral,
lava rock, wattled stucco, field stone and concrete with exposed aggregates, or
wood impressions. Board and batten or board on board wood siding walls are
particularly encouraged;
(7)   Colors. Colors for all materials must be natural or earth tones in
subdued ranges and combinations, or those that reflect traditional plantation
or historical colors. Colors for architectural trim or accent are not subject
to this limitation;
(8)   Street facades.
(A)   A minimum of 50 percent of the area of the first floor street facade for
business uses shall be devoted to windows and entrances. The area shall be
measured along the length of the first floor street facade to a height of 8
feet from the finish grade; and
(B)   All glass on street facades shall be transparent and untinted;
(9)   Walkways. Private walkway and sidewalk material shall be visually
compatible with natural materials such as wood planks or concrete with wood
impressions or exposed aggregate; and
(10)   Exceptions. Exceptions to the above requirements for architectural
appearance and character may be approved by the director if adequate
justification for the exception is submitted and the exception requested is
consistent with the objectives of the Haleiwa special district.
(g)   Signs.
(1)   Signs shall be designed to enhance the historic and architectural
character of Haleiwa. An appropriate sign design would use a carved or
sandblasted wood sign with serif-style lettering typical of the turn of the
century, incorporating symbols when appropriate, and suspended from canopies or
mounted on the building wall;
(2)   Pole-mounted signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 10 feet;
(3)   Signs that are self-illuminating, with moving parts, luminous paints, or
reflective materials are not permitted. Any illumination may be from a detached
source shielded from direct view. Box fluorescent signs shall not be allowed;
(4)   Notwithstanding the provisions for ground signs under
Article 7, one ground sign, not directly illuminated, per zoning lot for
identification or directory purposes may be permitted in the required 10-foot
front yard, if there are more than three establishments. If it is used as a
directory sign for more than three establishments, a maximum 18-square-foot
ground sign is permitted;
(5)   A second business sign on the building frontage for each ground floor
establishment may be allowed; provided that the sign is a hanging or projecting
sign; and
(6)   In lieu of the second business sign described above, a garden sign may be
permitted within the required front yard for each ground floor establishment
with building frontage; provided that parking is not located within the front
yard. Garden signs shall be spaced a minimum of 50 feet apart;
(h)   Exterior furniture. Any exterior furniture located within the public
right-of-way by a public agency, or on private property by an owner, lessee, or
tenant, shall be designed to enhance the rural character of Haleiwa and shall
be subject to approval by the director; and
(i)   Drive-thru facilities.
(1)   Required off-street parking shall be provided on site;
(2)   Left turns out of a drive-thru lane onto Kamehameha Highway shall be
prohibited;
(3)   The service area for customers shall be at the rear or side of the
structure;
(4)   Queuing vehicles on drive-thru lanes shall be screened from view of
Kamehameha Highway by appropriate landscaping. The director shall approve the
landscaping plan;
(5)   Drive-thru lanes shall be of a length sufficient to ensure that waiting
vehicles do not obstruct traffic on Kamehameha Highway;
(6)   Drive-thru operations shall cease by 10:00 p.m.;
(7)   Drive-thru facilities shall only be permitted on zoning lots along
Kamehameha Highway:
(A)   Between Weed Junction and the cane haul road; and
(B)   Between the northern boundary of the Haleiwa special district and Anahulu
Bridge; and
(8)   No portion of any drive-thru facility shall be located within 2,000 feet
of another drive-thru facility.
(j)   Mobile commercial establishments. Mobile commercial establishments are
subject to the following regulations:
(1)   For the purposes of this section, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Mobile Commercial Establishment. A vehicle, with current registration and
safety check, used by an itinerant vendor, peddler, or huckster for the sale of
food products or other wares. This includes but is not limited to lunch wagons,
lunch vans, and food trucks. Excluded are vendors at farmers’ markets, fun
fairs, special community events, or other special events where mobile
commercial establishments are not the majority of the event and are managed by
a regulatory entity. Any vehicle without a current registration and safety
check that is used by an itinerant vendor, peddler, or huckster for the sale of
food products or other wares will be considered a structure;
(2)   Mobile commercial establishments are permitted only on business-zoned
lots;
(3)   A minimum of five off-street parking stalls is required for each mobile
commercial establishment;
(4)   A zoning lot with three or more mobile commercial establishments is
allowed one ground sign for directory purposes, subject to the requirements of
this chapter;
(5)   Mobile commercial establishments must comply with the color requirements
of subsection (f)(7). The name of the mobile commercial establishment may be
displayed on the vehicle, subject to the color requirements;
(6)   A mobile commercial establishment must operate on areas where an all-
weather surface is provided, outside of the yard areas required in subsection
(c);
(7)   All mobile commercial establishments require a special district permit,
which must be site specific. The special district permit for mobile commercial
establishments must provide for the following:
(A)   Adequate restroom facilities for employees. Permanent restroom facilities
with wastewater systems are preferred. Portable restroom facilities, if any,
must be screened from view of Kamehameha Highway;
(B)   A traffic circulation and mitigation plan, parking management plan, and
pedestrian circulation plan;
(C)   Operating hours must end no later than 10:00 p.m. daily;
(D)   Compliance with all mobile commercial establishment and special district
regulations and requirements;
(8)   Mobile commercial establishments in legal operation prior to December 21,
2018 that do not meet the requirements of this subsection may continue
operating as a nonconforming use pursuant to §
21-4.110(c) until such time that the mobile commercial establishment obtains a
special district permit consistent with this subsection; provided that a mobile
commercial establishment must cease operation as a nonconforming use upon any
action taken by an owner, lessee, or authorized operator to transfer any
interest in the mobile commercial establishment to a third party;
(9)   Mobile commercial establishments are permitted only on zoning lots along
Kamehameha Highway:
(A)   Between Weed Junction and Paalaa Road; and
(B)   Between Achiu Lane and Amara Road;
provided that no zoning lot on which a mobile commercial establishment operates
may be located within 1,500 feet of another zoning lot on which a mobile
commercial establishment operates. This subdivision does not apply to zoning
lots on which a mobile commercial establishment operated prior to December 21,
2018.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.90-4) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 02-19,
18-44)
§ 21-9.90-5 Dwelling units.
   Single-unit, two-unit, and duplex-unit dwellings constructed prior to
December 21, 2018, are exempt from the requirements of the Haleiwa special
district, except for §
21-9.90-4(d)(3), (d)(4), and (d)(5), relating to landscaping, §
21-9.90-4(f)(1) relating to general architectural appearance and character, §
21-9.90-4(f)(2) relating to roofs, §
21-9.90-4(f)(4) relating to railings, fences, and walls, and §
21-9.90-4(f)(7) relating to colors. Single- unit, two-unit, and duplex-unit
dwellings constructed after December 21, 2018, will fall under the category
“New buildings not covered above” in
Table 21-9.7.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.90-5) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 18-44,
25-2)
§ 21-9.90-6 Project classification.
(a)   Refer to
Table 21-9.7 to determine whether specific projects will be classified as
major, minor, or exempt.
(b)   Projects involving demolition or relocation of structures listed on
Exhibit 21-9.17, set out at the end of this article, may be referred to
appropriate public or private agencies for review, which may include submittal
for review to the State historic preservation office to investigate public and
private alternatives to preserve buildings of scenic, historic, cultural, or
architectural significance consistent with the legislative intent and
objectives of this ordinance. If required, such review shall not exceed a
period of 90 days, and shall precede acceptance of the application for a
special district permit.
(Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ord. 18-44)
Table 21-9.7
Haleiwa Special District Project Classification
Activity/Use Required Permit Special Conditions
Table 21-9.7
Haleiwa Special District Project Classification
Activity/Use                    Required Permit Special Conditions
Signs                           E                
Tree removal over 6 inches in                   Minor only if visible from
diameter                        m/E             Kamehameha Highway or Haleiwa
                                                Road
Single-unit, two-unit, and
duplex-unit dwellings, and      E                
accessory structures
Grading and stockpiling         E                
Major modification, alteration,                 Major if listed on
repair, or addition to all      M/m             Exhibit 21-9.17 or if visible
structures                                      from Kamehameha Highway or
                                                Haleiwa Road
Minor modification, alteration,                 Also includes structures on
repair, or addition to historic m               Exhibit 21-9.17
structures
Exterior repainting that                        Minor if listed on
significantly alters the        m/E             Exhibit 21-9.17 or visible from
character or appearance of the                  Kamehameha Highway or Haleiwa
structure                                       Road
Minor exterior repair,
alteration, or addition to
nonhistoric structures, which   E                
does not adversely change the
character or appearance of the
structure
Interior repairs, alterations,
and renovations to all          E                
structures
Demolition or obstruction of    M               Also includes structures on
historic structures                             Exhibit 21-9.17
Demolition of nonhistoric       E                
structures
Fences and walls                E                
Streetscape improvements,
including street furniture,
light fixtures, sidewalk        m                
paving, bus shelters, and other
elements in public rights-of-
way
Major above-grade
infrastructure* improvements
not covered elsewhere,
including cell towers, new      m                
roadways, new substations, new
parks, and significant
improvements to existing parks
Minor above-grade
infrastructure* improvements
not covered elsewhere; all
below-grade infrastructure      E                
improvements; and all emergency
and routine repair and
maintenance work
New buildings not covered above                 Major if visible from
and mobile commercial           M/m             Kamehameha Highway or Haleiwa
establishments                                  Road
Drive-thru facilities           m                
*Notes:
“Infrastructure” includes roadways, sewer, water, electrical, gas, cable
television, telephone, drainage, and recreational facilities.
   A special district permit is not required for activities and uses classified
as exempt, as well as other project types which do not fall into one of the
categories listed above. These activities and uses, however, must still conform
to the applicable objectives and standards of the special district. This
conformance will be determined at the building permit application stage.
Legend—Project classification:
M = Major
m = Minor
E = Exempt
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.90-6) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 02-19,
18-44, 25-2)
§ 21-9.100 Transit-oriented development (TOD) special district.
(a)   The purpose of this section is to establish a TOD special district
surrounding rail stations to encourage appropriate transit-oriented
development.
(b)   The regulations applicable in the TOD special district are in addition to
underlying zoning district regulations and, if applicable, special district
regulations, and may supplement and modify the underlying regulations. If any
regulation pertaining to the TOD special district conflicts with any underlying
zoning district or special district regulation, the regulation applicable to
the TOD special district will take precedence.
(c)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Active Ground Floor Activities. Those uses and activities that will encourage
pedestrian movement and activate the ground floor of buildings, including
retail establishments, restaurants, personal service establishments, offices,
financial institutions, lobbies for hotels or multi-unit dwelling uses,
galleries, theaters, and other similar uses and activities.
Bike-Walk Greenway. Shared-use paths or trails for pedestrians, cyclists, and
other users of non-motorized transportation modes within or adjacent to a TOD
special district. Certain development standards will apply only to those zoning
lots that abut the bike-walk greenway. Bike-walk greenways are identified on
the exhibits set forth at the end of this article.
Community Benefits. Those project elements that will mitigate impacts of
greater heights or greater density or modifications to TOD special district
development standards. Examples of community benefits include affordable
housing, open space, parks, right-of-way improvements, financial contributions
to existing community amenities or public uses, and facilities that enhance the
pedestrian experience or improve multimodal transportation.
IPD-T. An interim planned development-transit project pursuant to §
21-9.100-5.
Key Streets. Streets within a TOD special district that are most vital to
facilitating a walkable, vibrant, economically active neighborhood in the
direct vicinity of a rail station. Certain development standards will apply
only to those zoning lots fronting a designated key street. The key streets are
identified on the exhibits set forth at the end of this article.
Nonconforming Site Development. A zoning lot with structures or uses that
comply with underlying zoning district standards, but are not in conformance
with all of the standards of the TOD special district, including but not
limited to building location, yard and setback requirements, street facades,
building orientation and entrances, parking lot design and location, and
bicycle parking.
PD-T.  A planned development-transit project pursuant to §
21-9.100-10.
Rail Station.  An existing or planned rail station identified in the Honolulu
Rail Transit Project Environmental Impact Statement, accepted by the Governor
of the State of Hawaii on December 16, 2010.
Setback. The distance from the property line to the front facade of a building.
Street Tree Plan. A street tree planting plan approved in accordance with the
city “Standards and Procedures for the Planting of Street Trees.”
TOD. Transit-oriented development.
TOD Development Regulations. The regulations establishing the permitted uses
and structures and development standards within a TOD special district, which
will be established by the council by ordinance, pursuant to this section. TOD
development regulations may include provisions specific to certain rail station
areas.
TOD Special District. That area surrounding rail stations along the rail
alignment and designated in §
21-9.100-12. Lands within a TOD special district are subject to TOD development
regulations.
TOD Station Area or Station Area. The parcels of land around a rail station
subject to the TOD development regulations. Generally, the TOD station area
will consist of that land within approximately 0.5 miles of the related rail
station, which is roughly the distance of a 5- to 10- minute walk from the
station, as identified on the exhibits set forth at the end of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.100) (Added by Ord. 09-4; Am. Ords. 17-54,
22-29 , 25-2)
§ 21-9.100-1 TOD special district findings.
(a)   The city’s rail transit system represents a significant investment by the
community to improve mobility and re-shape the urban form. TOD regulations will
support the use of multimodal transportation with the creation of vibrant,
mixed-use developments, and quality community gathering places around transit
stations.
(b)   Development along the transit corridor that contains a cohesive and rich
mix of uses and a variety of housing types can support the public investment in
rail transit and direct a large portion of Oahu’s future population growth to
the rail corridor, reducing pressures to develop in rural agricultural lands,
open spaces, and suburban residential areas.
(c)   Therefore, it is necessary to establish special controls and allowances
that respond to the unique characteristics of TOD and shape development around
transit stations to foster more livable communities, respond to local
conditions, take full advantage of transit, and support the public’s
investment.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.100-1) (Added by Ord. 09-4; Am. Ord. 17-54)
§ 21-9.100-2 Neighborhood TOD plans.
(a)   For each TOD station area or combination of station areas, the department
shall prepare a neighborhood TOD plan, which serves as the basis for the
creation of or amendment to the TOD special district and the TOD development
regulations applicable thereto. Each neighborhood TOD plan must address, at
minimum, the following:
(1)   The general objectives for a specific TOD station area in terms of
overall economic revitalization, neighborhood character, and unique community
historic and other design themes. Objectives must summarize the desired
neighborhood mix of land uses, general land use intensities, circulation
strategies, general urban design forms, and cultural and historic resources
that form the context for TOD;
(2)   Parcels recommended to be included in the TOD special district, taking
into account natural topographic barriers, extent of market interest in
redevelopment, and the benefits of transit, including the potential to increase
rail and bus transit ridership;
(3)   Recommended zoning controls, including architectural and community design
principles, open space requirements, parking standards, and other modifications
to existing zoning requirements, or the establishment of new zoning districts
or special district precincts, as appropriate, including density incentives.
Prohibition of specific uses must be considered. Form-based zoning may be
considered;
(4)   Preservation of existing affordable housing and potential opportunities
for new affordable housing, with supportive services as appropriate;
(5)   Preservation of existing healthcare services. For the purposes of this
subdivision, “healthcare services” means the furnishing of medicine, medical or
surgical treatment, nursing, hospital service, dental service, optometrical
service, complementary health services, or any other necessary services of like
character intended to prevent, alleviate, cure, or heal human illness, physical
disability, or injury;
(6)   Preservation and protection of Native Hawaiian cultural and historic
resources, including cultural, historic, and pre-contact sites and monuments;
(7)   Mitigating gentrification of the community;
(8)   Consideration of flood hazards, including coastal hazards such as sea
level rise, which may affect neighborhood infrastructure and land; and
(9)   The general direction on implementation of the recommendations, including
the phasing, timing, and approximate cost of each recommendation, as
appropriate, and new financing opportunities that may be pursued.
(b)   The process of creating neighborhood TOD plans must be inclusive, open to
residents, businesses, landowners, community organizations, government
agencies, and others.
(c)   The process must consider population, economic, and market analyses, and
infrastructure analyses, including capacities of water, wastewater, and roadway
systems. Where appropriate, public-private partnership opportunities must be
explored.
(d)   The neighborhood TOD plan must be consistent with the applicable regional
development plan.
(e)   To the extent practical, the neighborhood TOD plan must be consistent
with any applicable special area plan or community master plan, or make
recommendations for revisions to these plans.
(f)   The neighborhood TOD plan must be submitted to the council and approval
of the plan must be by council resolution, with or without amendments.
(g)   The primary design objectives of the Waipahu Neighborhood TOD Plan are as
follows:
(1)   Maintain Waipahu’s heritage as a former sugar plantation town in the
Pouhala (Waipahu Transit Center) station area;
(2)   Maintain the area’s low-rise character and wide range of uses;
(3)   Retain the area’s historic low-rise character, while providing new
retail, office, and residential opportunities in a walkable, mixed-use setting
in the areas along Waipahu Depot Street and Farrington Highway;
(4)   Concentrate development in the Hoaeae (West Loch) station area in the
area adjacent to the rail station along Farrington Highway and Leoole Street;
and
(5)   Encourage a higher-density commercial center with mixed-use buildings
along Farrington Highway, while Leoole and Leoku Streets serve as pedestrian-
oriented streets with active ground floor activities and pedestrian access to
the Pearl Harbor Historic Trail.
(h)   The primary design objectives of the Aiea-Pearl City Neighborhood TOD
Plan are as follows:
(1)   Develop the Kalauao (Pearlridge) station area as a major urban center and
regional destination with opportunities for new high-density residential and
commercial development that enhance access and views to the area’s natural
features;
(2)   Preserve views of Pearl Harbor from Kaonohi Street;
(3)   Create additional housing units, improved access and amenities along the
Pearl Harbor Historic Trail, and new waterfront open spaces in the area makai
of Kamehameha Highway;
(4)   Transform the existing parking lots and low-density commercial uses near
the Waiawa (Pearl Highlands) station area into a walkable, pedestrian-oriented
environment by allowing new high-density development;
(5)   Promote the area as an attractive place to live and work by emphasizing
and improving amenities like the Pearl Harbor Historic Trail, the University of
Hawaii Urban Garden Center, and the wide variety of local shopping and dining;
(6)   Improve access to regional transportation options, especially pedestrian
and bicycle access to the Pearl Harbor Historic Trail from public streets; and
(7)   Promote the vision of the Halaulani (Leeward Community College) station
area as a college-oriented neighborhood.
(i)   The primary design objectives of the Halawa Area Neighborhood TOD Plan
are as follows:
(1)   Develop a TOD-oriented sports and entertainment district tied to a
stadium in the Halawa (Aloha Stadium) station area;
(2)   Establish a gateway corridor connecting the rail station and stadium; and
(3)   Concentrate an eclectic mix of street-level retail with consistent
frontage along Salt Lake Boulevard.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.100-2) (Added by Ord. 09-4; Am. Ords. 17-20,
17-54, 22-29 , 23-32)
§ 21-9.100-3 Processing of proposed ordinances establishing the TOD special
district and development regulations applicable thereto.
   If the council approves a neighborhood TOD plan, with or without amendments,
the director shall submit to the planning commission a proposed ordinance
establishing the TOD special district or expanding the existing special
district to include the applicable station area(s) and the TOD development
regulations applicable thereto.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.100-3) (Added by Ord. 09-4; Am. Ord. 17-54)
§ 21-9.100-4 TOD development regulations minimum requirements.
   The TOD development regulations for the TOD special district must include
but need not be limited to the following:
(a)   Allowances for a mix of land uses, both vertically and horizontally,
including affordable housing;
(b)   Density and building height limits that may be tied to the provision of
community amenities, such as public open space, affordable housing, and
community meeting space;
(c)   Elimination or reduction of the number of required off-street parking
spaces, including expanded allowances for joint use of parking spaces;
(d)   Design provisions that encourage use of rapid transit, buses, bicycling,
walking, and other non-automobile forms of transport that are safe and
convenient;
(e)   Guidelines on building orientation and parking location, including
bicycle parking;
(f)   Identification of important neighborhood historic, scenic, and cultural
landmarks, and controls to protect and enhance these resources;
(g)   Design controls that require human-scale architectural elements at the
ground and lower levels of buildings;
(h)   Landscaping requirements that enhance the pedestrian experience, support
station identity, and complement adjacent structures; and
(i)   Incentives and accompanying procedures to encourage appropriate and
necessary transit-oriented development, which may include minimum standards,
financial incentives, and considerations relating to the ability to contribute
positively to the economic enhancement of the affected area and the city,
particularly with regard to providing a broad mix of uses, diverse housing, and
diverse employment opportunities.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.100-4) (Added by Ord. 09-4; Am. Ord. 17-54)
§ 21-9.100-5 Interim planned development-transit (IPD-T) projects.
(a)   The purpose of the IPD-T permit is to provide opportunities for creative,
catalytic redevelopment projects and public housing projects within the rail
corridor that would not be possible under a strict adherence to the development
standards of this chapter before the adoption of the TOD neighborhood plans or
amendments to this chapter relating to the future TOD special districts, or
both.
Qualifying projects must demonstrably exhibit those kinds of attributes that
are capable of promoting highly effective transit-enhanced neighborhoods,
including diverse employment opportunities, an appropriate mix of housing
types, support for multimodal circulation, and well-designed publicly
accessible and usable spaces. Flexibility may be provided for project uses,
density, height and height setbacks, yards, open space, landscaping,
streetscape improvements, parking and loading, and signage when timely,
demonstrable contributions are incorporated into the project benefitting the
community, supporting transit ridership, and implementing the vision
established in §
21-9.100-4. Reflective of the significance of the flexibility represented by
this option, it is appropriate to approve projects conceptually by legislative
review and approval before a more detailed administrative review and approval
by the department. For the purposes of this section, “public housing project”
means a residential or mixed-use development with a significant affordable
housing component undertaken by the Hawaii Public Housing Authority or other
State or city agency that develops public housing, their lessee, or their
designated developer pursuant to a partnership or development agreement.
Prior to the adoption of TOD special district standards, proposed development
on sites with at least portions of an eligible zoning lot that are within no
more than one-half mile of a future rail station identified in the Honolulu
Rail Transit Project (HRTP) Environmental Impact Statement (EIS), accepted by
the Governor of the State of Hawaii on December 16, 2010, and any future
supplemental EISs for the project, may qualify for an IPD-T permit in the
interim, subject to the provisions of this section.
For the purposes of this section, "draft neighborhood TOD plan" means the most
current version of the plan then under consideration by the department or the
council, commencing with the first public review draft released by the director
to the community for review and comment. Council committee drafts of a plan are
deemed under consideration by the council after they have been placed on a full
council agenda for adoption. Council floor drafts of a plan are deemed under
consideration by the council after the council has amended the plan to the
floor draft version.
(b)   Eligible zoning lots. IPD-T projects may be permitted on zoning lots that
meet the following standards:
(1)   The zoning lot must be located within the proposed TOD special district
as shown in the maps and figures for the applicable neighborhood TOD plan;
(2)   For public housing projects, a portion of a zoning lot must be within 1
mile of a rail station;
(3)   The minimum project size is 20,000 square feet. Multiple zoning lots may
be part of a single IPD-T project if the owners, lessees, developers, or other
designated representatives, including but not limited to a board or association
of homeowners, condominium owners, timeshare owners, or cooperative housing
owners, in lieu of individual owners, consent. Zoning lots may be added to or
removed from existing IPD-T projects upon the application of the owners,
lessees, developers or other designated representatives of the zoning lots to
be added or removed with the written consent of the original applicant for the
existing IPD-T project, or its successor. Applications for the addition or
removal of zoning lots will be processed in accordance with other applicable
regulations of this chapter. Zoning lots to be removed from an IPD-T project
must comply with all zoning regulations applicable to that zoning lot separate
from the IPD-T project. Multiple zoning lots in a single IPD-T project must be
contiguous; provided that zoning lots that are not contiguous may be part of a
single IPD-T project if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
(A)   The zoning lots are not contiguous solely because they are separated by a
street or right-of-way, so that if the street were to be removed, the zoning
lots would be adjacent to each other; and
(B)   Each noncontiguous portion of the IPD-T project site, whether composed of
a single zoning lot or multiple contiguous zoning lots, has a minimum area of
10,000 square feet.
When an IPD-T project consists of noncontiguous zoning lots as provided in this
subdivision, pedestrian walkways, improved streetscapes, or functional design
features connecting the separated lots are strongly encouraged to unify the
project site. Multiple zoning lots that are part of an approved single IPD-
T project will be considered and treated as one zoning lot for purposes of the
project, without requiring separate approval for consolidation of the zoning
lots pursuant to
Chapter 22;
(4)   The IPD-T project site must be entirely within the state-designated urban
district;
(5)   All eligible zoning lots must be within the apartment, apartment mixed-
use, business, business mixed-use, resort, industrial, or industrial-commercial
mixed-use districts; provided that this subdivision does not apply to landscape
lots, right-of-way lots, or other lots used for similar utilitarian
(infrastructure) purposes; and
(6)   The TOD special district will be established incrementally, with station
areas being added to the TOD special district as the council approves the
neighborhood TOD plans and as the subsequent TOD special district regulations
are added to this chapter to reflect each TOD station area. Upon the
establishment of the TOD special district and its related development
regulations, all zoning lots within the station areas that are added to the TOD
special district will no longer be eligible for an IPD-T permit, but must
henceforth comply with all applicable TOD special district regulations and
requirements set forth in this chapter; provided that any application for an
IPD-T project that has received council approval of its conceptual plan before
the date of enactment of the ordinance expanding the TOD special district to
the station area where the project site is located will continue to be
processed under and be subject to this section and the applicable use and
development standards allowed under the approved conceptual plan.
(c)   Review criteria.
(1)   The IPD-T option offers developers opportunities to increase development
potential; provided that the project demonstrates and provides community
benefits and equitable contributions that benefit the general public, the
transit system, and TOD.
(2)   Significant flexibility and the possibility of increased development
potential are available to eligible IPD-T projects. The degree of flexibility
must be commensurate with the contributions that a project may provide towards
the enhancement of highly effective transit-enhanced neighborhoods,
particularly as these contributions relate to the success of TOD. The highest
degree of flexibility may be authorized by an IPD-T permit for those projects
that demonstrate the standards set forth in §
21-9.100-8(a)(1)(E) and §
21-9.100-9(b). When an applicant seeks to exceed the base height or density
through an IPD-T permit, the conclusions set forth in §
21-9.100-8(a)(1)(F) must be reached.
(3)   Unless otherwise specified in this section, IPD-T projects must be
generally consistent with:
(A)   The approved neighborhood TOD plan for the affected area; or
(B)   If the neighborhood TOD plan has not yet been approved, the draft
neighborhood TOD plan at the time the application for the principal project is
submitted to the department and accepted as complete.
(d)   Use regulations.
(1)   Permitted uses and structures for all zoning districts other than the
BMX-4 central business mixed-use zoning district may be any of those uses
permitted in the BMX-3 community business mixed-use zoning district; provided
that lodging uses are not permitted on any zoning lot unless they are otherwise
in compliance with the standards enumerated by § 21-5.70-3(b), or on a zoning
lot within the Convention Center Subdistrict of the Ala Moana neighborhood TOD
plan;
(2)   Permitted uses and structures in the BMX-4 central business mixed-use
zoning district will be as specified in
Table 21-5.1; and
(3)   Ground floors and pedestrian-accessible spaces should be used to the
extent feasible for active uses, including but not limited to outdoor dining,
retail, gathering places, and pedestrian-oriented commercial activity. These
spaces should also provide public accommodations, including but not limited to
benches and publicly accessible seating, shaded areas through either trees or
built structures, publicly accessible restrooms, trash and recycling
receptacles, facilities for recharging electronic devices, publicly accessible
telecommunications facilities, and Wi-Fi service.
(e)   Site development and design standards. The standards set forth in this
subsection are general requirements for IPD-T projects. When, in the
subdivisions below, the standards are stated to be subject to modification or
reduction, the modification or reduction must be for the purpose of
accomplishing a project design consistent with the goals and objectives of §
21-9.100-4 and this subsection. In addition, pursuant to subsection (b), the
modification or reduction in the following standards must be commensurate with
the contributions and community benefits provided in the project plan, and the
project must be generally consistent with the draft or approved neighborhood
TOD plan for the area, unless otherwise specified in this subsection.
(1)   Density.
(A)   The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) may be up to twice that allowed by the
underlying zoning district or 7.5, whichever is lower; provided that where a
draft or approved neighborhood TOD plan identifies greater density for the
site, a project on that site may seek the specified density contained in the
plan;
(B)   For public housing projects as defined in subsection (a), the FAR may not
exceed 7.5; provided that if the maximum FAR under the draft or approved
neighborhood TOD plan is greater than 7.5, then the FAR specified in the plan
will prevail; and
(C)   For lots in the B-2, BMX-3, BMX-4, and IMX-1 districts, the maximum
increase will apply in addition to any eligible density bonuses for the
underlying zoning district; that is, the FAR may be doubled after any FAR
bonuses for public open space or arcade space are added to the base FAR.
(2)   Height.
(A)   For project sites where there is no draft neighborhood TOD plan, the
maximum building height may be up to twice that allowed by the underlying
zoning district, or 450 feet, whichever is lower;
(B)   Where there is a draft or approved neighborhood TOD plan, the maximum
height may not exceed the maximum height specified in the plan; provided that
where existing height limits exceed those in the plan, the existing height
limit will prevail; and
(C)   For public housing projects as defined in this section, the maximum
building height may be up to 400 feet, unless the maximum height specified in
the draft or approved neighborhood TOD plan is higher, in which case the
maximum height specified in the plan will prevail.
(3)   Transitional height or street setbacks may be modified where adjacent
uses and street character will not be adversely affected.
(4)   Buildable area. Yards and the maximum building area must be as specified
by the approved conceptual project plan; provided that building placement will
not cause adverse noise, privacy, or wind effects to adjacent uses, and street
character will not be adversely affected.
(5)   Open space.
(A)   Project open space must be as specified in the approved conceptual
project plan, with a preference for publicly accessible, highly usable parks,
and gathering spaces rather than buffering or unusable landscaped areas.
(B)   Where appropriate, usable open space may be:
(i)   Transferred to another accessible site within the vicinity of the project
that will be used as a public park, plaza, or gathering place for the affected
community; or
(ii)   Provided in the form of connections or improvements, or both, to nearby
open spaces, pedestrian ways, or trails, including but not limited to
streetscape and intersection improvements, pedestrian walkways or bridges,
arcades, or promenades;
or both subparagraphs (i) and (ii).
(C)   Where public open space is being offered as a community benefit to
achieve height or density bonuses, required yards may be included in the
calculation and the landscaping requirement will be reduced to 20 percent of
the total area.
(6)   Landscaping and screening standards will be as specified in the approved
conceptual project plan and project landscaping must include adjacent rights-
of-way. Streetscape landscaping, including street trees or planting strips, or
both, should be provided near the edge of the street, rather than adjacent to
the building, unless infeasible.
(7)   Parking and loading standards are as follows:
(A)   The number of parking and loading spaces must be provided in accordance
with
Article 6;
(B)   Service areas and loading spaces must be located at the side or rear of
the site, unless the size and configuration of the lot renders this infeasible;
(C)   Vehicular access must be provided from an existing access or driveway, or
from a secondary street whenever possible and placed in the location least
likely to impede pedestrian circulation; and
(D)   The provision of car-sharing programs and electric vehicle charging
stations is encouraged.
(8)   Bicycle parking must be accommodated on the project site in accordance
with
Article 6.
(9)   Signs.  All projects must include appropriate measures to accommodate
TOD-related way-finding signage that will be considered "public signs" for
purposes of
Article 7.
(f)   Affordable housing requirements. All projects proposing the construction
or conversion of 10 or more for-sale dwelling units must satisfy the
requirements of
Chapter 29, as the same may be amended or superseded.
(g)   Community benefits.
(1)   Community benefits must be proposed in the IPD-T project application to
justify height and density bonuses, or to mitigate the impacts related to the
modification of TOD special district development standards.
(2)   Where community benefits are proposed, they must meet the standards set
forth in §
21-9.100-9(e).
(3)   For projects that include a hotel component, the community benefits
proposed in the IPD-T project application must include one or both of the
following:
(A)   Affordable housing provided in addition to any affordable housing
requirements applicable to the project under
Chapter 29. The affordable housing proposed as community benefits must meet the
following minimum requirements:
(i)   For-sale affordable dwelling units must be sold to households earning 120
percent and below of the AMI. At least one-half of those units must be sold to
households earning 100 percent and below of the AMI;
(ii)   For-rental affordable dwelling units must be rented to households
earning 80 percent and below of the AMI;
(iii)   The affordable dwelling units must remain affordable for a period of at
least 30 years;
(iv)   The affordable dwelling units must be marketed as provided in §
29-1.6 for affordable units required by
Chapter 29; and
(v)   Application of the department's affordable housing requirement rules,
including the room factor calculation, is required. If, after applying the room
factor, additional affordable dwelling units are required, the additional
required affordable dwelling units may not be created by dividing previously
proposed affordable dwelling units into more dwelling units; or
(B)   City multimodal transportation system improvements.
For purposes of this subdivision:
AMI. Has the same as meaning defined in §
29-1.2;
Hotel. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1, and includes condo-hotels owned under a condominium property regime;
and
City Multimodal Transportation System Improvements. Improvements associated
with the Honolulu rail transit system, the city bus transit system, or the city
special transit services. Improvements may include but are not limited to
easements on, over, and across private property; construction or maintenance of
rail transit stations or bus stations or stops; provision of informational or
directional signage; and monetary contributions to fund the cost of such
improvements.
(h)   Application requirements. An application for approval of an IPD-T project
must contain:
(1)   A project name;
(2)   A location map showing the project in relation to the future rail station
area and the surrounding area;
(3)   A site plan showing property lines, the locations of buildings and other
major structures, building access and activity zones, the proposed open space
and landscaping system, access and circulation for vehicles, bicycles, and
pedestrians, bus or trolley stops, and other major activities;
(4)   A narrative description of:
(A)   The overall development and urban design concept;
(B)   The general mix of uses;
(C)   The basic form and number of structures;
(D)   The relationship of buildings to each other and to the streets, and how
that is used to create active public space;
(E)   The estimated number of proposed public and private dwelling or lodging
units, affordability restrictions to be observed, and the proposed mix of
housing types;
(F)   General building height and density;
(G)   How the project achieves and positively contributes to TOD and transit-
enhanced neighborhoods;
(H)   Proposed public amenities and community benefits;
(I)   The planned development of usable, publicly accessible spaces,
accommodations, and landscaping;
(J)   How the project supports walking, bicycling, and active living;
(K)   Proposals to enhance multimodal circulation and access;
(L)   Proposed off-street parking and loading; and
(M)   Possible impacts on security, public health and safety, infrastructure,
and public utilities;
(5)   An open space plan, showing the reservation of land for public, semi-
public, and private open space, including parks, plazas, and playgrounds, and
an integrated circulation system indicating proposed movement of vehicles,
goods, pedestrians, and bicyclists within both the project area and adjacent
areas, including streets and driveways, sidewalks and pedestrian ways, bicycle
lanes, bicycle tracks, and multi-use paths, off-street parking, and loading
areas;
(6)   A narrative explanation of the project’s architectural and urban design
relating the various design elements to support pedestrian- and transit-
oriented development, and a discussion of any impacts to any cultural or
historic resources, as well as any public views protected by state or city
laws;
(7)   Details of the project, including proposed floor area, open space, open
space bonuses, and maximum FAR;
(8)   A parking and loading management plan or transportation demand management
plan, or both;
(9)   A wind and shadow study to analyze the effects of mid-rise and high-rise
structures, particularly anticipated effects at the ground level. Where adverse
effects are anticipated, mitigative measures must be included in the proposal;
(10)   A dollar amount estimate of:
(A)   The value of requested height bonuses;
(B)   The value of requested density bonuses; and
(C)   The cost to the developer for each category of proposed community
benefits;
accompanied by an explanation of how the values and costs were calculated.
(11)   Any other information deemed necessary by the director to ascertain
whether the project meets the requirements of this section.
(i)   Procedures. Applications for approval of IPD-T projects must be processed
in accordance with §
21-2.110-2. Fees will be as enumerated for planned development applications in
§
6-41.1(a)(19); provided that the fee will be waived for public housing
projects.
(j)   Conceptual plan for a project. No project will be eligible for IPD-
T status, unless the council, by resolution, has first approved a conceptual
plan for the project. The approved conceptual plan must set forth the allowable
uses and the site development and design standards for density, height,
transitional height or street setbacks, yards, open space, landscaping and
screening, parking and loading, bicycle parking, and signs, if the uses and
standards depart from the uses and standards applicable in the underlying
zoning district. If uses and standards are not otherwise specified, the uses
and standards applicable to the underlying zoning district apply.
(k)   Guidelines for review and approval of the conceptual plan for a project.
Before or concurrently with its approval of a conceptual plan for an IPD-
T project, the council shall find that the project concept, as a unified plan,
is in the general interest of the public, and that:
(1)   Requested project boundaries and requested flexibility with respect to
development standards and use regulations are consistent with the objectives of
TOD and the provisions enumerated in §
21-9.100-4 and this section as applicable;
(2)   Requested flexibility with respect to development standards and use
regulations is commensurate with the public amenities and community benefits
proposed; and
(3)   The public amenities proposed will produce timely, demonstrable benefits
to the community, support transit ridership, and implement the vision
established in §
21-9.100-4 and this section as applicable.
(l)   Deadline for obtaining building permit for project.
(1)   A council resolution for approval of a conceptual plan for an IPD-
T project must establish a deadline within which the building permit for the
project must be obtained. For multiphase projects, deadlines must be
established for obtaining building permits for each phase of the project. The
resolution must provide that the failure to obtain any building permit within
the prescribed period will render null and void the council’s approval of the
conceptual plan and all approvals issued thereunder; provided that in
multiphase projects, any prior phase that has complied with the deadline
applicable to that phase will not be affected. The reordering of phases is
permitted with the director’s approval as long as the overall completion
deadline for multiphase projects has not passed. A revocation of a building
permit pursuant to §
18-5.4 after the deadline will be deemed a failure to comply with the deadline.
(2)   The resolution must further provide that a deadline may be extended as
follows.
(A)   The director may extend the deadline if the applicant demonstrates good
cause, but the deadline may not be extended beyond one year from the initial
deadline without the approval of the council, which may grant or deny the
approval in its complete discretion.
(B)   If the applicant requests an extension beyond one year from the initial
deadline and the director finds that the applicant has demonstrated good cause
for the extension, the director shall prepare and submit to the council a
report on the proposed extension, which report must include the director’s
findings and recommendations thereon and a proposed resolution approving the
extension.
(C)   The council may approve the proposed extension or an extension for a
shorter or longer period, or deny the proposed extension, by resolution.
(D)   If the council fails to take final action on the proposed extension
within the first to occur of:
(i)   Sixty days after the receipt of the director’s report; or
(ii)   The applicant’s then-existing deadline for obtaining a building permit,
the extension is deemed to be denied.
(3)   For public housing projects, the council resolution for approval of a
conceptual plan for an IPD-T project must include a five-year deadline within
which the building permit for the first phase of the project must be obtained.
Any extensions beyond this deadline, including extensions for subsequent
phases, will be subject to council approval pursuant to the procedures in
subdivision (2).
(4)   The director shall notify the council in writing of any extensions
granted by the director that do not require council approval.
(m)   Further processing by director. If the council approves the conceptual
plan for the IPD-T project, the applicant shall address the conditions of
approval contained in the resolution adopted by the council, and modify the
project and related plans accordingly. The applicant shall thereafter submit
the revised plans to the department so that the project application may
continue to be processed by the director as provided under §
21-2.110-2. Additional documentation may be required by the director as
necessary. The following criteria must be used by the director to review
applications:
(1)   The project must conform to the approved conceptual plan and any
conditions established by the council in its resolution of approval. Any change
to the conceptual plan will require a new application and approval by the
council. The director may approve changes to the project that do not
significantly alter the size or nature of the project, if the changes remain in
conformance with the conceptual plan and any conditions established by the
council. Any increase in the height or density of the project will be
considered a significant alteration and a change to the conceptual plan;
(2)   The project also must implement the objectives, guidelines, and standards
of §
21-9.100-4 and this section;
(3)   The project must contribute significantly to the overall desired urban
design of TOD areas;
(4)   The project must demonstrate a pedestrian system, publicly accessible
spaces and accommodations, landscaping, and other amenities, that must be
integrated into the overall design of the project, and must enhance the
pedestrian experience between the project and surrounding TOD areas;
(5)   The project must involve a broad mix of uses and other characteristics
that support the economic development and vitality of the affected TOD enhanced
neighborhood; and include an appropriate mix of housing types, particularly
affordable housing, rental housing, and public housing; and
(6)   The parking management plan or transportation demand management plan must
support transit ridership and alternative modes of travel and minimize impacts
upon public streets where possible.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.100-5) (Added by Ord. 14-10; Am. Ords. 16-
26, 17-40, 20-40, 20-41, 22-29 , 25-2)
§ 21-9.100-6 TOD special district objectives.
   The objectives of a TOD special district are to:
(1)   Promote an appropriate mixture and density of activity around the rail
transit stations in order to maximize the potential for transit ridership and
promote alternative modes of transportation to the automobile;
(2)   Allow for more intense and efficient use of land for the mutual
reinforcement of public investments and private development;
(3)   Support transit by ensuring connectivity and convenient access, while
limiting conflicts among vehicles, pedestrians, bicycles, and transit
operations;
(4)   Establish standards for buildings and sites that provide quality urban
design that attracts and encourages pedestrian activity;
(5)   Provide a high level of streetscape amenities that create a comfortable
environment for pedestrians, bicyclists, and other uses, such as walkways,
street furniture, street trees, and human-scale architectural features;
(6)   Promote an appropriate mix of housing types, including affordable housing
and rental housing;
(7)   Promote quality publicly accessible and usable spaces and gathering
places; and
(8)   Contribute positively to the economic enhancement of the affected area
and the city, particularly with regard to providing a broad mix of uses,
diverse housing, and diverse employment opportunities.
(Added by Ord. 17-54)
§ 21-9.100-7 Use regulations.
   Permitted uses and structures are as enumerated in
Table 21-5.1, except as provided below:
(a)   In the business mixed-use district, the ground floor of buildings facing
a key street, public open space, or transit station must be designed and used
for active ground floor activities, as defined in §
21-9.100(c), for at least 80 percent of the ground-floor building frontage. On
corner lots, this requirement must be met on each key-street- facing facade.
(b)   In the apartment mixed-use district the ground floor of the building
frontage facing any key street, public open space, or transit station must be
designed and used as residential dwelling units or active ground floor
activities, as defined in §
21-9.100(c). On corner lots, this requirement must be met on each key-street-
facing facade.
(c)   Up to 10 dwelling units may be permitted per zoning lot above the ground
floor in the IMX-1 industrial commercial mixed-use district, subject to a
special district permit.
(Added by Ord. 17-54) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 21-9.100-8 General requirements and development standards.
   The following standards apply throughout a TOD special district:
(a)   Site development and design standards. Development standards are as
established for the underlying base zoning district except as provided below.
(1)   Density and height.
(A)   The maximum FAR is as prescribed by the underlying zoning district,
unless modified through a special district permit or PD-T permit, through which
an applicant may seek approval to exceed the base FAR up to a maximum FAR as
follows:
 
                       BMX-3 and B- Apartment and       Industrial and
                       2 Districts  Apartment Mixed-Use Industrial Mixed-Use
                                    Districts           Districts
Base FAR               2.5          Refer to            Refer to
                                    Table 21-3.3        Table 21-3.5
Maximum FAR with Minor
Special District       3.5          1.2 x Base FAR      1.2 x Base FAR
Permit
Maximum FAR with PD-   7.0          2.0 x Base FAR      2.0 x Base FAR
T Approval
 
(B)   The open space bonus provisions of §§
21-3.110-1(c) and
21-3.120-2(c) are not applicable.
(C)   In the apartment mixed-use districts, the maximum commercial use density
and location provisions of §
21-3.90-1(c) and
Table 21-3.3 may be modified through a special district permit if the proposed
development meets the objectives of the TOD special district, as enumerated in
§
21-9.100-6.
(D)   Height. If the maximum height is not prescribed for a zoning district in
this chapter, the allowable height is as prescribed on the zoning map. An
applicant may seek approval to exceed the base height up to the parenthetical
height identified as the bonus height limit on the zoning map, where
applicable, through a special district permit or PD-T approval as follows:
 
Maximum Height with Minor Special 60 feet over the base height limit; or
District Permit                   twice the base height limit, whichever is
                                  less
Maximum Height with Major Special 120 feet over the base height limit; or
District Permit                   three times the base height limit,
                                  whichever is less
                                  Up to the parenthetical height identified
Maximum Height with PD-T Approval as the bonus height limit on the zoning
                                  map
 
(E)   Where a TOD special district permit is sought to achieve height or
density bonuses, the degree of flexibility requested must be commensurate to
the community benefits the development will provide for the enhancement of the
surrounding area. The highest degree of flexibility may be authorized for those
projects that demonstrate:
(i)   The provision of measures or facilities, or both, to promote a highly
functioning, safe, interconnected, multimodal circulation system, supporting
easy access to, and effective use of the transit system on a pedestrian scale;
(ii)   The provision of open space, particularly usable, safe, and highly
accessible public accommodations, gathering spaces, or parks, either onsite,
within the TOD station area, or at a public park or gathering space within 400
feet of the same TOD station area boundary; and
(iii)   An appropriate mix of housing and unit types, particularly affordable
for-sale or rental housing, or both, located on the project site or within the
same rail station area as the project site. Affordable housing provided as a
community benefit under this paragraph must be in addition to the affordable
housing requirements of Chapter 29, which are based on a percentage of the
total number of dwelling units in the principal project, and include higher
percentages for IPD-T, PD-T, and TOD special district projects seeking bonus
height or density, or both.
The above notwithstanding, the completed project must be able to contribute
positively to the economic enhancement of the affected area and the city,
particularly with regard to providing a broad mix of uses, diverse housing, and
diverse employment opportunities, including but not limited to whether the
construction workforce employed on all phases of the project will be paid no
less than the prevailing minimum wages established for public works projects
pursuant to HRS Chapter 104.
(F)   When an applicant seeks to exceed the base height or density limit
through a special district permit, the following conclusions must be made:
(i)   Additional project elements that provide community benefits beyond what
would otherwise be required have been incorporated into the project plan, as
described in §
21-9.100-9(e);
(ii)   The increase in height or FAR is reasonably related to the level of
community benefits provided;
(iii)   The additional height or FAR will not be detrimental to the quality of
the neighborhood character or urban design, and will not negatively impact any
adopted public views; and
(iv)   The provision of community benefits in conjunction with the increase in
height or FAR will further the goals and objectives of the TOD special district
and the applicable neighborhood TOD plan.
(2)   Building area. Within the TOD special district, the building area
standard for zoning lots in the apartment mixed-use and industrial mixed-use
districts, as set forth in
Tables 21-3.3 and
21-3.5, respectively, are not applicable.
(3)   Yards, setbacks, street facade, and building placement.
(A)   Required yards (in feet) in a TOD special district are as follows:
 
                             B-2 and BMX- Apartment and       Industrial and
Required Yard Standards      3 Districts  Apartment Mixed-Use Industrial Mixed-
                                          Districts           Use Districts
Minimum Front All Streets    5
Setback1
Maximum Front Non-Key Street 10           None
Setback1      Key Street     10           15                  10
              Highway2       15
1 Front setbacks may be modified pursuant to §
21-9.100-8(a)(3)(C).
2 For the purposes of this subdivision, “highway” refers to Farrington Highway
or Kamehameha Highway. This provision prevails where there are other maximum
front setbacks.
 
(B)   The maximum setback must be measured from the front property line to the
exterior face of the building. See
Figures 21-9.3 and
21-9.4.
(C)   The minimum and maximum front setbacks may be modified as follows:
(i)   Buildings may encroach into the front yard; provided that:
(aa)   A paved public sidewalk at least 8 feet in width fronts the building; or
(bb)   Other buildings on the same block and sharing the same street frontage
are set back less than 5 feet from the property line, and the proposed building
location will match the existing setbacks so that the proposed building facade
creates a consistent building alignment.
(ii)   Buildings may be located beyond the maximum setback if the additional
setback is necessary to provide for a tree within the property because it is
not feasible to provide for street trees within the adjacent right-of-way due
to limitations such as the location of existing infrastructure.
(D)   Street facade and building placement.
(i)   On a corner zoning lot fronting at least one key street, buildings must
be located within 30 feet of the corner. See
Figure 21-9.5.
(ii)   On a zoning lot with a street frontage of 100 feet or less per frontage,
the ground floor building facade must be placed within the maximum front
setback for at least 75 percent of the linear street frontage. See
Figure 21-9.6.
(iii)   On a zoning lot with a street frontage greater than 100 feet per
frontage, the ground floor building facade must be placed within the maximum
front setback for at least 65 percent of the linear street frontage. See
Figure 21-9.7.
(iv)   If a zoning lot fronts two or more key streets, the applicant may
designate one of the streets or corners for purposes of street facade and
building placement. The structure must be placed within the maximum setback on
at least one key street. Setback improvements must be provided along all key
street frontages, as set forth in §
21-9.100-8(a)(3)(E). See
Figures 21-9.8 and
21-9.9.
(v)   Any portion of a building above 60 feet in height must be set back at
least 50 feet from the side and rear property lines, and spaced at least 100
feet from any portion of other buildings above 60 feet in height on the same
zoning lot, as depicted in the following illustration:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9720.png]
(vi)   To preserve important views, no structures greater than 3 feet in
height, except for open work fences, may be constructed in the areas identified
as view corridors in the exhibits specified in §
21-9.100-12. The director may approve uses and structures allowed in standard
required yards; provided that no views will be adversely impacted.
(vii)   Buildings above 40 feet in height must be oriented with the long axis
aligned in a mauka-makai direction.
(E)   Setback improvements.
(i)   For structures within 15 feet of the property line with commercial or
industrial uses on the ground floor, the setback area between the property line
and the building facade must be improved with a combination of hard surface,
landscaping that does not obstruct pedestrian access to the setback area, and
pedestrian amenities, such as outdoor dining, benches and publicly accessible
seating, shade trees, portable planters, trash and recycling receptacles,
facilities for recharging electronic devices, Wi-Fi service, bicycle
facilities, or merchandising displays.
(ii)   Awnings and other sunshade devices may exceed the 36-inch horizontal
projection limit established in §
21-4.30(b), and may encroach into the right-of-way; provided that they meet all
requirements of the building codes and do not conflict with any street tree
requirements.
(iii)   For ground-floor residential uses, covered porches, stoops, or lanais
may encroach into the required front yard. Other portions of the front yard
must be landscaped, except for necessary access driveways and walkways.
(F)   For zoning lots on key streets in the apartment mixed-use districts,
walls and fences located between the property line and the front facade of a
building set back 15 feet or less must not exceed 3 feet in height.
(G)   Where a side yard, rear yard, or zoning district boundary line abuts a
designated bike-walk greenway, a 10-foot setback must be provided. This setback
area must be landscaped or improved with a combination of hard surface,
landscaping, and pedestrian amenities, such as benches, shade trees, water
fountains, or bicycle facilities to enhance the greenway user experience. The
setback area may also be used for convenience or commercial purposes that
support the users of the bike-walk greenway, such as outdoor dining,
merchandise displays, bicycle repair stations, and refreshment kiosks. No
fences, except for openwork fences that do not exceed 4 feet in height, may be
installed within the 10-foot setback area. For the purposes of this paragraph,
“openwork” means at least 50 percent open.
(H)   If a street tree plan or TOD special district street tree plan exists for
the street that fronts the project, the applicant shall install street trees,
as required by the director.
(I)   The standards of this subdivision may be modified through a special
district permit if at least one of the following conclusions may be made:
(i)   Irregular property lines, zoning lot configuration, coastal hazards as
projected using the best available science, or topography of the zoning lot
render the yards, setbacks, street facade, or building placement standards
infeasible;
(ii)   The existing built environment is arranged in such a way that the yards,
setbacks, street facade, or building placement standards are incompatible or
unreasonable, and better overall design may be achieved by following existing
development patterns; or
(iii)   The proposed building placement provides for publicly accessible,
highly usable parks or gathering spaces, and will not detract from the purposes
of the TOD special district.
(4)   Building orientation and entrances.
(A)   Building facades must be predominantly oriented to and parallel with the
street, property line, or adjacent public spaces. A primary building entrance
must be placed on that street frontage. See
Figures 21-9.10 through
21-9.12.
(B)   Where multiple businesses are located along the front facade of the
ground floor of a building, each establishment must have a separate entrance on
that street frontage.
(C)   At least one entrance must be placed every 50 feet of the building facade
facing a street or pedestrian plaza.
(D)   The requirements of this subdivision may be modified through a special
district permit if irregular property lines, zoning lot configuration, or
topography of the zoning lot renders them infeasible.
(5)   Building transparency, blank wall limits, and required openings for
ground-floor facades.
(A)   Building facades within 20 feet of a front or street-facing property line
must contain windows, doors, or other openings for at least 60 percent of the
building facade area located between 2.5 and 7 feet above the level of the
sidewalk. See
Figure 21-9.13. Blank walls must not extend for more than 25 feet in a
continuous horizontal plane without an opening on the ground floor of a
building; provided that:
(i)   Along key streets, this provision applies to all buildings, except for
the portions of a building with residential dwelling units on the ground floor;
provided that residential lobbies are subject to the transparency standard; and
(ii)   Along non-key streets, structures with residential or industrial uses on
the ground floor are exempt from this standard.
(B)   Openings fulfilling this requirement must be designed to provide views
into work areas, display areas, sales areas, lobbies, or similar active spaces,
or into window displays that are at least 3 feet deep.
(C)   Modifications to the building transparency standard may be approved
through a special district permit; provided that:
(i)   The proposed use has unique operational characteristics for which the
required windows and openings are incompatible, such as in the case of a cinema
or theater; and
(ii)   Street-facing building facades will exhibit architectural relief and
detail, and will be enhanced with landscaping and street furniture, or provide
canopies and awnings in a manner that creates visual interest at the pedestrian
level and activates the sidewalk area.
(6)   Pedestrian walkways. Walkways with a minimum 5-foot unobstructed width
must be provided according to the following standards:
(A)   Pedestrian walkways must create internal connections by connecting all
buildings on a zoning lot to each other, to onsite automobile and bicycle
parking areas, and to any onsite open space areas or pedestrian amenities. See
Figures 21-9.14 and
21-9.15;
(B)   Pedestrian walkways must connect the principal pedestrian entryway to a
sidewalk on each street frontage;
(C)   Direct and convenient access must be provided to neighboring properties
from commercial and mixed use developments on zoning lots 1 acre or more in
size whenever possible; and
(D)   Where walkways cross or are parallel to driveways, parking areas, or
loading areas, they must be clearly identifiable through the use of different
paving materials or other visual markings.
(b)   Specific use development standards.
(1)   Projects must satisfy the applicable affordable housing requirements of
Chapter 29.
(2)   Outdoor dining areas are subject to the following:
(A)   A planter or hedge of not more than 2.5 feet in height may be provided in
the required yard to define the perimeter of the outdoor dining area;
(B)   Outdoor dining facilities are limited to chairs, tables, serving devices,
and umbrellas. When umbrellas are used, they will not be counted against open
space calculations; and
(C)   Outdoor dining areas must not be used after 11:00 p.m. or before 7:00
a.m.
(c)   Vehicle parking, loading, and bicycle parking.
(1)   At-grade parking spaces and parking on the ground floor of any structure
must not be located within 40 feet of any front property line. See
Figures 21-9.8 and
21-9.9. Exceptions may be granted with the approval of a special district
permit if the director determines that:
(A)   Buildings are built as close as possible to the public sidewalk; and
(B)   The site is small and constrained such that underground, structured, and
surface parking located more than 40 feet from the street frontage could not be
accommodated.
(2)   Service areas and loading spaces must be located at the side or rear of
the site. This requirement may be modified through a special district permit if
the director determines that the size and configuration of the zoning lot make
such a requirement infeasible.
(3)   Vehicular access must be provided from a secondary street wherever
possible and located where it is least likely to impede pedestrian circulation,
as approved by the appropriate agencies.
(4)   The ground floor of parking structures on all streets must be designed
and used for active ground floor activities within 40 feet of the front
property line.
(d)   Nonconformities.  The provisions of §
21-4.110 apply, except as provided in this subsection.
(1)   Structures and uses that are nonconforming prior to the adoption of a TOD
special district and that do not conform to the TOD special district standards
are subject to the provisions of §
21-4.110.
(2)   Uses that became nonconforming with the adoption of a TOD special
district and zoning map amendments may be expanded to other parts of an
existing structure or structures on a lot provided no new floor area devoted to
such nonconforming use is proposed.
(3)   Structures that became nonconforming with the adoption of a TOD special
district and zoning map amendments may be repaired and modified where there is
no proposed increase in floor area. Structural repairs that do not enlarge or
extend the structure, and exterior repairs and renovations that will not modify
the arrangement of buildings on the lot may be allowed; provided that if any
portion of a nonconforming structure is destroyed by any means to an extent of
more than 90 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it may
not be reconstructed, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(4)   The addition of floor area on a structure that became nonconforming with
the adoption of a TOD special district and zoning map amendments may be
allowed; provided that the proposed development complies with all applicable
development standards or does not increase the nonconformity.
(5)   Existing structures on lots with nonconforming site development may be
repaired and modified, and will not be subject to value limits on repairs or
renovation work performed. Where the work involves new floor area or
reconfiguration of the site, the new work must comply with the TOD special
district uses and standards in §§
21-9.100-7 and
21-9.100-8.
(6)   Where proposed improvements to nonconforming structures or nonconforming
site development meet the standards of the underlying zoning but not the TOD
special district uses and standards in §§
21-9.100-7 and
21-9.100-8, the applicant may seek a special district permit to allow the
development if the director finds:
(A)   The proposed development is not detrimental to the special district,
surrounding neighborhood, or streetscape; and
(B)   The proposal includes measures to mitigate the impacts of the proposed
development, or provides other community benefits to increase the conformity of
the site overall with the special district standards.
(e)   Signage. TOD-related way-finding signage will be considered “public
signs” for purposes of
Article 7.
(Added by Ord. 17-54; Am. Ords. 20-41, 22-29 , 23-32)
Figure 21-9.3
YARDS AND MAXIMUM SETBACKS ON ALL STREETS IN THE BMX-3 BUSINESS
MIXED-USE AND B-2 COMMUNITY MIXED-USE DISTRICTS AND ON KEY STREETS
IN THE IMX-1 INDUSTRIAL COMMERCIAL MIXED-USE AND I-2 INTENSIVE INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-237.png]
Figure 21-9.4
YARDS AND MAXIMUM SETBACKS ON KEY STREET,
APARTMENT AND APARTMENT MIXED USE DISTRICTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-239.png]
Figure 21-9.5
BUILDING FACADE PLACEMENT ON CORNER LOTS FRONTING TWO KEY STREETS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-241.png]
Figure 21-9.6
BUILDING FACADE PLACEMENT ON LOTS 100 FEET OR LESS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-243.png]
Figure 21-9.7
BUILDING FACADE PLACEMENTS ON LOTS GREATER THAN 100 FEET
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-245.png]
Figure 21-9.8
BUILDING FACADE AND PARKING PLACEMENT ON LOTS FRONTING TWO KEY STREETS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-247.png]
Figure 21-9.9
BUILDING FACADE AND PARKING PLACEMENT ON LOTS FRONTING THREE KEY STREETS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-249.png]
Figure 21-9.10
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY BUILDING ENTRANCES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-251.png]
Figure 21-9.11
FOR LOTS WITH IRREGULAR PROPERTY LINES, BUILDING FACADES PARALLEL TO STREETS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-253.png]
Figure 21-9.12
PRIMARY ENTRANCES SHOULD FACE THE STREET
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-255.png]
Figure 21-9.13
BUILDING TRANSPARENCY
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-257.png]
Figure 21-9.14
PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY CONNECTIVITY ACROSS ZONING LOTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-259.png]
Figure 21-9.15
PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS WITHIN A ZONING LOT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-261.png]
(Added by Ord. 17-54)
§ 21-9.100-9 TOD special district permits.
(a)   Where a TOD special district permit is sought to modify development
standards pursuant to §§
21-9.100-7 and
21-9.100-8, the application must show that:
(1)   The proposed project is generally consistent with the neighborhood TOD
plan for the area; and
(2)   The proposed project meets the findings identified under each specific
development standard for which modification is sought.
(b)   Where a TOD special district permit is sought because the lot is an acre
or more in size, or when height or density bonuses are sought, the proposed
development must have a cohesive overall design that meets the goals and
objectives of the TOD special district, pursuant to §§
21-9.100-4 and
21-9.100-6, and is generally consistent with the neighborhood TOD plan for the
area. The project plan must show how the development positively contributes to
the neighborhood transportation network, including pedestrian paths and
connectivity. The application must also show how the proposed development
generates active uses and streetscapes, and contributes to neighborhood
vitality.
(c)   Where a special district permit is sought to allow residential units in
the IMX-1 industrial commercial mixed-use district, the application must show
how the residential units will be integrated into the neighborhood and how any
potential conflicts among the industrial, commercial, and residential uses will
be mitigated. Additionally, the application must provide a review of the
adequacy of public utilities and facilities, including sewer, water, and
roadway systems, for the proposed dwelling units and, where necessary, a plan
to upgrade any utilities that are inadequate for the proposed use.
(d)   Where a special district permit is sought and the project proposes to
develop more than 10 residential dwelling or lodging units, or both, the
application must show how the affordable housing requirements of
Chapter 29 will be satisfied.
(e)   Community benefits must be proposed in the TOD special district permit
application to justify height and density bonuses, or to mitigate the impacts
related to the modification of TOD special district development standards.
Where community benefits are proposed, they must meet the following standards:
(1)   Where open space is provided as a community benefit for a TOD special
district permit, it must meet the following minimum qualifications:
(A)   The area dedicated to open space must be at least 2,000 contiguous
square-feet, or an area equal to at least 5 percent of the maximum permitted
floor area on the lot, not including floor area bonuses being sought, whichever
is greater;
(B)   The land dedicated to open space may include required yards; provided
that all open space must have a minimum average width and depth of 20 feet and
a slope no greater than 10 percent across the open space;
(C)   Quality open space will involve publicly accessible, highly usable parks
and gathering spaces. These spaces should be pedestrian-oriented and provide
public accommodations, including but not limited to benches and seating, shaded
areas, restrooms, trash and recycling receptacles, facilities for recharging
electronic devices, telecommunications facilities, and bicycle facilities. Open
space must be surfaced with a combination of trees, landscaped groundcover, and
hardscape materials. It must include benches or other seating, shade
structures, drinking fountains, water features, public art, trash receptacles,
information kiosks, performance areas, or other similar amenities; and
(D)   The open space may be provided onsite, off-site within the same special
district, or through a combination of both;
(2)   Where affordable housing is provided as a community benefit for a TOD
special district permit, the affordable housing must be in addition to the
affordable housing requirements of
Chapter 29; and
(3)   Where streetscape improvements are provided as a community benefit for a
TOD special district permit, the improvements must be in compliance with any
adopted complete streets guide, manual, or ordinance.
(Added by Ord. 17-54)
§ 21-9.100-10 Planned development-transit (PD-T) projects.
   The purpose of the PD-T permit is to provide opportunities for creative,
catalytic redevelopment projects within a TOD special district that would not
be possible under a strict adherence to the development standards of this
chapter. Qualifying projects must demonstrably exhibit those kinds of
attributes that are capable of promoting highly effective transit enhanced
neighborhoods, including diverse employment opportunities, an appropriate mix
of housing types, support for multimodal circulation, and well-designed
publicly accessible and usable spaces. Flexibility may be provided for density,
height and height setbacks, yards, open space, landscaping, streetscape
improvements, parking and loading, and signage when timely, demonstrable
contributions are incorporated into the project benefiting the community,
supporting transit ridership, and implementing the vision, goals, and
objectives of the TOD special district stated in §
21-9.100-6. Reflective of the significance of the flexibility represented by
this option, it is appropriate to approve projects conceptually by legislative
review and approval prior to a more detailed administrative review and approval
by the department.
(a)   Eligibility. PD-T projects may be permitted on zoning lots that meet the
following standards:
(1)   PD-T projects are permitted on zoning lots with a minimum area of 20,000
square feet. Multiple zoning lots may be part of a single PD-T project if the
owners, lessees, developers, or other designated representatives, including but
not limited to a board or association of homeowners, condominium owners,
timeshare owners, or cooperative housing owners, in lieu of individual owners,
consent. Zoning lots may be added to or removed from existing PD-T projects
upon the application of the owners, lessees, developers, or other designated
representatives of the zoning lots to be added or removed with the written
consent of the original applicant for the existing PD-T project, or its
successor. Applications for the addition or removal of zoning lots will be
processed in accordance with other applicable regulations in this chapter.
Zoning lots to be removed must comply with all zoning regulations applicable to
that zoning lot separately from the PD-T project. Multiple zoning lots in a
single PD-T project must be contiguous; provided that zoning lots that are not
contiguous may be part of a single PD-T project if all of the following
conditions are satisfied:
(A)   The zoning lots are not contiguous solely because they are separated by a
street or right-of-way, so if the street were to be removed, the zoning lots
would be adjacent to each other; and
(B)   Each noncontiguous portion of the PD-T project, whether composed of a
single zoning lot or multiple zoning contiguous lots, has a minimum area of
10,000 square feet.
When a PD-T project consists of noncontiguous zoning lots as provided in this
subdivision, pedestrian walkways, improved streetscapes, or functional design
features connecting the separate zoning lots are strongly encouraged to unify
the project site. Multiple zoning lots that are part of an approved single PD-
T project will be considered and treated as one zoning lot for purposes of the
project without requiring separate approval for consolidation of the zoning
lots pursuant to
Chapter 22.
(2)   This subsection does not apply to landscape lots, right-of-way lots, or
other lots used for similar utilitarian (infrastructure) purposes.
(b)   Standards for review.
(1)   All of the development standards of a TOD special district will apply to
PD-T projects, except as otherwise provided in this section. Greater height and
density bonuses are available to PD-T projects and the development standards
may be modified in any way that would normally be allowed through a special
district permit. The degree of flexibility sought through the PD-T process must
be commensurate to the community benefits provided. The highest degree of
flexibility may be authorized by this permit for those projects that
demonstrate those standards enumerated in §
21-9.100-8(a)(1)(E) and described in §
21-9.100-9(b).
(2)   PD-T projects must be generally consistent with the approved neighborhood
TOD plan for the affected area.
(c)   Site development and design standards. The standards set forth by this
subsection are general requirements for PD-T projects. When applicants seek the
modification of TOD special district standards, the modification must be for
the purpose of accomplishing the goals and objectives of the TOD special
district. Also, the modification must be commensurate with the community
benefits provided in the project plan, and the project must be generally
consistent with the neighborhood TOD plan for the area.
(1)   Density. The maximum allowable density is specified in §
21-9.100-8(a)(1)(A) by zoning district.
(2)   The maximum height must not exceed the bonus height limit shown as the
parenthetical number on the zoning maps.
(3)   Transitional height or height setbacks may be modified if adjacent uses
and street character will not be adversely affected.
(4)   PD-T projects must satisfy the applicable affordable housing requirements
of
Chapter 29. Affordable housing that is provided as a community benefit must be
in addition to the affordable housing requirements of
Chapter 29, which are based on a percentage of the total number of dwelling
units in the principal project, and include higher percentages for IPD-T, PD-T,
and TOD special district projects seeking bonus height or density, or both.
(d)   Application requirements. An application for approval of a PD-T project
must contain:
(1)   A project name;
(2)   A location map;
(3)   A site plan showing property lines, the locations of buildings and the
other major structures on the same and adjacent lots, building access and
activity zones, the proposed open space and landscaping system, access and
circulation for vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians, bus or trolley stops, and
other major activities;
(4)   A narrative description of the overall development and urban design
concept; the building height and density; the basic form and number of
structures; the relationship of buildings to each other and the streets; the
general mix of uses; the estimated number of proposed dwelling or lodging
units; the proposed mix of housing types; the ways the project positively
contributes to TOD; the ways the project is consistent with the applicable
neighborhood TOD plan; the usable, publicly-accessible space and landscape
plans; how the project supports walking, bicycling, and active living;
proposals to enhance multimodal circulation and access; the proposed off-street
parking and loading; and the possible impacts on security, public health and
safety, infrastructure, and public utilities;
(5)   Details of the project, including calculations of proposed floor area,
FAR, height limits, open spaces, landscaped areas, areas dedicated to parking,
and any other significant calculations;
(6)   A narrative description of the proposed public amenities and community
benefits the project will provide. The narrative must describe how the
amenities and benefits are commensurate with the design flexibility being
requested, and how they will benefit the TOD special district and the
neighborhood;
(7)   An open space plan, showing the reservation of land for public, semi-
public, and private open space, including parks, plazas, and playgrounds, and
an integrated circulation system plan, showing the proposed movement of
vehicles, goods, pedestrians, and bicyclists within the project area and
adjacent areas, including streets and driveways, sidewalks and pedestrian ways,
bicycle lanes, bicycle tracks, and multi- use paths, off-street parking, and
loading areas;
(8)   A discussion of any impacts to any cultural or historic resources, as
well as any public view protected by law or ordinance;
(9)   A parking and loading management plan or transportation demand management
plan, or both;
(10)   A wind and shadow study to analyze the effects of mid-rise and high-rise
structures, particularly anticipated effects at the ground level. Where adverse
effects are anticipated, mitigative measures must be included in the proposal;
(11)   If applicable, a discussion of how the proposed project will satisfy the
affordable housing requirements of
Chapter 29; and
(12)   Any other information deemed necessary by the director to ascertain
whether the project meets the requirements of this section.
(e)   Procedures. Applications for approval of PD-T projects will be processed
in accordance with §
21-2.110-2. Fees will be as enumerated for Planned Development applications in
§
6-41.1(a)(19).
(f)   Conceptual plan for a project. The council must approve the conceptual
plan for the project before the final PD-T permit approval may be granted. The
approved conceptual plan must set forth the allowable uses and the site
development and design standards for density, height, transitional height and
street setbacks, yards, open space, landscaping and screening, parking and
loading, bicycle parking, and signs if the uses and standards depart from the
uses and standards applicable in the underlying zoning district or TOD special
district. If applicable, the approved conceptual plan must also show how the
proposed project will satisfy the affordable housing requirements of
Chapter 29.
(g)   Guidelines for review and approval of the conceptual plan for a project.
Prior to or concurrently with its approval of a conceptual plan for a PD-
T project, the council shall find that the project concept, as a unified plan,
is in the general interest of the public, and, that:
(1)   Requested project boundaries and requested flexibility with respect to
TOD special district development standards and use regulations are consistent
with the TOD special district objectives stated in §
21-9.100-6, and this section; and
(2)   Requested flexibility with respect to development standards and use
regulations to allow up to 10 dwelling units in the IMX-1 district is
commensurate with the public amenities and community benefits proposed.
(h)   Deadline for obtaining building permit for a project.
(1)   A council resolution approving a conceptual plan for a PD-T project must
establish a deadline within which the building permit for the project must be
obtained. For multiphase projects, deadlines must be established for obtaining
building permits for each phase of the project. The resolution must provide
that the failure to obtain any building permit within the prescribed period
will render null and void the council’s approval of the conceptual plan and all
approvals issued thereunder; provided that in multiphase projects, any prior
phase that has complied with the deadline applicable to that phase will not be
affected. A revocation of a building permit pursuant to §
18-5.4 after the deadline will be deemed a failure to comply with the deadline.
(2)   The resolution must further provide that a deadline may be extended as
follows:
(A)   The director may extend the deadline for one year if the applicant
demonstrates good cause;
(B)   If the applicant requests an extension beyond one year from the initial
deadline and the director finds that the applicant has demonstrated good cause
for the extension, the director shall prepare and submit to the council a
report on the proposed extension, which must include the director’s finding,
recommendations and a proposed resolution approving the extension;
(C)   The council may approve the proposed extension or any extension for a
shorter or longer period, or deny the proposed extension by resolution;
(D)   If the council fails to take final action on the proposed extension
within the first to occur of:
(i)   Sixty days after the receipt of the director’s report; or
(ii)   The applicant’s then-existing deadline for obtaining a building permit;
the extension will be deemed to be denied; and
(E)   The director shall notify the council in writing of any extensions
granted by the director that do not require council approval.
(i)   Further processing by Director. If the council approves the conceptual
plan for the PD-T project, the application, as approved in concept by the
council, will continue to be processed by the director as provided under §
21-2.110-2. Additional documentation may be required by the director as
necessary. The following criteria must be used by the director to review
applications:
(1)   The project must conform to the approved conceptual plan and any
conditions established by the council in its resolution of approval. Any
significant change to the conceptual plan will require a new application and
approval by the council. The director may approve changes to the project that
do not significantly alter the size or nature of the project, if the changes
remain in conformance with the conceptual plan and any conditions established
by the council; and
(2)   The project must implement the goals and objectives of this section.
(Added by Ord. 17-54; Am. Ord. 22-29 )
§ 21-9.100-11 TOD special district–project classification.
   Refer to
Table 21-9.8 to determine whether specific categories of projects will be
classified as major, minor, or exempt. For the purposes of this section, in
addition to §
21-9.20-2(c), the term “exempt” means projects that are in full compliance with
the standards and objectives of a TOD special district.
Table 21-9.8
TOD Special District Project Classification
Activity/Use Required Permit Special Conditions
Table 21-9.8
TOD Special District Project Classification
Activity/Use                                                                  Required Special
                                                                              Permit   Conditions
                                                                                       Projects on
                                                                                       key streets
Major modification, major additions, or new construction on sites 1 acre or   M/m      are major.
more in size                                                                           All others
                                                                                       will be
                                                                                       minor.
                                                                                       Projects on
                                                                                       key streets
Minor additions to existing structures or construction of new accessory       m/E      are minor.
structures on sites 1 acre or more in size                                             All others
                                                                                       will be
                                                                                       exempt.
Major modification, additions, or new construction on sites less than 1 acre  E         
in size
Interior or exterior repairs, alterations, or renovations to all structures   E         
                                                                                       See §
                                                                                       21-9.100-8
                                                                                       (a)(1)(A).
                                                                                       PD-
                                                                                       T approval
Modifications to FAR                                                          M/m      may be
                                                                                       required
                                                                                       prior to
                                                                                       obtaining a
                                                                                       major
                                                                                       permit.
                                                                                       See §
                                                                                       21-9.100-8
                                                                                       (a)(1)(D).
                                                                                       PD-
                                                                                       T approval
Modifications to height                                                       M/m      may be
                                                                                       required
                                                                                       prior to
                                                                                       obtaining a
                                                                                       major
                                                                                       permit.
Modification to the following standards:
· Yards and setbacks
· Street facade and building placement
· Building orientation and entrances
· Building transparency
· Number of parking stalls
· Location of above ground surface parking                                   m         
· Location of service area and loading spaces
· Bicycle parking
· The commercial use density and location provisions in the apartment mixed-
use districts
· Additional commercial density in the apartment mixed-use districts.
· Reconfiguration of sidewalk area
Demolition of structures                                                      E         
Residential units in the IMX-1 district                                       m         
                                                                                       If the
                                                                                       director
                                                                                       has
                                                                                       determined
                                                                                       that the
                                                                                       project may
                                                                                       result in
                                                                                       substantial
                                                                                       impacts to
                                                                                       a TOD
                                                                                       special
Streetscape improvements, including street furniture, light fixtures,                  district, a
sidewalk paving, bus shelters and other elements in public rights-of-way when m/E      minor
part of the development of a zoning lot                                                permit is
                                                                                       required;
                                                                                       otherwise
                                                                                       exempt.
                                                                                       Where
                                                                                       addressed
                                                                                       as part of
                                                                                       another
                                                                                       permit, a
                                                                                       minor
                                                                                       permit is
                                                                                       not
                                                                                       required.
                                                                                       If the
                                                                                       director
                                                                                       has
                                                                                       determined
                                                                                       that the
                                                                                       project may
                                                                                       result in
Major above-grade infrastructure improvements not covered elsewhere,                   substantial
including new roadways, road widenings, new substations, new parks, and       m/E      impacts to
significant improvements to existing parks                                             a TOD
                                                                                       special
                                                                                       district, a
                                                                                       minor
                                                                                       permit is
                                                                                       required;
                                                                                       otherwise
                                                                                       exempt.
Minor above-grade infrastructure improvements not covered elsewhere; all
below-grade infrastructure improvements; and all emergency and routine repair E         
and maintenance work
A special district permit is not required for activities and uses classified as exempt, as well as
other project types that do not fall into one of the categories listed above. These activities and
uses, however, must still conform to the applicable objectives and standards of the special
district. This conformance will be determined at the building permit application stage. Pursuant
to §§
21-2.110-2,
21-9.100-8(a)(1)(A), and
21-9.100-8(a)(1)(D), PD-T approval may be required prior to obtaining a major special district
permit. If a PD-T or major special district permit is otherwise required, a separate minor special
district permit is not required.
Legend: Project classification: M = Major; m = Minor; E = Exempt
 
(Added by Ord. 17-54; Am. Ords. 22-29 , 23-32)
§ 21-9.100-12 TOD special district boundaries.
(a)   The Hoaeae (West Loch) station area TOD special district boundaries are
designated on
Exhibit 21-9.19, set forth at the end of this article.
(b)   The Pouhala (Waipahu Transit Center) station area TOD special district
boundaries are designated on
Exhibit 21-9.20, set forth at the end of this article.
(c)   The Halaulani (Leeward Community College) station area TOD special
district boundaries are designated on Exhibit 21-9.21, set forth at the end of
this article.
(d)   The Waiawa (Pearl Highlands) station area TOD special district boundaries
are designated on Exhibit 21-9.22, set forth at the end of this article.
(e)   The Kalauao (Pearlridge) station area TOD special district boundaries are
designated on Exhibit 21-9.23, set forth at the end of this article.
(f)   The Halawa (Aloha Stadium) station area TOD special district boundaries
are designated on Exhibit 21-9.24, set forth at the end of this article.
(Added by Ord. 17-54; Am. Ords. 22-29 , 23-32)
Exhibit 21-9.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9722.png]
Exhibit 21-9.2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-265.png]
Exhibit 21-9.3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-267.png]
Exhibit 21-9.4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-269.png]
Exhibit 21-9.5
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-271.png]
Exhibit 21-9.6
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-273.png]
Exhibit 21-9.7
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-275.png]
Exhibit 21-9.8
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-277.png]
Exhibit 21-9.9
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10112.png]
Exhibit 21-9.10
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-281.png]
EXHIBIT 21-9.10-A
CHINATOWN SPECIAL DISTRICT HISTORIC
AND ARCHITECTURALLY SIGNIFICANT STRUCTURES
Tax Map Key Address1 Building Name
Tax Map Key      Address1                       Building Name
1-7-01: 2        55 N. Nimitz Hwy.              Pier 13 & 14
1-7-02: 2        800 Nuuanu Ave.                Fisher Hawaii Building
1-7-02: 4                                       State of Hawaii (shops)
1-7-02: 4        925 Maunakea St.               Fireboat Fire Station
1-7-02: 8        83 N. King St.                 Goodwill Industries
1-7-02: 9,45     75 N. King St.                 D. Dam/N. Tam
1-7-02: 11       900 Maunakea St.               M. Kawahara & T. Sato
1-7-02: 13       128 N. Nimitz Hwy.             C. Q. Yee Hop (stone)
1-7-02: 16       905 Kekaulike St.              Nimitz & Kekaulike
1-7-02: 17,18    915 Kekaulike St., 937         King & Kekaulike
                 Kekaulike St.
1-7-02: 19,21    943 Kekaulike St., 125 N. King Fish Market
                 St.
1-7-02: 23       101 N. King St.                Bank of Hawaii
1-7-02: 24       950 Maunakea St.               Dentist
1-7-02: 25       922 Maunakea St.               J. H. Schnack
1-7-02: 26       902 Kekaulike St.              Holau Market
1-7-02: 28       175 N. King St.                McCandless
1-7-02: 29       165 N. King St.                Musashiya
1-7-02: 34       145 N. King St.                Oahu Market
1-7-02: 35       2 Marin St.                    T. R. Foster/Spaghetti-2 Bldg.
1-7-02: 39       1 N. King St.                  One North King
1-7-02: 40       928 Nuuanu Ave.                Nippu Jiji
1-7-02: 45       69 N. King St.                 Oka
1-7-03: 1        2 N. King St.                  Hocking Hotel
1-7-03: 2        36 N. King St.                 United Chinese Society
1-7-03: 4,97     39 N. Hotel St.                Swing Club
1-7-03: 5        29 N. Hotel St.                29-31 Hotel St.
1-7-03: 6        15 N. Hotel St.                Nuuanu Shops
1-7-03: 7        1 N. Hotel St.                 Gallery
1-7-03: 8        1044 Nuuanu Ave.               McCandless Property
1-7-03: 9        1038 Nuuanu Ave.               Kim Chow
1-7-03: 10       72 N. King St.                 Hawaii National Bank
1-7-03: 11       80 N. King St.                 Lum Yip Kee
1-7-03: 12       90 N. King St.                 Lee & Young
1-7-03: 15       61 N. Hotel St.                Bath Palace
1-7-03: 15       61 N. Hotel St.                Mendonca (makai)
1-7-03: 16       51 N. Hotel St.                Mendonca (small, corner)
1-7-03: 18,90 92 116 N. King St.                D & B’s Lunch
1-7-03: 19       124 N. King St.                Uptown Jewelers
1-7-03: 25       119 N. Hotel St.               Lum Yip Kee 1936
1-7-03: 26       111 N. Hotel St.               Wo Fat
1-7-03: 28       1020 Kekaulike St.             Arita Store
1-7-03: 28       1020 Kekaulike St.             Kekaulike Building
1-7-03: 29,66    170 N. King St.                Lee Building
1-7-03: 30,31    178 N. King St.,               N. King & River Streets
72-74            182 N. King St.
1-7-03: 32       165 N. Hotel St.               Wong Building
1-7-03: 33       159 N. Hotel St.               LDCST BenevSoc
1-7-03: 37       102 N. Hotel St.               Siu Building
1-7-03: 42       158 N. Hotel St.               Wong
1-7-03: 45       175 N. Pauahi St.              Komeya Apartments
1-7-03: 48       1138 Maunakea St.              Sumida Building 1926
1-7-03: 49       1130 Maunakea St.              Lum Yip Kee 1920
1-7-03: 50       1110 Maunakea St.              Lee Building
1-7-03: 51       54 N. Hotel St.                Mendonca
1-7-03: 52       1125 Maunakea St.              Ket On Society
1-7-03: 55       65 N. Pauahi St.               Barbershop
1-7-03: 56       2 N. Hotel St.                 Encore Saloon Building
1-7-03: 57       24 N. Hotel St.                24 Hotel St. (Mel’s)
1-7-03: 58       30 N. Hotel St.                Risque
1-7-03: 59       42 N. Hotel St.                Kuo Min Tang
1-7-03: 59       42 N. Hotel St.                Young Market
1-7-03: 59       50 N. Hotel St.                Mini Garden
1-7-03: 62       1126 Nuuanu Ave.               Love’s Bakery
1-7-03: 63       1136 Nuuanu Ave.               McCandless Block
1-7-03: 64       1118 Nuuanu Ave.               Lai Fong
1-7-03: 66,29    158 N. King St.                United Press, Ltd.
1-7-03: 75       136 N. King St.                L. Ah Leong
1-7-03: 76       1034 Maunakea St.              Cindy’s Leis
1-7-03: 81       1021 Smith St.
1-7-03: 83       21 N. Hotel St.                Club Hubba Hubba
1-7-03: 84-89    1023 Maunakea St.              Chung Chong Yuen
1-7-03: 96       1120 Maunakea St.              Colusa Building (part of
                                                Maunakea Marketplace)
1-7-03: 98       1128 Smith St.                 1128 Smith St.
1-7-04: 1        1150 Nuuanu Ave.               Four Seas Chop Suey
1-7-04: 8        1162 Nuuanu Ave.               Bo San Ton
1-7-04: 9        1158 Nuuanu Ave.               Oweco World Travel
1-7-04: 11       1149 Maunakea St.              Yanin Ltd. Building
1-7-04: 13       1159 Maunakea St.              Tsung Tsin Association
1-7-04: 16       1165 Maunakea St.              Old Jailhouse (stone building)
1-7-04: 18       83 N. Beretania St.            Hai On Tong
1-7-04: 19       73 N. Beretania St.            79 N. Beretania St.
1-7-04: 21,22    53 N. Beretania St.            OK Restaurant (2 sections)
1-7-04: 25       1146 Smith St.                 Golden Harvest
1-7-04: 28       1152 Maunakea St.              Minatoya Sukiyaki
1-7-04: 36       171 N. Beretania St.           Fong Building
2-1-02: 12       901 Bethel St.                 Kamehameha V Building
2-1-02: 19       63 Merchant St.                Bishop Bank Building
2-1-02: 20       51 Merchant St.                Melcher Building
2-1-02: 24,57    842 Bethel St.                 Old Honolulu Police Station
                                                (Walter Murray Gibson Building)
2-1-02: 32       924 Bethel St.                 The Friend
2-1-02: 33       908 Bethel St.                 Honolulu Publishing Co.
2-1-02: 34       16 Merchant St.
2-1-02: 35       2 Merchant St.                 Royal Saloon
2-1-02: 37       923 Nuuanu Ave.                Wing Wo Tai
2-1-02: 42       2 S. King St.                  King’s Court/First Federal
2-1-03: 16       1121 Nuuanu Ave.               McLean Block
2-1-03: 17       2 S. Hotel St.                 Perry Block 1888
2-1-03: 18       1129 Nuuanu Ave.               Pantheon Bar
1   In the event the listed addresses are not consistent with the tax map keys
or building names, the tax map keys and building names shall prevail.
 
(Am. Ord. 10-19)
Exhibit 21-9.11
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-283.png]
Exhibit 21-9.12
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-285.png]
Exhibit 21-9.13
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-287.png]
EXHIBIT 21-9.13A
Modification to Waikiki Special District Zoning Precincts
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-289.png]
EXHIBIT 21-9.14*
Editor’s note:
   *Exhibit 21-9.14 is left blank intentionally.
Exhibit 21-9.15
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-291.png]
Exhibit 21-9.16
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-293.png]
Exhibit 21-9.17
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-295.png]
Exhibit 21-9.18
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-297.png]
Exhibit 21-9.19
Hoaeae (West Loch) Station Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9551.jpg]
(Added by Ord. 17-54; Am. Ord. 22-29 )
Exhibit 21-9.20
Pouhala (Waipahu Transit Center) Station Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9543.png]
(Added by Ord. 17-54; Am. Ord. 22-29 )
Exhibit 21-9.21
Halaulani (Leeward Community College) Station Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9545.jpg]
(Added by Ord. 22-29 )
Exhibit 21-9.22
Waiawa (Pearl Highlands) Station Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9549.jpg]
(Added by Ord. 22-29 )
Exhibit 21-9.23
Kalauao (Pearlridge) Station Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9547.jpg]
(Added by Ord. 22-29 )
Exhibit 21-9.24
Halawa (Aloha Stadium) Station Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10119.png]
(Added by Ord. 23-32)
ARTICLE 10: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
21-10.1   Definitions
§ 21-10.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words used in the
present tense include the future; words used in the singular include the
plural, and the plural the singular. The use of any gender shall be applicable
to all genders. The word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is permissive;
the word “land” includes inland bodies of water and marshes.
   Where a proposed use is not specifically listed in this chapter or included
in a definition in this article, the director will review the proposed use and,
based upon the characteristics of the use, determine which listed or defined
use is equivalent to that proposed.
Accessory Dwelling Unit. A dwelling unit, including separate kitchen, bedroom,
and bathroom facilities, attached or detached from the principal dwelling unit
on the zoning lot.
Accessory Receive Only Antenna.  An antenna that is not regulated by the
Federal Communications Commission, is used primarily to receive radio frequency
or microwave transmissions, and is accessory to a principal use. The term
includes satellite dishes up to 1 meter in size, amateur (ham) radio antennas,
and television antennas attached to single-unit, two-unit, and duplex-unit
dwellings. The term does not include broadcasting antennas (see broadcasting
antenna), telecommunication facilities (see communication tower, communication
support structure), or satellite dishes larger than 1 meter in diameter (see
dish antenna).
Accessory Use. A use that meets the following conditions:
(1)   Is conducted on the same zoning lot as the principal use to which it is
related, whether located within the same building or an accessory building or
structure, or as an accessory use of the zoning lot;
(2)   Is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with the
principal use; and
(3)   Is operated and maintained substantially for the benefit or convenience
of the owners, occupants, employees, customers, or visitors of the zoning lot
with the principal use.
Active Agricultural Use. Continuously used for the business of raising and
producing agricultural products in their natural state, including necessary and
customary fallowing periods.
Adjoin, Adjoining, and Adjoins. Without an intervening street or permanent open
space over 25 feet in width.
Adverse Reflection. A glare toward any oncoming traffic within a 45-degree cone
of vision to each side and a 30-degree cone of vision vertically that could
create a traffic hazard.
Agricultural Cluster. An area accommodating joint facilities for farming
activities, including the clustering of homes within a larger site, by
individuals, associations, or corporations.
Agricultural Collection and Storage. Collecting and storing of crops and
animal-related products essential for the support of a variety of agriculture
uses for distribution to wholesale and retail markets. The term does not
include the storage or movement of non-agricultural products (see general
storage, warehousing, and distribution).
(1)   Minor: Collecting and storing crops and live animal by-products such as
milk, eggs, and honey.
(2)   Major: Collecting and storing dead animals and associated by-products.
Agricultural Easement. The grant of a property right stipulating that the
affected land will remain in active agricultural production or in open space.
Agricultural Energy Facility. An accessory facility that generates, stores, or
distributes renewable energy fuels from products of crop production or
livestock and poultry keeping. The term includes producing, harvesting, and
preparing Hawaii-grown feedstock for use at the agricultural energy facility.
The term includes operational infrastructure of the appropriate type and scale
for the economic commercial generation, storage, distribution, and other
similar handling of energy, including equipment, feedstock, fuels, and other
products of agricultural energy facilities necessary for an enterprise that
integrally incorporates an agricultural activity with an agricultural energy
facility. The term does not include utility-scale solar facilities, or the use
of grease, food wastes, animal residues, or animal wastes from offsite
commercial or industrial uses to generate energy (see biofuel processing
facility).
Agricultural Equipment Service. Selling and repairing machinery used in
agricultural production, such as tractors, planters, and harvesters. The term
does not include the sale, rental, or lease of motor vehicles for use on a road
(see vehicle sales and rental), the repair of industrial machinery, heavy
equipment. and engines that are not used in agricultural production (see heavy
repair), or the routine maintenance of vehicles that are not used in
agricultural production, such as replacing fluids and minor parts (see vehicle
service).
Agricultural Farmers Market. An accessory outdoor market for the sale of
Hawaii-grown agricultural products and value-added products that were produced
using Hawaii-grown agricultural products located on a zoning lot with a
principal agricultural use. The term does not include outdoor markets and
similar uses conducted outside of the agricultural zoning districts (see
general retail), farm stands (see farm stand), or food trucks or mobile vendors
(see mobile commercial establishments).
Agricultural Processing. Processing Hawaii-grown crops and Hawaii-raised
animal-related products (grown or raised onsite or offsite) in their original
form, such as washing, cutting, bundling, and packaging, which are essential to
supporting a variety of agriculture uses for distribution to storage structures
or wholesale and retail markets. The term does not include the processing of
packaged food or drink products (see food manufacturing and processing). See
also agricultural collection and storage.
(1)   Minor: Processing Hawaii-grown crops and live Hawaii-raised animal by-
products (grown or raised onsite or offsite) such as milk. eggs, honey, and
aquaculture harvests. In the agricultural zoning districts, the term includes
the processing of Hawaii-grown crops grown onsite or offsite to produce malt
beverages, distilled spirits, or wines. of which at least 51 percent are
Hawaii-grown ingredients other than water.
(2)   Major: Slaughtering and processing of dead Hawaii-raised animals and
associated by-products.
Agritourism. Accessory agricultural-related tourism for recreational or
educational purposes on zoning lots primarily used for ongoing crop production
or livestock and poultry keeping. Agricultural-related tourism activities
include kayaking, hiking, mountain biking, boating, horseback riding,
ziplining, and picnicking. The term includes accessory destination events, such
as weddings. The term does not include agricultural-related tourism for
entertainment purposes, including luaus and performance-related shows (see
general outdoor recreation).
Aina-Based Education Facility. A facility designed to support educational
programs that are grounded in the cultural, environmental. and community values
of aina and is not operated primarily for financial gain.
Airport. Activities and structures for the landing and takeoff of flying
vehicles, including loading and unloading areas such as passenger terminals.
Aviation facilities may be improved or unimproved. The term includes but is not
limited to commercial carriers and private aircraft facilities.
All-Weather Surface. A 4-inch base course with a 2-inch asphaltic concrete
surface or a 4-inch reinforced concrete pavement or any other similar materials
as determined to be acceptable by the department. These materials may combine
the load-bearing characteristics, durability, and level surface of asphalt and
concrete. “Grass bloc” and “grasscrete” may be considered all-weather surfaces.
Animal Care.  Providing medical care, grooming, training, or boarding services
to household pets as a principal use. The term includes animal shelters,
kennels, veterinary clinics, animal clinics, animal hospitals, pet grooming
facilities, pet daycare, and pet spas. The term does not include raising and
feeding livestock and poultry in confined areas such as pens, stalls, or cages
(see major animal raising), or providing veterinary services to livestock and
poultry (see livestock and poultry veterinary service).
(1)   Minor: Facilities that do not provide overnight boarding.
(2)   Major: Facilities that provide overnight boarding.
Animal Raising. Agricultural establishments primarily engaged in commercial
livestock and poultry keeping or feeding as a principal use.
(1)   Minor: Agricultural establishments that, because of operational
characteristics, may generate dust, odors, pollutants, or visual impacts that
are unlikely to adversely affect adjacent properties. The term includes small
commercial animal operations such as rabbit farms, apiaries, aviaries, or the
raising and feeding of livestock and poultry such as cattle, horses, goats,
sheep, swine, turkeys, chickens, ducks, bees, and rabbits. The term does not
include feedlots (see major animal raising), the boarding and care of household
pets (see animal care), or animal shelters (see animal care).
(2)   Major: Agricultural establishments that, because of operational
characteristics, may generate dust, odors, pollutants, or visual impacts that
could adversely affect adjacent properties. The term includes piggeries,
dairies, dairy and beef cattle feedlots, and chicken, turkey, and other poultry
farms. The term also includes feedlots, defined as any animal feeding operation
that concentrates animals, feed, manure and urine, dead animals, and production
operations on a small land area. In feedlots, feed is brought to the animals
rather than the animals grazing or otherwise seeking feed in pastures, fields,
or on rangeland. The term does not include the boarding and care of household
pets (see animal care) or animal shelters (see animal care).
Aquaculture. The cultivating and raising of aquatic plants such as limu,
wetland taro, kelp or algae, or aquatic animals such as fish or shellfish in
controlled natural or artificial bodies of water. The term does not include
cultivating land-based crops, including with hydroponics (see crop raising).
Arcade. A contiguous area with access to a street designed to provide
pedestrian access to more than one abutting establishment. It is open and
unobstructed to a height of not less than 12 feet, is accessible to the public
during business hours and has an area of not less than 500 square feet
including portions occupied by building columns. It has minimum length and
width dimensions of 10 feet. An arcade is not more than 3 feet above the level
of the sidewalk which it adjoins. At least 50 percent of its perimeter is open
to a street, sidewalk, or public open space, except for a railing or wall with
a maximum height of 42 inches (see
Figure 21-10.1).
FIGURE 21-10.1
ARCADE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-303.png]
Attic. A portion of a building wholly or partly in the roof, so designated,
arranged, or built as to be used for business, storage, or habitation. Attic
areas with a head room of less than 7 feet shall not be included as floor area.
Bar, Nightclub. An establishment that prepares and sells liquor for onsite
consumption. The term does not include liquor production (see brewery,
distillery, winery). A bar or nightclub may include a dance floor or live or
amplified recorded music or professional entertainment, subject to licensing by
the Honolulu liquor commission. A bar or nightclub may also offer food and
nonalcoholic drinks for consumption onsite or offsite but is not considered to
be a general eating and drinking establishment if the principal offering is the
sale of liquor. See also general eating and drinking.
(1)   Minor: A bar or nightclub open until 2:00 a.m. or that closes prior to 2:
00 a.m.
(2)   Major: A bar or nightclub open until 4:00 a.m.
Base Yard. Outside storage, parking, cleaning, and incidental repair and
maintenance of vehicles and associated equipment. The term includes supporting
dispatching services, administrative offices, kitchens, showers, lounges, and
similar personnel supporting activities.
Basement. A floor that is wholly below grade, or that is partly below grade
such that the floor above is no more than 3 feet above grade for at least 50
percent of the floor’s perimeter.
Grade shall be either existing or finished grade, whichever is lower at all
points (see
Figure 21-10.2).
FIGURE 21-10.2
BASEMENT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-305.png]
Bathroom. A room that contains, or a combination of adjoining rooms that
provide access to one another that contain, at least two of the following
items:
(1)   Bath or shower;
(2)   Sink; or
(3)   Toilet.
Bed and Breakfast Home. A use in which overnight accommodations are advertised,
solicited, offered, or provided (or a combination of any of the foregoing) to
transient occupants, for compensation, for periods of less than 90 consecutive
days, in the same dwelling unit occupied by an owner, lessee, operator, or
proprietor of the dwelling unit. See also transient vacation unit. For the
purposes of this definition:
(1)   Compensation includes but is not limited to monetary payment, services,
or labor of transient occupants; and
(2)   Month-to-month holdover tenancies resulting from the expiration of long-
term leases of 90 consecutive days or more are excluded.
Beekeeping. The keeping of bees in artificial hives, such as honeybees and
varieties of native bees as an agricultural activity. The term does not include
accessory commercial beekeeping in zoning districts where home occupations are
permitted, which must comply with standards for home occupations (see home
occupation). The term does not include accessory backyard beekeeping involving
small-scale beekeeping for personal use on the same zoning lot on which the
beekeeper’s dwelling unit is located (see §
12-2.5(b) for animal nuisance requirements relating to the keeping of
honeybees).
Bicycle Sharing. Refers to non-rental bicycles that are shared by multiple
users at one location, typically for short trips by employees, guests, or
residents of a multi-unit dwelling. Bicycle sharing may also refer to bicycles
offered for rent with designated docking stations, but does not include bicycle
sharing offices or onsite staff.
Biofuel Processing Facility. A facility that produces liquid or gaseous fuels
from organic sources, such as biomass crops, agricultural residues, oil crops
(including palm, canola, soybean, and waste cooking oils); grease; food wastes;
or animal residues and wastes that may be used to generate energy.
Booking Service. Any reservation or payment service provided by a person that
facilitates a transaction between an owner, operator, or proprietor of a bed
and breakfast home or transient vacation unit, and a prospective user of that
bed and breakfast home or transient vacation unit, and for which the person
collects or receives, directly or indirectly through an agent or intermediary,
a fee from any person in connection with the reservation or payment services
provided for by the transaction.
Boundary Wall. A solid wall without openings, which is part of a building and
erected on the boundary line between adjacent zoning lots.
Brewery, Distillery, Winery. A facility that produces malt beverages, distilled
spirits, or wines. The term does not include facilities that fall within the
minor agricultural processing use (see minor agricultural processing) or
establishments that fall within the bar, nightclub use. The onsite or offsite
consumption of malt beverages, distilled spirits, or wine is determined by the
type of liquor license obtained from the Honolulu liquor commission.
(1)   Minor: Producing a maximum of 10,000 barrels a year (or similar level of
production). The term includes guided tours and free tastings of malt
beverages, distilled spirits, or wine produced onsite.
(2)   Major: Producing more than 10,000 barrels a year (or similar level of
production). The term includes guided tours and free tastings of malt
beverages, distilled spirits, or wine produced onsite.
Broadcasting Antenna. Antennas, towers, and other accessory facilities for
radio frequency transmissions of AM and FM radio and television broadcasting.
Transmissions may be received by anyone with a radio or television. These
facilities are regulated by the Federal Communications Commission under Title
47 CFR Part 73, as may be amended or superseded. The term does not include
broadcasting studios and stations, and telecommunication facilities (see
communication tower, communication support structure).
Buildable Area. A portion of a zoning lot excluding required yards, stream
setbacks, shoreline setbacks, and street setbacks.
Buildable Area Boundary Line. Any of the imaginary lines which constitute a
perimeter separating the buildable area from the nonbuildable area of a zoning
lot.
Building. Anything built, constructed, or erected, or established or composed
of parts joined together in some definite manner that provides shelter for
humans, animals, or property of any kind and requires location on the ground,
or that is attached to something having permanent location on the ground. A
building may or may not be easily moved from a given location on the ground.
Building Area. The total area of a zoning lot covered by structures and covered
open areas. The following are not considered building area:
(1)   Open areas covered by eaves and normal overhang of roofs;
(2)   Uncovered entrance platforms, uncovered terraces, and uncovered steps
when these features do not themselves constitute enclosures for building areas
below them, and do not exceed 30 inches in height; and
(3)   All-weather surfaces.
Car Sharing Spaces. Parking spaces dedicated for use by car sharing vehicles.
Car Wash. A facility with mechanical or hand-operated equipment used for
cleaning, washing, polishing, or waxing of motor vehicles.
Caretaker Unit. An accessory dwelling unit occupied by the owner or caretaker
of a principal use on a zoning lot for the purposes of maintenance and security
of the premises. The term includes accessory caretaker units for principal uses
involving cemeteries and Hawaiian fishponds.
Carport. An accessory structure or portion of a principal structure consisting
of a roof and supporting members such as columns or beams, unenclosed from the
ground to the roof on at least two sides, and designed or used for the storage
of motor vehicles.
Cemetery. A property divided into cemetery lots for sale as burial plots at an
interment facility, including columbaria and mausoleums. Permitted accessory
uses include crematory operations, cemetery real estate operations, mortuary
services, floral and monument sales, and single-unit dwellings to be occupied
by cemetery caretakers.
Communication Support Structure. A structure designed for a separate use or
purpose that also supports or conceals a telecommunications facility. Equipment
may be mounted on and integrated with a roof or facade, light pole, bell tower,
clock tower, campanile, steeple, light structure other than a street light pole
or traffic signal pole, or similar structure.
Communication Tower. A freestanding structure that supports a
telecommunications facility. The term includes monopoles, monopalms, monopines,
lattice towers, and similar structures. The term does not include broadcasting
antennas (see broadcasting antenna) or structures that support or conceal an
antenna (see communication support structure).
Community-Based Recreation Center. A community-based recreation center, which
may be membership based, that includes outdoor and indoor recreation, including
swimming pools, locker rooms, sports courts, gymnasiums, meeting rooms,
offices, and supporting facilities. See also park, general outdoor recreation,
nature-based recreation, personal services, public facility.
Composting. The recycling of organic waste through natural decomposition and
other processes that encourage or speed up the decomposition process.
Composting may include the receipt of composting materials, primary processing,
decomposition, and final processing for sale and marketing of resulting
products. The term does not include bioremediation of fuel-contaminated soil,
or backyard composting involving small-scale composting of organic materials,
primarily yard wastes, at the site where these materials are generated.
(1)   Minor: Involves simple management and engineering solutions to control
odors, vectors, and surface water contamination. The term includes the
composting of clean, source-separated organic materials, including greenwaste,
animal manure, crop residues, and waste from vegetable food processing
operations.
(2)   Major: Involves complex controls to manage odors, vectors, and surface
water contamination. For instance, in some cases, onsite odors may not be able
to be completely mitigated. The term includes the composting of mixed solid
waste, including solid waste facility residues (rubbish), sewage sludge, waste
from animal food processing operations, and similar materials.
Consulate. A facility that includes the offices (including administrative
offices) of an official appointed by a foreign government who serves the
interests of foreign citizens. A consulate may include space for residential
occupancy. Consulates are public facilities, and are eligible for zoning
waivers that apply to public facilities.
Crop Raising. Cultivating, maintaining, and harvesting crops for agriculture
and horticulture purposes, generally conducted in an open field or greenhouse.
The term includes vertical farm operations and cultivating crops with
hydroponics, aeroponics, and aquaponics. The term does not include cultivating
aquatic plants or animals (see aquaculture). See also forestry, plant nursery.
CUP. Conditional use permit.
Daycare, Adult. The use of a building or property other than a dwelling unit or
medical facility to provide supervision and care to adults who need supervision
or assisted living services. The term does not include overnight stays and 24-
hour care.
Daycare, Child. The use of a building or property other than a dwelling unit,
public school, or medical facility to provide supervision and care for
individuals under 18 years of age. The term includes care for seven or more
individuals under 18 years of age. The term does not include overnight stays
and 24-hour care. See also home occupation, home-based childcare, K-12 school,
and public facility.
Department. The department of planning and permitting.
Designated Authorized Representative. One or more persons appointed by the
owner or owners to reside in the primary dwelling unit or accessory dwelling
unit and act on behalf of the owner or owners in the absence of the owner or
owners.
Developer. A landowner or any person with written authorization from the owner
who intends to improve or to construct improvements upon a zoning lot or
portion of a zoning lot.
Development. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real property,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, filling, grading,
or excavation operation.
Director. The director of planning and permitting or designated representatives
of the director. As appropriate to the circumstances, approval by the director
shall include approval by the director’s designated representatives.
Dish Antenna. A receiver or transmitter of radio frequency or microwave
transmissions consisting of a reflector-shaped satellite dish that is larger
than 1 meter in diameter. The term does not include dish antennas integrated
with telecommunication facilities (see communication tower, communication
support structure). See also accessory receive only antenna.
Donor Lot. A zoning lot that will transfer all or a portion of the unused floor
area of the zoning lot to a receiving lot under off-site joint development
approval.
Drive-Through Facility. Any portion of a retail establishment that offers
service to patrons via a drive- through counter or window so that patrons need
not leave their vehicles for service. The term drive-through does not include
automobile service stations.
Drive-Thru. An accessory facility that allows a customer to be served while
seated in a vehicle, typically accessory to an eating and drinking
establishment, bank, dry cleaner, or pharmacy.
Dwelling, Duplex-Unit. A single building that is located on two separate zoning
lots. The duplex building must contain two independent dwelling units that are
separated by a common wall located along a side or rear yard boundary line for
the zoning lots. An interior connection between the dwelling units is
prohibited, and each dwelling unit must have a separate entrance. Use of a
duplex-unit dwelling is the occupancy of each dwelling unit in the duplex-unit
dwelling by one family for non-transient, residential purposes and permissible
accessory uses (see
Figure 21-10.3).
Dwelling, Multi-Unit. Three or more dwelling units contained in a single
building. Use of a multi-unit dwelling includes the occupancy of each dwelling
unit in the multi-unit dwelling by one family for non-transient occupancy for
residential purposes and permissible accessory uses. If permitted in the
underlying zoning district, multi-unit dwellings may include spaces for
nonresidential uses; provided that these nonresidential uses will be regulated
as separate land uses.
Dwelling, Single-Unit. A detached building containing one dwelling unit that is
used exclusively by one family for non-transient occupancy for residential
purposes, and permissible accessory uses (see
Figure 21-10.3).
Dwelling, Two-Unit. Two dwelling units in a single structurally independent
building that is entirely surrounded by yards or other separation from
buildings on adjacent zoning lots (see
Figure 21-10.3).
FIGURE 21-10.3
DWELLINGS (TYPES)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10305.png]
Dwelling Unit. A room or connected rooms in a single structure that are
designed for residential occupancy by one family. A dwelling unit contains one
kitchen, sanitary facilities, and space for sleeping. Two or more structures
that are essentially separate except for an unenclosed or token connection,
such as a covered walkway or a trellis, do not constitute a single dwelling
unit. Dwelling unit use is the exclusive occupancy of a dwelling unit by one
family for non-transient, residential purposes and permissible accessory uses.
Unless specifically permitted in use regulations, a dwelling unit may not be
used as a timeshare, bed and breakfast home, or transient vacation unit as
defined in this section.
Eating and Drinking, General. An establishment that serves meals to patrons for
compensation as a principal use. Must have suitable kitchen facilities
connected therewith, containing the necessary equipment and supplies for
cooking an assortment of foods that may be required for ordinary meals. General
eating and drinking may include the sale of liquor with appropriate Honolulu
liquor commission license. See also bar, nightclub. A bona fide general eating
and drinking establishment is distinguished from a bar or nightclub because the
principal offering is the sale of food and nonalcoholic drinks for consumption
onsite or offsite. See also drive-thru.
Electric Ready. A parking space that is prepared in advance for future use as
an electrical charging station for electric vehicles. To be electric ready,
electrical conduits must be in place with lines to the electrical supply of the
structure. The actual wiring and installation of charging equipment or
receptacles may occur at a future date when demand for electrical charging
stations arises.
Energy Generation System. A facility for producing electricity from renewable
sources such as the sun, wind, internal heat of the earth, flowing water, or
waves, or from nonrenewable sources such as petroleum. natural gas or coal.
Energy Savings Device. Any facility, equipment, apparatus, or the like which
makes use of nonfossil fuel sources for lighting, heating, or cooling, or that
reduces the use of other types of energy dependent on fossil fuel for
generation.
Exclusive Agricultural Sites. Leasehold parcels within an agricultural zoning
district having a minimum leasable area of 5 acres, and prohibiting any
structures for temporary, seasonal, or permanent residential occupancy or
habitation.
Explosive or Toxic Chemical Manufacturing, Storage, and Distribution.
Manufacturing, storing, and distributing poisonous, corrosive, or combustible
materials capable of causing death or injury to people or damage to property.
The term does not include petroleum, liquefied petroleum gas, or coal products
(see petrochemical plant).
Family. One or more natural persons, all related by blood, adoption,
guardianship, marriage, or other duly authorized custodial relationship
occupying a dwelling unit or lodging unit: or no more than five unrelated
natural persons.
Farm Dwelling. A dwelling unit that is accessory to a principal agricultural
use on the same zoning lot other than open space or forestry, where onsite
agricultural activity provides income to the household occupying the farm
dwelling.
Farm Stand. Selling merchandise primarily grown or made onsite with limited
sales of prepackaged food and drinks. The term does not include food trucks or
mobile vendors (see mobile commercial establishment), or farmers markets (see
agricultural farmers market).
Farm Worker Housing. Dwelling units that are accessory to an active, principal
agricultural use other than open space, forestry, or the boarding and care of
animals, and used exclusively to house employees of agricultural operations and
their family members.
Feed Store. Storing and selling products essential to agricultural production,
such as seed, feed, and fertilizer.
Flag Lot. A zoning lot consisting of an access drive and a body in such a
manner that the body would be landlocked from a public street or private way
except for connection by the access drive (see
Figure 21-4.1).
Flag Lot Access Drive. A strip of land that provides access for a flag lot (see
Figure 21-4.1).
Flag Lot Body. The landlocked portion of a flag lot (see
Figure 21-4.1).
Floor Area. The area of all floors of a structure excluding unroofed areas,
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline
of party walls dividing a structure. The floor area of a structure, or portion
thereof, that is not enclosed by exterior walls is the area under the covering,
roof, or floor above that is supported by posts, columns, partial walls, or
similar structural members, that define the wall line (see
Figure 21-10.4). Excluded from the floor area are:
(1)   Parking structures, including covered driveways and accessways, porte
cocheres, and parking attendant booths;
(2)   Attic areas with head room less than 7 feet;
(3)   Basements;
(4)   Lanais;
(5)   Projections such as sunshade devices and architectural embellishments
that are decorative only;
(6)   Areas covered by roofing treatment to screen rooftop machinery only; and
(7)   Areas underneath rooftop solar panels or unsupported building overhangs,
provided the area is not otherwise enclosed.
FIGURE 21-10.4
FLOOR AREA
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-309.png]
(Added by Ord. 99-12)
FIGURE 21-10.4 (Continued)
FLOOR AREA (Continued)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-311.png]
(Added by Ord. 03-37)
Floor Area Ratio or FAR. The ratio of floor area to total area of the zoning
lot expressed as a percent or decimal. Where rounding of numbers is necessary
to determine floor area ratio, the nearest one-hundr edth shall be used.
Multiplyi ng the permissibl e floor area ratio by the lot area of the zoning
lot determine s the maximum floor area permitted.
Food Manufacturing and Processing. Processing of packaged food or drink
products for human consumption that does not involve the handling of dead
animals or animal by-products (see agricultural processing). The term does not
include facilities that fall within the agricultural processing use, if
activities include further processing such as cooking and blending.
Forestry. Creating, conserving, and managing forests or forest lands for
commodity benefits such as lumber or non-commodity benefits such as
conservation or education. See also plant nursery, crop raising.
Golf Course. A facility for playing nine holes or more of golf. Includes
associated clubhouses and driving ranges. The term does not include miniature
golf courses or stand-alone driving ranges (see general outdoor recreation).
Grading. Any excavation or cut or fill or combination thereof.
Group Living. Residential occupancy that is not included in household living.
Includes but is not limited to monasteries, convents, dormatories, and
facilities such as adult residential care home, assisted living facility,
special needs housing for the elderly, developmental disabilities domicilary
home, special treatment facility, clean and sober home, hospice home, group
home, recovery home, nursing home, rehabilitation facility, and sanitarium.
These facilities may be licensed, certified, registered, or monitored by the
State.
Group Living, Large. Type of group living that may be licensed, certified,
registered, or monitored by the State, where a dwelling unit is occupied by
nine or more residents who do not meet the definition of a family. Resident
managers or supervisors and their families are not included in the resident
count.
Group Living, Small–Not State Regulated. Type of group living that is not
licensed, certified, registered, or monitored by the State, where a dwelling
unit is occupied by up to eight residents who do not meet the definition of a
family. Resident managers or supervisors and their families are not included in
the resident count.
Group Living, Small–State Regulated. Type of group living that is licensed,
certified, registered, or monitored by the State, where a dwelling unit is
occupied by up to eight residents who do not meet the definition of a family.
Resident managers or supervisors and their families are not included in the
resident count.
Grubbing. Any act to clear the ground surface of any or all trees, large
shrubbery, or large groupings of plants.
Hawaiian Fishpond. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 183B-1.
Height Envelope. The three-dimensional space within which a structure is
permitted to be built on a zoning lot and that is defined by the buildable area
boundary lines, maximum height regulations, and any applicable height setbacks.
Heliport. A facility for landing and takeoff of rotorcraft, including
supporting fueling, maintenance, repair, and storage activities.
Helistop. An accessory facility for landing and takeoff of rotorcraft that does
not include supporting fueling, maintenance, or repair facilities.
Historic Site or Structure. Any site or structure that has been placed on
either the national or State registers of historic places, or that is
specifically listed as a site or structure of significance in a special
district under Article 9.
Home-Based Childcare. A home occupation in which childcare services are
provided during any portion of a 24-hour day to no more than six children at
any given time who are not members of the household, and that is licensed by
the State department of human services. In addition to one employee of the home
occupation who is allowed on the property at any given time, if the principal
caregiver that is a household member becomes unavailable due to illness or
emergency, an additional non-household member may be allowed on the property to
provide childcare services on a temporary basis to substitute for the principal
caregiver. See also child daycare.
Home Occupation. Any activity intended to produce income that is carried on
within a dwelling unit, accessory structure to a dwelling unit, or on a zoning
lot used principally for residential purposes. Home occupations include the use
of any residential premises as a base for an off-premise, income-producing
activity.
Hospital. An institution providing primarily in-patient, intensive, medical, or
surgical care, including emergency care services. The term includes facilities
for extended care, intermediate care and out-patient care, living facilities
for staff, research and educational facilities, doctor offices, and any
administrative offices necessary for the operation of the facility. See also
general medical services.
Hosting Platform. A person that collects or receives a fee from any person for
booking services through which an owner, operator, or proprietor of a bed and
breakfast home or transient vacation unit may offer use of the bed and
breakfast home or transient vacation unit. Hosting platforms typically, but not
necessarily, provide booking services through an online platform that allows
the owner, operator, or proprietor to advertise the bed and breakfast home or
transient vacation unit through a website provided by the hosting platform, and
the hosting platform conducts a transaction by which potential users arrange
the use of and payment for the bed and breakfast home or transient vacation
unit, whether the payment is made directly to the owner, operator, or
proprietor, or to the hosting platform.
Hotel. A building or buildings, or a portion of a building or buildings,
containing guest rooms that are offered and used for the provision of transient
accommodations to transient occupants. A hotel must include a lobby or 24-hour
front desk and facilities used to provide housekeeping services to guests. The
term includes activities, facilities, and services that are traditionally and
customarily provided for the benefit and convenience of hotel guests. The term
does not include transient vacation units, bed and breakfast homes, and
timeshares.
Household Pet. A dog, cat, service animal, or other domesticated animals that
are customary and usual pets. The term does not include cows, horses, camels,
llamas, sheep, goats, swine, or poultry.
Impervious Surface. A surface covering or pavement of a developed parcel of
land that prevents the land’s natural ability to absorb and infiltrate rainfall
or stormwater. Impervious surfaces include but are not limited to rooftops,
walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, impervious concrete
and asphalt, and any other continuous watertight pavement or covering.
Joint Development. The development of two or more adjacent subdivision lots
under a single or unified project concept. See also “off-site joint
development.”
Kitchen. A kitchen facility for a housekeeping unit that exists when there is,
on the premises of the housekeeping unit, an item from all three of the
following categories:
(1)   Fixtures, appliances, or devices for heating or cooking food;
(2)   Fixtures, appliances, or devices for washing utensils used for dining and
food preparation or for washing and preparing food; and
(3)   Fixtures, appliances, or devices for refrigeration of food.
Lanai. An area projecting from the face of a building that meets the following
conditions:
(1)   It is an accessory area to a dwelling or lodging unit;
(2)   At least 50 percent of the area’s perimeter is permanently open to the
exterior, except for a safety railing not exceeding 4 feet in height, and is
without structural columns or walls; and
(3)   The area is solely accessible from the dwelling unit to which it is
appurtenant.
Recessed areas within the main building face are not “lanais.”
Landscaped. A maintained area of which a minimum of 50 percent shall be devoted
exclusively to include plants that are rooted directly in the ground or in
permanently fixed planter boxes. The remaining 50 percent may be devoted to
rock gardens, fountains, and reflecting pools.
Laundry Room. A utility room in a dwelling unit that is used for washing and
cleaning clothes and other fabrics, and which contains items such as a washing
machine, utility sink, and clothes dryer.
Lei Making and Selling. A retail use or structure exclusively involved with the
preparation and retail sale of leis made from fresh plant materials; provided
that:
(1)   Any structure used, such as a kiosk or vending cart, is not fixed to a
particular location for more than 24 hours at a time; and
(2)   Any structure used has no more than one umbrella or canvas overhead
directly attached to the structure, and is not fixed at any point to the ground
or to another structure.
Linen Supplier. Providing linen and offsite laundry services, including but not
limited to delivery and pickup to businesses such as hospitals and hotels.
Linens include but are not limited to uniforms, towels, aprons, tablecloths,
napkins, and similar fabrics meant to be cleaned.
Livestock. Animals raised in an agricultural setting to provide labor or
produce diversified products for consumption such as meat milk, fur, leather,
and wool. The term includes cattle, horses, goats, sheep, swine, and rabbits
that are not raised as household pets or for purposes of personal use and
companionship.
Livestock and Poultry Veterinary Service. Providing veterinary services to
livestock and poultry. The term does not include providing veterinary services
to livestock and poultry raised as household pets or for purposes of personal
use and companionship (see animal care). See also major animal raising.
Lodging Unit. A building, or portion of a building, in a hotel or other
structure designed for transient or longer-term occupancy that does not include
all three permanent facilities for food preparation (heating/cooking element,
sink, and refrigerator).
Long-Term Bicycle Parking. Secure, weather-protected bicycle parking intended
for employees, residents, commuters, and other visitors who generally stay at a
site for several hours, or overnight.
Lot Area. The total area within the lot lines of the zoning lot but exclusive
of right-of-way for ingress or egress in favor of others, and easements for
open drainage systems.
Lot Depth. The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot line.
In the case of zoning lots with more than one front yard, either one of the
zoning lot dimensions may be used to calculate lot depth.
Lot Width. The average horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at
right angles to lot depth. In the case of zoning lots with more than one front
yard, either one of the zoning lot dimensions may be used to calculate lot
width.
Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of an enclosed area including basements of a
building. An enclosure, usable solely for parking vehicles, building access, or
storage area is not considered a building’s lowest floor.
Manufacturing and Processing, General. The manufacture, processing, assembly,
fabrication, refinement, alteration, or packaging by hand or by machinery, from
raw materials, component parts, or other products. of finished goods,
merchandise, or other end products suitable for sale or trade.
(1)   Light: Activities that are non-offensive to adjacent uses; involve no
open storage or other types of outdoor accessory uses other than parking and
loading; do not involve processes that generate significant levels of heat,
noise, odors, or particulates; and do not involve chemicals or other substances
that pose a threat to health and safety. The term includes but is not limited
to the production of handcrafted goods, electronics-intensive equipment,
components related to instrumentation and measuring devices, bio-medical and
telecommunications technologies, computer parts and software, optical and
photographic equipment, or other similar types of manufacturing, processing.
and packaging activities.
(2)   Heavy: Activities involving significant mechanical and chemical
processes, large amounts of metal transfer, or extended shift operations. The
term includes but is not limited to paper and textile milling; wood millwork
and production of prefabricated structural wood products; soap and detergent
manufacturing; rubber processing and rubber products manufacturing; production
of plastics and other synthetic materials; primary metals processes; vehicle,
machinery, and fabricated metal products manufacturing; electroplating; cement
making and concrete production; gypsum and related products production;
chemical products, perfumes, and pharmaceuticals production; or paving and
roofing materials production. The term does not include those activities
associated with petroleum processing (see petrochemical plant); the manufacture
of explosives or toxic chemicals (see explosive or toxic  chemical
manufacturing, storage, and distribution); waste disposal and processing (see
waste disposal and processing); or the processing of salvage, scrap, or junk
materials (see salvage, scrap, or junk storage and processing).
Marine, General. Activities and structures used to support recreational marine
or other water-related activities, commercial boating, or the storage and
transfer of marine or other water-related goods and services.
(1)   Minor: Land uses on harbor fast lands, lagoons, or other inland waters
that support recreational marine activities. The term includes but is not
limited to piers or boathouses, storage and minor repair of boats, clubhouses,
sale of boating supplies and fuels, ice and cold storage facilities, hoists,
launching ramps, and wash racks.
(2)   Major: Land uses on harbor fast lands that support commercial marine
activities. The term includes but is not limited to construction, vocational
training, equipment sales, and repair.
Mechanical Parking System. A mechanism with vertical or horizontal transport
capability that provides for automobile storage or retrieval, and refers to
systems that are either manually operated, such as a mechanism that lifts and
lowers one or more cars within one parking space, or autonomously operated,
such as a multi-level robotic garage, sometimes referred to as automated
parking systems or APS.
Medical Laboratory. Conducting medical research or testing and examining of
materials derived from the human body, such as fluid, tissue, or cells, for the
purpose of providing information on diagnosis, treatment, mitigation, cure, or
prevention of disease. The term includes compounding pharmacy and training of
medical students.
Medical Services, General. Providing out-patient medical, surgical, or dental
care by a physician or health care worker in a facility that does not include
onsite overnight care. The term includes doctor offices, ambulatory surgery
facilities, freestanding surgical outpatient facilities, freestanding birthing
centers, chiropractor offices, dentist offices, orthodontist offices, physical
therapist offices, kidney dialysis centers, blood donation or collection
services facilities, acute care facilities, urgent care facilities, and any
administrative offices necessary for operation of the facility. The term does
not include emergency care services (see hospital).
Meeting Facility. A principal use involving regular or periodic gatherings or
assemblies of individuals on private property for a common purpose. May be
accessory to a principal use if not expressly prohibited. For the purposes of
this definition, the director may liberally construe accessory uses outside of
the agricultural zoning districts. The term includes private clubs, union
halls, community centers, religious facilities such as churches, temples, and
synagogues, and student centers. See also public facility.
(1)   Small: Meeting facilities with a capacity for more than 25 individuals,
up to 100 individuals.
(2)   Medium: Meeting facilities with a capacity for more than 100 individuals,
up to 2,000 individuals.
(3)   Large: Meeting facilities with a capacity for more than 2,000
individuals.
Mobile Commercial Establishment. A vehicle with current registration and safety
check used by an itinerant vendor for the sale of food products, other wares,
or services. The vehicle must be mobile and in a condition that allows it to
enter and exit the zoning lot. The term includes but is not limited to lunch
wagons, lunch vans, food trucks, and vehicles with attached or associated pop-
up tents. The term does not include vendors at farmers markets, fun fairs,
special community events, or other special events managed by a regulatory
entity where mobile commercial establishments are not a majority of the event.
In the Haleiwa special district, the definition of mobile commercial
establishment in §
21-9.90-4(j) supersedes this definition.
Multimodal Facility. A facility for trains, buses, taxis or car share services.
The term includes bus transfer facilities, bus stations, car-share facilities,
limousine or taxi services, tight rail stations, or rail stations.
Nature-Based Recreation. A privately-owned and managed permanent facility or
area dedicated to outdoor play, outdoor recreation, or aina-based education
facilities, often containing recreational equipment and facilities intended to
promote or enhance access to natural areas on land with preserved wildlife and
natural features. The term includes picnic grounds, greenways, hiking and
bicycling trails, areas for fishing and hunting, limited accessory sports
courts and fields, non-motorized access to scenic interests, horseback riding
tours, recreational camping, and campgrounds with tents, pavilions, lodges, and
cabins. The term does not include parks (see park), golf courses (see golf
course), horse stables (see major animal raising), accessory agriculture-
related tourism or recreation (see agritourism), community recreation centers
(see community-based recreation center), hotels (see hotel), and timeshares
(see timeshare). See also general outdoor recreation, minor animal raising.
Nonconforming Dwelling Unit. Any combination of legally established one-family
or two-family detached dwellings that exceed the permitted maximum number
currently allowed on a single zoning lot.
Nonconforming Lot. A zoning lot that was previously lawful, but does not comply
with the applicable lot requirements of the district where the lot is located,
either on October 22, 1986, or as a result of any subsequent amendment to this
chapter, a zoning map amendment, or government action associated with eminent
domain.
Nonconforming Parking. Parking spaces and parking areas that were previously
lawful, but do not conform to current parking standards, including number,
dimensions, and arrangement of spaces; surface treatment; and landscaping and
screening, either on October 22, 1986, or as a result of any subsequent
amendment to this chapter, a zoning map amendment, or government action
associated with eminent domain.
Nonconforming Structure. A structure that was previously lawful, but does not
comply with the sign, density, yard, setback, or height regulations of the
district, or design requirements of the special district where the lot is
located, either on October 22, 1986, or as a result of any subsequent amendment
to this chapter, zoning map amendment, or government action associated with
eminent domain.
Nonconforming Use. Any use of a structure or a zoning lot that was previously
lawful, but does not conform to the applicable use regulations of the district
where the lot is located, either on October 22, 1986, or as a result of any
subsequent amendment to this chapter, or a zoning map amendment.
Oahu Historic Preservation Commission. The Oahu historic preservation
commission established pursuant to § 3-10.3.
Off-Site Joint Development. The development of two or more zoning lots under a
single or unified density. Under off-site joint development, floor area
normally attributable to a donor lot is allocated to and may be used on a
receiving lot.
Office, General. Business and professional services in a private or co-working
setting, including but not limited to accounting, advertising, architecture,
auditing, banking, bookkeeping, consulting, design, employment, engineering,
insurance, investment, landscape architecture, legal, real estate, security, or
technology services. The term includes data storage centers and call centers.
Ohana Unit. An accessory attached or detached dwelling unit on a zoning lot
that includes a principal dwelling unit, for persons who are related by blood,
adoption, guardianship, marriage, or other duly-authorized custodial
relationship to the family residing in the principal dwelling unit located on
the same zoning lot.
Open Land. Land that may be improved, but contains no structures, and is set
aside, designated, or reserved for public or private recreational use or
enjoyment, including but not limited to picnic grounds, beaches, beach
accesses, greenways, and areas for hiking, fishing, hunting, and other scenic
interests.
Open Space. Any portion of a zoning lot essentially free of structures that
serves the purpose of visual relief and buffering from building and structural
mass. These areas may be privately or publicly owned, and may or may not be
accessible to the general public. Open space includes but is not limited to
parks, playgrounds, playfields, plazas, outdoor dining areas, botanical
gardens, fountains, reflecting pools and other bodies of water, walkways, and
nonbuildable easements. Simple structures that contribute to the enjoyment of
the area may be permitted, including stages for performances, street furniture,
sculpture, umbrellas, and other similar features. In determining whether an
area is open space, the following shall apply:
(1)   It shall be unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except for
umbrellas, and unsupported roof eaves and roof overhangs;
(2)   It shall be at finished grade unless otherwise specified in this chapter;
(3)   It shall not be used for parking, loading, maneuvering of vehicles, or
storage of equipment or refuse; and
(4)   A required yard may be considered open space.
Owner. The recorded owner of land in fee simple.
Park. An area used for outdoor play or recreation, often containing
recreational equipment such as slides, swings, climbing frames, sport courts
and fields, and botanical gardens. A park may include small office spaces for
managers or groundskeepers, storage structures, and barbeque pavilions. A park
does not include swimming pools and gymnasiums (see community-based recreation
center). The term may include both passive and active recreation. The term
includes projects that promote and enhance ecosystem benefits, keep wildlife on
land with preserved natural features, as well as picnic grounds, beaches, beach
access, greenways, and areas for hiking, fishing, hunting, and other scenic
interests. The term does not include public parks (see public facility) or
community recreation centers (see community-based recreation center). See also
nature-based recreation, general outdoor recreation, meeting facility.
Parking, Commercial. A facility that provides parking as a principal use on the
zoning lot. See also remote parking.
Parking Lot. An open area of land other than a street, used or intended to be
used to provide space for the parking of motor vehicles for private purposes or
available to the public. It shall include parking spaces, loading spaces,
maneuvering aisles, and other areas providing access to parking or loading
spaces, but does not include an area providing four or less spaces accessory to
dwelling units. The term also includes parking of vehicles for sale or rental.
Parking, Remote. The use of a zoning lot to provide parking for vehicles to
support a principal use occurring on a different zoning lot. See also
commercial parking.
Personal Services, General. Providing personal services. The term includes but
is not limited to barbershops, beauty shops, computer repair, dance studios,
martial arts studios, music studios, photographic studios or classrooms, day
spas, dry cleaning drop-off, laundry cleaning and pressing, funeral homes,
funeral parlors, mortuaries, undertaking establishments, hair salons, garment
repair, gyms, fitness studios, pilates studios, yoga studios, gymnastic
studios, cheerleading training, boxing training, climbing gyms, locksmith
services, nail salons, tanning salons, tutoring and other schools, travel
agencies, tattoo or body piercing, tailoring, shoe repair, watch repair,
jewelry repair, eyeglass repair, hearing aid repair, and smartphone repair.
Petrochemical Plant. A facility for processing and refining petroleum,
liquefied petroleum gas, or coal products.
Plant Nursery. Propagating and growing plants for offsite sale or onsite
accessory sales (both wholesale and retail). The term includes floriculture
operations. The term does not include retail establishments such as garden
shops that sell items other than plants, such as gardening supplies, potting
soil, and fertilizers (see general retail). See also crop raising, aquaculture,
forestry, feed store.
Plantation Community Subdivision. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 205-
4.5(a)(12).
Port. A facility for supporting commercial marine activity, such as cargo
shipping, located on harbor fast lands. The term includes but is not limited to
wharves, piers and boathouses, cargo handling systems, storage and repair of
boats and ships, sale of marine supplies and fuel, cold storage facilities,
power stations, hoists, launching ramps, facilities for embarking and
disembarking of passengers, and other facilities necessary for the maintenance
and operation of the port.
Porte Cochere. A covered access drive or walkway leading to the entrance of a
building.
Poultry. Fowls, including chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, and other birds
raised for the production of meat. eggs, or feathers.
Prison. A public facility or a facility run by a State-licensed entity for the
confinement, housing, and supervision of persons awaiting trial or serving
terms of imprisonment for the violation of criminal law. See also public
facility.
Production Studio.  A facility producing movies, videos, or other similar forms
of intellectual property. The term includes but is not limited to studios or
other facilities used for production, distribution, editing, set construction,
and special effects. The term does not include sites or facilities used
temporarily for production purposes.
Public Facility. A facility providing a government function, activity, or
service in accordance with public policy, for public benefit. The term does not
include buildings leased by the government to a private or nonprofit
organization, unless the organization is contracted to act as a public entity
or execute a public program. The term includes public (federal, State, or city)
administrative offices, transportation stops, libraries, satellite city halls,
post offices, schools, parks, zoos, golf courses, and meeting facilities such
as the Hawaii Convention Center, the Neal S. Blaisdell Center, and the Waikiki
Shell. The term does not include private schools (see PreK-12 school,
vocational school), private golf courses (see golf course), parks (see park),
or community recreation centers (see community-based recreation center).
Public Open Space.  Open space that is accessible to the public at all times,
not including required yards, except where permitted. It adjoins a public
street, public way, pedestrian easement, or public open space such as a park,
playground, or shoreline area, for at least 20 percent of its perimeter at an
elevation not more than 3 feet above the adjoining sidewalk. A minimum of 50
percent of its total area is landscaped (see
Figure 21-10.5).
FIGURE 21-10.5
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-313.png]
Publishing Facility. Printing, reproducing, or duplicating material such as
newspapers, books, and magazines using a printing press, photographic
reproduction, or other similar techniques.
Receiving Lot. A zoning lot that may, under off-site joint development
approval, use floor area normally attributable to a donor lot.
Recreation, General Indoor. Permanent facilities for indoor recreation and
enjoyment, including for entertainment and related activities, that involve
activities overseen by a manager or operator. The term includes but is not
limited to billiard or pool halls, bowling alleys, electronic gaming arcades,
escape rooms, ice-skating or roller-skating rinks, playgrounds, or trampoline
parks, sport facilities, miniature golf courses, or archery or gun ranges. The
term also includes libraries or museums that do not meet the definition of a
public facility. The term does not include parks (see park), government
facilities (see public facility), or privately-owned clubs (see meeting
facility, general eating and drinking, general marine).
Recreation, General Outdoor. Facilities for outdoor recreation and enjoyment,
including for entertainment and related activities, that involve activities
overseen by a manager or operator, and may include motorized activities. The
term includes amusement parks, batting cages, drive-in theaters, go-cart or
vehicle racetracks, golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses, outdoor sport
facilities, amphitheaters, outdoor concert venues, outdoor luaus, unenclosed
theaters, sport courts and fields, and water parks. The term does not include
parks (see park), government facilities (see public facility), golf courses
(see golf course), privately-owned clubs (see meeting facility, general eating
and drinking, golf course, general marine), horseback riding tours (see nature-
based recreation), recreational camping (see nature-based recreation), or
nature-based recreation uses such as hiking and biking trails that do not
involve artificial lighting or support structures other than sanitary
facilities. See also agritourism, zoo, animal raising.
Reflective Surfaces. Any glass or other specular surface such as polished
metal, specified in a manufacturer’s literature, having reflectance (designated
by such terminology as average daylight reflectance, visible light reflectance,
visible outdoor reflectance, and comparable terms) of over 30 percent.
Renewable Energy. Energy generated or produced using the following sources;
wind; sun; falling water; biogas, including landfill and sewage-based digester
gas; geothermal; ocean water, currents, and waves, including ocean thermal
energy conversion; biomass, including biomass crops, agricultural and animal
residues and wastes; and municipal solid waste and other solid waste, biofuels,
and hydrogen produced from renewable energy sources.
Repair, General. Repair that does not require the use of tools or equipment
that generate significant noise or impact to the environment and adjacent land
uses, including the repair of household appliances, upholstery, bicycles,
shoes, garments, clocks, and general fix-it repair. The term also includes the
production and repair of prosthetic devices. See also personal service.
Repair, Heavy. The repair of industrial machinery, heavy equipment, engines and
motors, vehicle repair exceeding activities permitted under the vehicle service
use, blacksmithing, and furniture repair. The term also includes other repair
activities not permitted under general repair or activities requiring an
industrial wastewater discharge permit.
Research and Development, General. Research and development facilities,
including but not limited to laboratories, supporting prototype manufacture,
pilot plants used to test manufacturing processes planned for use in production
elsewhere, and supporting administrative offices. The term does not include
medical research and development (see medical laboratory).
Resource Extraction, General. A site or facility for the exploration,
extracting, and processing of natural resources, including but not limited to
natural accumulations of minerals, ores, gemstones, sand, rock, soil. gravel,
or water.
Retail, General. A facility involved in the sale, lease, or rental of new or
used products. The term includes but is not limited to appliance stores; art
galleries; automotive stores; banks and other financial institutions; bicycle
sales, rentals, and repair; bookstores; clothing stores; copy or shipping
service centers; print shops; electronics stores; stores selling electronic
cigarettes, vaping, and similar products; department stores; drug or
pharmaceutical stores; fabric stores; florists; furniture, grocery or specialty
food stores; hardware stores; liquor stores; scooter sales and rentals; musical
instrument sales, rentals, and repair; eyeglass sales, pet stores, shoe stores,
sporting goods stores; toy stores; and other similar retail activities.
(1)   Small: Up to 2,500 square feet of total floor area.
(2)   Medium: More than 2,500 square feet of total floor area, up to 25,000
square feet of total floor area.
(3)   Large: More than 25,000 square feet of total floor area.
Retaining Wall. That portion of a wall that resists the lateral displacement of
soil or other material up to a maximum height of 6 inches above the finished
grade of the retained material.
Rooming. Providing accessory overnight living accommodations to persons other
than transient occupants, for compensation, for periods of 90 consecutive days
or more, in the same dwelling unit occupied by an owner or occupant of the
dwelling unit. The term does not include bed and breakfast homes (see bed and
breakfast home).
Salvage, Scrap, or Junk Storage and Processing. A facility for the storage,
sale, dismantling. or other processing of used or waste materials that are not
intended for reuse in their original forms. The term includes but is not
limited to automotive wrecking yards, junkyards, and salvage yards.
Sawmill. Processing timber, including hardwood or softwood, to produce pulp,
lumber, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips.
School, PreK-12. A facility educating students enrolled in pre-kindergarten
through 12th grade, operated by a private institution or entity that provides
educational programs using a curriculum analogous to the Hawaii public school
curriculum for the same grade level, and when applicable, in compliance with
the State compulsory attendance laws. The term does not include public schools
(see public facility), post-secondary schools (see university, college,
vocational school). See also child daycare, home-based childcare.
School, Vocational. A facility for post-secondary education with a curriculum
devoted primarily to business (including barbers and beauticians), industry,
trade, or other vocational-technical instruction, or a language school. The
term does not include institutions of higher education that award associates,
bachelors, masters, or doctorate degrees (see university, college). The term
also does not include vocational training on harbor fast lands that support
commercial marine activities (see major general marine). The term also does not
include sports classes, tutoring, martial arts studios, dance studios, or
gymnastic studios (see general personal services).
(1)   Minor: Facilities that do not include the operation of industrial
equipment such as floor-mounted woodworking or machine shop equipment.
(2)   Major: Facilities that include the operation of industrial equipment such
as floor-mounted woodworking or machine shop equipment.
Self-Storage. Providing separate storage areas, units, or lockers for personal
or business use, designed to allow a tenant private access for storing or
removing personal property. The term does not include the outdoor storage of
fleet vehicles (see base yard) or the outdoor storage of junk, scrap metal, or
old cars (see salvage, scrap, or junk storage and processing).
Shared Parking. A technique involving the joint use of parking used to reduce
parking requirements in mixed- use developments or facilities. Peak parking
demand times for proposed or existing uses are calculated, and a reduction of
parking space requirements is justified when the peak parking demand times
occur at different times of the day.
Short-Term Bicycle Parking. Bicycle parking for customers and visitors of an
establishment in convenient, accessible, and visible areas.
Signs. See sign definitions in Article 7.
Slope. The incline of grade across the buildable area of a zoning lot,
expressed as a percentage and calculated by the following formula:
Highest elevation point - Lowest elevation point  x 100
Horizontal linear distance between highest and lowest points
Special Management Area Use Permit. A permit defined by and implemented under
Chapter 25.
State Historic Preservation Officer. That officer appointed by the governor as
provided in HRS § 6E-5.
State Register of Historic Places. The Hawaii register of historic places as
provided for in HRS Chapter 6E.
Stockpiling. The temporary open storage of earthen materials upon any premises,
except the premises for which a grading permit has been issued for the purpose
of using the materials as fill material at some other premises at a future
time.
Storage, Warehousing, and Distribution, General. A facility involved in the
storage or movement of goods for a business or other entity. Goods are
generally delivered to other entities or the final consumer with little onsite
customer activity. The term includes the non-transient storage of motor
vehicles not in operating condition, and temporary storage of household goods
by a freight mover. See also agricultural collection and storage.
Storage Yard. The open storage of soil, mulch, stone, lumber, pipe, steel,
construction materials, or similar products. The term includes but is not
limited to a contractor’s storage yard. The term does not include the outdoor
storage of fleet vehicles (see base yard) or the outdoor storage of junk, scrap
metal, or old cars (see salvage, scrap, or junk storage and processing).
Street. Any public right-of-way for vehicle purposes or private right-of-way
for vehicle purposes, that provides access to more than two zoning lots, and
does not include freeways (controlled-access facilities) as defined under HRS
Chapter 264-61.
Street Frontage. That portion of a zoning lot that has access rights to a
street abutting the lot.
Street, Major. A street of considerable continuity that can carry a large
volume of traffic and is used primarily as a route between communities and
large urban areas or from one section of the city to another.
Street, Minor. A street other than a major or secondary street that provides
access to abutting property and serves local traffic only.
Street, Secondary. A street that carries or collects traffic from minor streets
either directly or via other secondary streets.
Street Setback Line. A future right-of-way line for a street or highway as
located or dimensioned under adopted street right-of-way maps and standards.
Structure. Anything above existing grade constructed or erected with a fixed
location on the ground, or requiring a fixed location on the ground, or
attached to something having or requiring a fixed location on the ground. The
term structure includes the term “building.”
Tandem Parking. Two or more parking spaces configured one behind the other.
Telecommunications Facility. Facilities integrated with communication towers or
communication support structures that are regulated by the Federal
Communications Commission, and may include transmitting panel antennas, GPS
antennas, accessory satellite dish antennas, remote radio units, power cables,
and similar equipment. The term includes accessory structures that may be
located elsewhere on the zoning lot, including equipment cabinets, emergency
generators, and fencing.
Theater. An indoor and enclosed facility primarily for the performing arts or
for the viewing of motion picture films. The term includes but is not limited
to performing arts centers, concert halls, luau venues, and other types of live
theater.
Timeshare. The use or occupancy of a timeshare unit, as defined in HRS § 514E-
1, or any successor statute.
Transient Accommodation. Living accommodations that are offered or made
available to transient occupants for less than 90 consecutive days.
Transient Occupant. Any person who rents a lodging or dwelling unit, or portion
thereof, for less than 90 consecutive days, and whose permanent address for
legal purposes is not the lodging or dwelling unit being rented. See also
transient vacation unit, bed and breakfast home, rooming, and hotel.
Transient Vacation Unit. A dwelling unit or lodging unit that is advertised,
solicited, offered, or provided (or a combination of any of the foregoing) for
compensation to transient occupants for less than 90 consecutive days, other
than a bed and breakfast home (see bed and breakfast home), timeshare(see
timeshare), or hotel (see hotel). For the purposes of this definition:
(1)   Compensation includes but is not limited to monetary payment, services,
or labor of transient occupants; and
(2)   Month-to-month holdover tenancies resulting from the expiration of long-
term leases of 90 consecutive days or more are excluded.
Transitional Setback Distance. The shortest straight-line distance between the
closest portion of the structure or activity area to the edge of the applicable
zoning lot line.
Truck Terminal. A facility used as an origin or destination point for the
loading, unloading, assembling, or transferring of goods transported by truck.
Unbundled Parking. The cost to rent, lease, or purchase a dwelling or
commercial space is separate from the cost to rent, lease, purchase, or
otherwise use parking spaces.
University, College. A facility for post-secondary education operated by an
institution of higher education that awards an associate, bachelor, master, or
doctorate degree. See also public facility, vocational school, PreK-12 school.
Unrelated Person. One or more persons not related by blood, adoption, marriage,
or other duly authorized custodial relationship.
Urban Agriculture. Crop raising, aquaculture, and related agricultural
activities conducted as a principal or predominant land use outside of the P-2,
agricultural, and country zoning districts. The term includes vertical farm
operations located outside of the P-2, agricultural, and country zoning
districts.
Use. Refers to either one of the following:
(1)   Any purpose for which a structure or a tract of land is designed,
arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied; or
(2)   Any activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on, or intended
to be carried on, in a structure or on a tract of land.
Utility, Small. Utility infrastructure that primarily provides onsite utility
services to a single residential, commercial, or industrial site, or a
neighborhood at a facility with no staff or crew, and has minimal impacts on
surrounding areas. The term includes but is not limited to geothermal, wind,
and solar energy generation with supporting storage, control, and electrical
equipment; stormwater retention or detention; aeration and septic systems;
drainage systems; and water supply wells and water tanks. The term also
includes non-generation energy installations with minor impacts on adjacent
land uses, such as 46 kilovolt or lower voltage electrical substations, vaults,
distribution equipment, and accessory telecommunication antennas to support
these installations, minor residential gas infrastructure, and other similar
uses.
Utility, Medium. Utility infrastructure that primarily provides onsite utility
services to a single commercial or industrial site, or to a neighborhood. The
term includes non-generation energy installations with potential impact on
adjacent land uses, by virtue of appearance, noise, size, traffic generation,
or other operational characteristics, including 138 kilovolt transmission
substations, and base yards. The term also includes solar energy generation
facilities that are not considered small utilities; wind energy generation
facilities; energy storage, control, and electrical equipment; stormwater
retention or detention: private water and wastewater pump stations or lift
stations; drainage systems; or private water towers.
Utility, Large. Utility infrastructure that primarily provides regional offsite
services to multiple neighborhoods. The term includes energy generation
facilities, supporting storage, and any generation capacity over 5 megawatts,
and utility scale wind energy generation facilities with a rated capacity of
100 kilowatts or more.
Vehicle Fueling Station. Providing vehicle fueling services such as gasoline,
diesel, compressed natural gas or hydrogen pumps, or electric charging
stations. The term does not include electric charging stations that are
accessory to a parking lot.
Vehicle Sales and Rental. A facility that sells, rents, or leases motor
vehicles for use on a road, such as cars, trucks, and buses.
(1)   Sales and Rental, Light: The sale, rental. or leasing of light-duty
vehicles that weigh less than 10,000 pounds (gross vehicle weight).
(2)   Sales and Rental, Heavy: The sale, rental, or leasing of heavy-duty
vehicles that weigh 10,000 pounds or more (gross vehicle weight). The term
includes sales of shipping containers and manufactured or modular homes.
Vehicle Service. The routine service and maintenance of vehicles limited to the
replacement of fluids and minor parts such as brakes, tires, windows, filters,
mirrors, and accessories. The term does not include body and fender repair,
painting, repair, or replacement of powertrain components other than tires, or
other significant work (see heavy repair).
Vending Cart. A stand-alone, portable outdoor cart on wheels used to dispense
prepared food and drinks, or merchandise for retail sale. It shall be
considered a retail use and structure, although not fixed to a particular
location for more than 24 hours at a time, and is not fixed at any point to the
ground or another structure. No more than one umbrella or canvas overhead may
be directly attached to these structures. Associated food preparation
activities are limited to warming and steaming, and the dispensing of
condiments.
Vertical Farm. Cultivating, maintaining, and harvesting crops in indoor
environments such as warehouses or tunnels in stacked layers using hydroponic,
aeroponic, or aquaponic techniques. The term does not include cultivating
aquatic plants or animals (see aquaculture).
Waste Disposal and Processing. A facility for disposing of and processing solid
waste. The term includes but is not limited to refuse dumps, sanitary
landfills, incinerators, and resource recovery plants.
Wet Bar. A serving counter in a dwelling or lodging unit that is equipped with
small single compartment sink that is not a part of a kitchen, bathroom, or
laundry room. A wet bar may contain a refrigerator, but may not contain any
fixture, appliance, or device for heating or cooking food, or a 220-volt
outlet, which is necessary for a full sized stove.
Yard. An open space required for the purpose of light and air access, bounded
on at least one side by a property line, measured at right angles from the
property line or the established street setback line (see “Yard, front”) and
unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure, except as specifically
permitted.
Yard, Front. Any yard bounded by a street, except that a single yard may be
designated as a front yard by the owner of a zoning lot containing a single-
unit, two-unit, or duplex-unit dwelling bounded by more than one street in
residential districts. The front yards designated must conform to district
regulations for front yards. All front yards are measured at right angles to
the street right-of-way or the established street setback line, whichever is
the greater distance from the street centerline set by adopted street right-of-
way maps and standards (see
Figure 21-10.6).
FIGURE 21-10.6
YARD, FRONT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-315.png]
Yard, Rear. A yard extending across a zoning lot at the opposite end of the lot
from the front yard, except that when a zoning lot has more than one front
yard, there will be no rear yards, but only front and side yards.
Yard, Side. A yard extending from the rear line of a required front yard to the
lot line at the opposite end of the zoning lot, or in the absence of a clear
definition of such a lot line, to the point on the lot farthest from the street
side of a front yard. For lots with more than one front yard, the side yards
are any yards remaining after the front yards have been established.
Zoning Lot. A lot or any portion of a lot, excluding right-of-way lots, within
a single zoning district, or precinct, except as permitted under joint
development.
Zoo. A facility where animals live in captivity and are put on display for the
public to view. The term does not include government facilities (see public
facility), uses involving the display of live animals for sale or adoption (see
general retail), or displays that are accessory to principal commercial or
hotel use.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 10, § 21-10.1) (Added by Ord. 99-12; Am. Ords. 00-09,
01-12, 02-63, 03-37, 06-15, 09-26, 10-19, 14-9, 15-41, 17-40, 17-55, 19-3, 20-
41, 20-43, 22-7, 22-28 , 25-2)
Editor’s note:
   * “May 10, 1999” is substituted for “before the adoption of this chapter.”
APPENDIX 21-A: KEY TO DEPARTMENT ABBREVIATIONS USED IN CHAPTER 21 APPENDICES
Editor’s note:
   The names of a number of these departments have changed and a number of the
departments have been combined. However, the new department names are not
generally reflected in the ROH.
BFS   = Budget and Fiscal Services (City)
BWS   = Board of Water Supply (City)
       
CCL   = City Council
CPO   = Chief Planning Officer in the Department of Planning and Permitting
       
DAGS  = Department of Accounting and General Services (State)
DDC   = Department of Design and Construction (City)
DBEDT = Department of Business, Economic Development and Tourism (State)
DCS   = Department of Community Services (City)
DES   = Department of Environmental Services (City)
DFM   = Department of Facility Maintenance (City)
DHHL  = Department of Hawaiian Home Lands (State)
DHR   = Department of Human Resources (City)
DLM   = Department of Land Management (City)
DOE   = Department of Education (State)
DOT   = Department of Transportation (State)
DPP   = Department of Planning and Permitting (City)
DPR   = Department of Parks and Recreation (City)
DTS   = Department of Transportation Services (City)
       
       
HFD   = Honolulu Fire Department (City)
HPD   = Honolulu Police Department (City)
HART  = Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
       
OCCSR = Office of Climate Change, Sustainability and Resiliency (City)
OH    = Office of Housing (City)
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Appendix 21-I)
APPENDIX 21-B: ZONING ORDINANCES
Editor’s note:
   Ordinances before 1988 may be found in Appendix B and Appendix B-1 to
Chapter 21, Revised Ordinances 1978 (1983 Ed.) and in Appendix 21A.1 to the
Revised Ordinances 1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. Approval
No.  Date
88-  4-22-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 21A-3.140-1, home occupations
45   1988
              Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-3.90-8, 21A-5.50-2, 21A-5.60-2, 21A-6.40-2(J),
              21A-6.50-2(G), 21A-6.50-8(F), 21A-7.80-4(E), 21A-8.60-1, 21A-8.60-2; amends R.O.
              1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-1.50, 21A-3.30, 21A-3.40, 21A-3.50, 21A-3.70-3(A), 21A-3.70-
88-  4-22-    5(A), 21A-3.70-9, 21A-3.70-10, 21A-3.70-13(A) and (F), 21A-3.80, 21A-3.90-1, 21A-
46   1988     3.90-3, 21A-3.90-4, 21A-3.120, 21A-3.130, 21A-4.70, 21A-6.30, 21A-6.50-2(E) and
              (F), 21A-7.10-2, 21A-7.10-4 — 21A-7.10-7, 21A-7.10-10 — 21A-7.10-13, 21A-7.80-4(C),
              21A-8.60, amends Art. 9 of Ch. 21A and Tables 6-B, 10-B — 10-D, 11-B — 11-D, 13-A,
              13-B, 14-A, 14-B, 15-A, 15-B, 16-B, 18-A, 20-A and 20-B and table of contents note
              of Ch. 21A
88-  4-27-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) 21A-3.70-3(C), Art. 9 of and Table 1 of Ch. 21A,
47   1988     parking
88-  4-28-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 21A-6.20, ohana dwellings
48   1988
              Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-4.40-37, 21A-4.40-25, 21A-4.40-16, 21A-4.40-14,
              21A-4.40-5 and 21A-4.40-3; amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-5.100, 21A-5.100-
              1 and Tables 17-A, 18-A, 18-B and 19-A of Ch. 21A; renumbers R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)
88-  5-11-    §§ 21A-4.40-32 — 21A-4.40-36 to 21A-4.40-38 — 21A-4.40-42, 21A-4.40-21 — 21A-4.40-
51   1988     31 to 21A-4.40-26 — 21A-4.40-36, 21A-4.40-13 — 21A-4.40-20 to 21A-4.40-17 — 21A-
              4.40-24, 21A-4.40-12 to 21A-4.40-15, 21A-4.40-6 — 21A-4.40-11 to 21A-4.40-8 — 21A-
              4.40-13, 21A-4.40-4 to 21A-4.40-6 and 21A-4.40-3 to 21A-4.40-4; renumbers and
              amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 21A-4.40-5 to 21A-4.40-7, industrial districts
88-  5-18-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-3.60, 21A-3.60-1 and Tables 7-B, 8-B and 9-B of
56   1988     Ch. 21A, height measurement
88-  5-18-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-3.60(B), 21A-4.40-3, and Art. 9 and Tables 3-A,
57   1988     4-A, 5-A, 6-A, 7-A, 8-A, 9-A, 10-A, 11-A, 12-A, 13-A, 14-A, 15-A, 16-A, 17-A, 18-A,
              19-A and 20-A, broadcast antennas
89-  4-18-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-3.160-1, 21A-3.160-2 and Art. 9 of R.O. 1978
50   1989     (1983 Ed.) Ch. 21A, convention center
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. Approval
No.  Date
              Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 21A-8.30-8; amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 21A-8.30-
89-  4-18-    4; repeals R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-7.20 — 21A-7.90 and replaces with R.O.
52   1989     1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-7.20 — 21A-7.90-6, Ch. 21A, Art. 7, Exhibits 1-18 and
              Tables 21-A — 21-G, special district regulations and processing
              Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-1.60, 21A-3.120-3; amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)
89-  12-22-   §§ 21A-3.80, 21A-3.90-1, Ch. 21A, Tables 1, 4-B, 5-B and 20-A, §§ 21A-7.80-6(A)
146  1989     and (C), 21A-8.30-4(D), 21A-8.30-6(D), 21A-8.30-7(G), 21A-8.30-8(D) and 21A-
              8.60 and Art 9 of R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 21A; repeals R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§
              21A-5.50-2 and 21A-5.60-2
89-  12-28-   Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-3.120-1 and 21A-3.120-2; amends R.O. 1978
154  1989     (1983 Ed.) Ch. 21A, Table 12-A, and § 21A-7.80-5; amends Art. 9 of R.O. 1978
              (1983 Ed.) Ch. 21A, transient vacation units and bed and breakfast homes
89-  12-28-   Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-6.20-1 and 21A-6.20-2; amends R.O. 1978 (1983
155  1989     Ed.) §§ 21A-6.20 and 21A-8.30-3, ohana dwellings
90-  2-23-    Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 21A-5.10-2; amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 21A-
15   1990     3.160-1 and Ch. 21A, Tables 3-A and 12-A, and amends Art. 9 of R.O. 1978 (1983
              Ed.) Ch. 21A, golf courses
90-  11-26-   Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 21A-3.140-1, Ch. 21A, Tables 4-A — 12-A, Ch. 21A,
93   1990     Art. 9; repeals R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-3.140-2 and 21A-4.40-19, pet-
              keeping regulations
92-  9-10-    Amends §§ 21-3.120, 21-6.20, 21-8.30-3; repeals and replaces §§ 21-6.20-1, 21-
101  1992     6.20-2; amends Art. 9, Ch. 21, ohana dwellings
92-  10-20-   Amends §§ 21-3.20(b), 21-3.70-1, 21-3.70-3(c), 21-3.70-6, 21-3.70-11, 21-3.80,
110  1992     21-3.120(c) and (d), 21-4.40-4 and 21-9.1, Tables 21-3.1(A), 21-5.3-A,
              miscellaneous amendments
93-  2-9-1993 Amends §§ 21-3.90-2 and 21-3.90-5, political campaign signs
02
93-  2-9-1993 Amends §§ 21-3.60, 21-3.80, and 21-9.1, definition of floor area; adds § 21-
03            3.60-2, rooftop structures
93-  6-14-    Amends §§ 21-3.120, 21-4.40-20, 21-4.40-25, 21-5.110, 21-9.1; repeals § 21-
46   1993     4.40-5; amends Tables 21-3.1(A), 21-5.17(A) and (B), 21-5.18(A) and (B), 21-
              5.19(A) and (B), 21-5.20(A) and (B)
93-  8-27-    Adds § 21-5.90-2, BMX-4 business mixed use special height controls; renumbers §
70   1993     21-5.90-2 to be § 21-5.90-3; amends § 21-8.30-8 and Table 21-5.16-B, major
              permits—downtown heights in excess of 350 feet
94-  3-15-    Amends § 21-2.30, zoning maps and interpretations
13   1994
94-  3-15-    Amends § 21-4.40-2, amusement facilities—outdoor, § 21-3.120, nonconformities,
14   1994     Tables 21-5.20-A and B, IMX-1 district, and § 21-9.1, definitions
94-  3-15-    Amends § 21-8.40, conditional zoning—agreements
15   1994
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. Approval
No.  Date
94-  3-15-    Amends § 21-7.10-12, nonconforming structures within the flood hazard
16   1994     districts, § 21-7.10-13, flood hazard district exemptions
94-  3-15-    Amends Tables 21-5.4-A, 21-5.5-A, 21-5.12-A, 21-5.14-A, 21-5.15-A, 21-5.16-A,
17   1994     21-5.20-A, helistops
              Amends §§ 21-1.40, 21-3.40, 21-3.60, 21-3.70-4, 21-3.120, 21-3.140-1, 21-3.150,
              21-4.40-22, 21-4.40-28, 21-4.80-1, 21-5.40-1, 21-6.50-2, 21-7.60-12, 21-9.1,
94-  3-15-    Tables 21-5.3-A, 21-5.4-A, 21-5.5-A, 21-5.7-B, 21-5.8-B, 21-5.9-B, 21-5.10-B,
18   1994     21-5.10-C, 21-5.10-D, 21-5.11-B, 21-5.11-C, 21-5.11-D, 21-5.13-A, 21-5.14-A,
              21-5.15-A, 21-5.16-A, 21-5.18-A, 21-7.1, 21-7.2, 21-7.3, 21-7.4, 21-7.5, 21-
              7.7; repeals § 21-3.70-9, miscellaneous amendments
94-  4-28-    Amends §§ 21-3.60, 21-3.80, 21-4.40-38, 21-9.1, Tables 21-5.6-A, 21-5.7-A, 21-
25   1994     5.8-A, 21-5.9-A, 21-5.10-A, 21-5.11-A; adds §§ 21-3.60-3 and 21-3.60-4,
              antennas and utility installations
94-  5-18-    Amends §§ 21-3.120-1 and 21-9.1, transient vacation units
30   1994
94-  5-18-    Amends § 21-3.120-2, bed and breakfast homes
31   1994
94-  9-15-    Adds § 21-4.40-8A; amends § 21-9.1 and Tables 21-5.3-A, 21-5.4-A, 21-5.5-A, 21-
64   1994     5.18-A, composting, major and minor
95-  5-18-    Amends §§ 21-3.90-1, 21-3.90-3, signs for second floor business establishments
13   1995
              Amend §§ 21-3.30, 21-3.60, 21-3.70, 21-3.70-1, 21-3.70-2, 21-3.70-3, 21-3.70-4,
              21-3.70-7, 21-3.70-10, 21-3.70-11, 21-3.70-14, 21-3.80, 21-3.90-1, 21-3.90-3,
              21-3.120, 21-3.130, 21-3.140-1, 21-3.150, 21-3.160-2, 21-4.10, 21-4.30, 21-
96-  10-31-   4.40, 21-4.70, 21-6.20-1, 21-6.50-11, 21-7.10-6, 21-7.10-7, 21-7.20-1, 21-7.30-
62   1996     4, 21-7.70-1, 21-8.10, 21-8.20, 21-8.30, 21-8.30-5, 21-8.30-6, 21-8.30-8, 21-
              9.1; Tables 21-3.1(A), 21-7.1, 21-7.2, 21-7.3, 21-7.4, 21-7.5, 21-7.7; repeals
              §§ 21-3.60-3, Ch. 21, Art. 5; adds new Ch. 21, Art. 5, various amendments to
              the land use ordinance
              Amends §§ 21-2.20, 21-3.90-3, 21-7.80-2, 21-9.1, Table 21-3.1(C), Exhibits 21-
              7.13 and 21-7.15; renumbers §§ 21-7.80 to 21-7.80-1, 21-7.80-3 to 21-7.80-4,
96-  12-18-   21-7.80-4 to 21-7.80-5, 21-7.80-5 to 21-7.80-6, 21-7.80-6 to 21-7.80-7, 21-
72   1996     7.80-7 to 21-7.80-8, Table 21-7.6 to Table 21-7.6(C); adds §§ 21-7.80, 21-7.80-
              3; 21-7.80-9, 21-8.30-9, Tables 21-7.6(A) and (B); repeals § 21-7.80-1 and
              Exhibit 21-7.14, relating to the Waikiki special district
              Amends §§ 21-3.30, 21-3.40, 21-3.70-12, 21-4.10, 21-5.20, 21-5.20-2, 21-5.30-4,
97-  12-17-   21-5.50-1, 21-5.60-1, 21-5.70-1, 21-5.90-3, 21-5.100-1, 21-5.110-1, 21-9.1;
74   1997     Tables 21-5.1-A, 21-5.1-B, 21-5.2-A, 21-5.3-A, 21-5.3-B, 21-5.4-A, 21-5.5-A,
              21-5.5-B, 21-7.6(C); Exhibits 21-7.13, 21-7.16, 21-7.17, 21-7.18, miscellaneous
              minor technical amendments
98-  2-12-    Renumbers § 21-4.40-20 as § 21-4.40-19; adds § 21-4.40-20; amends Table 21-5.4-
03   1998     A and § 21-9.1, relating to the transfer of development rights for certain
              historic properties
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. Approval
No.  Date
98-  3-23-    Amends §§ 21-5.10-1, 21-5.20-5, 21-9.1 and Table 21-5.1-A relating to cemetery
11   1998     caretakers (amends LUO to permit dwellings for caretakers as an accessory use
              to cemeteries)
98-  10-1-    Amends §§ 21-3.90-3, 21-7.60-1, 21-7.60-4, 21-7.60-12, 21-7.60-13, Table 21-
58   1998     7.4; adds Exhibit 21-7.10-A, relating to the Chinatown special district, land
              use ordinance
98-  11-20-   Amends §§ 21-4.40-8A, 21-4.40-13, 21-4.40-29, 21-4.40-33, 21-4.40-40, 21-5.100-
60   1998     1, Tables 21-5.5-A and 21-5.5-B; adds § 21-4.40-7A, relating to the regulation
              of uses in industrial and industrial-commercial mixed-use districts
99-  5-10-    Repeals Ch. 21, land use ordinance, and adds a new Ch. 21, which streamlines
12   1999     the land use permitting process and ensures that adequate controls and review
              mechanisms are in place for certain proposed land uses
99-  11-26-   Amends §§ 21-7.40 and 21-2.140-1, relating to signs (amends LUO to address
63   1999     issues relating to the regulation of signs in response to Res. 98-223, CD1)
00-  4-19-    Adds § 21-5.500A; amends § 21-10.1 and Table 21-3, establishing real estate
09   2000     offices and travel agencies as permitted uses in the resort zoning district
              (LUO)
01-  4-19-    Amends §§ 21-2.90-2, 21-10.1, and Table 21-3; adds § 21-5.610A, relating to
12   2001     elderly housing (LUO)
              Amends § 21-9.80-4 (LUO), relating to the Waikiki special district (extending
01-  12-28-   the deadline from 12-31-2001 to 12-31-2006 for submission to DPP of an
66   2001     application for a project needing planned development-resort or planned
              development-commercial approval)
02-  5-10-    Amends § 21-9.90-4 and Table 21-9.7 (LUO), relating to the Haleiwa special
19   2002     district (establishing drive-thru facilities as a permitted use)
02-  12-20-   Amends §§ 21-2.90-2, 21-3.50, 21-5.290, 21-5.510, 21-10.1, and Table 21-3; adds
63   2002     §§ 21-5.10A and 21-8.60, relating to the regulation of agricultural uses
              Amends §§ 21-2.40-1, 21-2.90-1, 21-2.90-2, 21-2.130, 21-2.140-1, 21-4.30, 21-
03-  11-20-   4.60, 21-4.70-1, 21-4.110, 21-5.10, 21-5.90, 21-7.20, 21-7.40, 21-7.60, 21-
37   2003     7.70, 21-9.30-5, 21-10.1; Tables 21-3, 21-3.4, 21-3.5; Figures 21-3.2, 21-3.10,
              21-4.1, 21-10.4, making miscellaneous minor technical or nonsubstantive
              revisions to the land use ordinance
03-  11-19-   Amends §§ 21-9.80-4, 21-9.80-5, 21-9.80-6, 21-9.80-7; Tables 21-6.3, 21-9.6(A),
38   2003     (B), (C); Figures 21-9.1, 21-9.2 (LUO), relating to the Waikiki special
              district
              Amends §§ 21-9.10-2, 21-9.10-4, 21-9.10-5, 21-9.10-7 through 21-9.10-9, 21-
04-  4-7-2004 9.10-11; repeals § 21-9.10-13; and adds a new § 21-9.10-13, relating to flood
09            hazard districts (to conform with current language in the National Flood
              Insurance Program (NFIP) regulations) (LUO)
04-  8-26-    Amends §§ 21-9.60-8 and 21-9.60-9, relating to the Chinatown Special District
30   2004     (LUO) (allows one- and two-family dwellings if located above the ground floor)
05-  8-23-    Amends § 21-5.370, relating to the off-site joint development of two or more
028  2005     zoning lots
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. Approval
No.  Date
06-  3-15-    Amends §§ 21-2.140-1, 21-4.110, 21-8.20, 21-8.20-1, and 21-10.1 (LUO), relating
15   2006     to ohana dwellings (deletes the maximum floor area restrictions for ohana
              dwelling units)
07-8 4-26-    Amends § 21-9.30-4; repeals and replaces Exhibits 21-9.1 and 21-9.2 (LUO),
     2007     relating to the Hawaii Capital Special District
07-  5-17-    Amends Table 21-3, the Master Use Table (LUO), relating to vacation cabins
14   2007
07-  5-17-    Amends Table 21-3, the Master Use Table (LUO), relating to amusement and
15   2007     recreation facilities, indoor
08-  8-7-2008 Amends § 21-2.70, relating to the transmission of planning commission
19            recommendations to the council (LUO)
              Adds §§ 21-9.100, 21-9.100-1 through 21-9.100-4 and amends § 21-9.20-6,
09-4 3-25-    relating to transit-oriented development (provides for the establishment of
     2009     transit-oriented development special districts and accompanying land use
              regulations around rapid transit stations)
09-5 3-25-    Amends §§ 21-2.140-1, 21-7.20, 21-7.40, and 21-7.60, relating to signs
     2009
09-  9-9-2009 Adds § 21-5.500A and amends Table 21-3 and § 21-10.1, relating to plant
26            nurseries (clarifies LUO provisions relating to plant nurseries)
09-  10-30-   Amends § 21-5.450, relating to meeting facilities in industrial districts
33   2009     (removes the 1,000-foot separation and three-month vacancy restrictions for
              meeting facilities located in industrial districts)
              Amends §§ 21-2.20, 21-2.60, 21-2.70, 21-2.90-1, 21-2.100, 21-2.140-1, Table 21-
10-           3, §§ 21-4.30, 21-4.110, 21-5.350, 21-5.380, 21-5.450, 21-5.700, Table 21-6.1,
19   9-2-2010 §§ 21-7.20, 21-8.30, Exhibit 21-9.10-A, §§ 21-9.80-4 and 21-10.1; adds §§ 21-
              5.80A, 21-5.510A, and 21-8.20A, miscellaneous amendments and additions to the
              land use ordinance
10-  9-2-2010 Amends § 21-4.30, relating to agricultural fences (increases the allowable
24            height of fences on certain agricultural lands)
11-  12-14-   Amends §§ 21-7.40, 21-9.80-4, 21-9.80-6, 21-2.110-2, Tables 21-9.6(A) and 21-
30   2011     9.6(B), and Exhibit 21-9.13, and repeals § 21-9.80-7, to amend the provisions
              in the land use ordinance pertaining to the Waikiki special district
13-  4-19-    Amends § 21-2.40-1, Table 21-3 and § 21-5.360, relating to hotels within the
10   2013     BMX-3 district under the land use ordinance
14-9 5-22-    Repeals §§ 21-9.10, 21-9.10-1 through 21-9.10-14 and reenacts a new § 21-9.10,
     2014     amends § 21-10.1, and creates a new Chapter 21A, relating to flood hazard areas
14-  6-20-    Amends § 21-2.110-2 and adds a new § 21-9.100-5, relating to interim planned
10   2014     development permits for transit-oriented development within close proximity to
              future rail stations
15-  9-14-    Creates new §§ 21-2.140-1(o) and 21-5.720, and amends Tables 21-3, 21-3.2, and
41   2015     21-6.1, and §§ 21-6.30(d), 21-6.40(c), 21-8.20(c), and 21-10.1
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. Approval
No.  Date
15-  11-20-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki and Exhibit 21-9.13
48   2015     relating to the Waikiki Special District (Special)
16-  9-23-    Amends § 21-9.100.5, relating to public housing in transit-oriented development
26   2016     special districts
17-  5-26-    Amends § 21-9.100-2(a), relating to transit-oriented development
20   2017
              Amends §§ 21-1.20(a) and (k), 21-2.40-1(c) and (i), 21-2.150-2, 21-3.20, 21-3.50-
17-  7-27-    4(c), 21-3.140-1(c), 21-4.50, 21-4.110(d), 21-5.10A, 21-5.160(c), 21-5.380(a),
40   2017     21-5.390, 21-5.700, 21-8.20(c), 21-9.80-3(b), 21-9.80-4(c) and (d), 21-9.100-5
              (d), 21-10.1, repeals Figure 21-2.1, and enacts a new Figure 21-2.1, relating to
              the land use ordinance
17-  8-24-    Amends Chapter 21, Table 21-3 and § 21-5.700(c), relating to wind machines
46   2017
              Creates new §§ 21-9.100-6 through 21-9.100-12; amends §§ 21-2.110-2, 21-9.20-2,
17-  10-26-   21-9.100, 21-9.100-1 through 21-9.100-4, and 21-9.20-6; adds new Figures 21-9.3
54   2017     through 21-9.15, a new Table 21-9.8, and new Exhibits 21-9.19 and 21-9.20; and
              repeals and replaces Figure 21-2.1, relating to the transit-oriented development
              special district
              Creates a new § 21-6.150; amends Article 10 in Chapter 21 (§ 21-10.1), §§ 21-
17-  10-26-   3.90-1(c), 21-3.110-1(c), 21-3.120-2(c), 21-3.140-1(c), 21-5.210, 21-5.480, and
55   2017     21-6.140(b); and repeals and replaces Figures 21-3.3, 21-3.5, and 21-3.7,
              relating to miscellaneous land use ordinance amendments
17-  11-17-   Amends § 21-4.110, relating to nonconforming structures
59   2017
18-  6-21-    Amends § 21-9.80.4(d), relating to planned development-resort and planned
19   2018     development-apartment projects
18-  12-21-   Amends §§ 21-9.90, 21-9.90-1 through 21-9.90-6, and Table 21-9.7, repeals and
44   2018     adds new Exhibits 21-9.16, 21-9.17, and 21-9.18 in Chapter 21
19-3 5-1-2019 Amends §§ 21-3.70-1, 21-6.40, 21-10.1 and Table 21-6.1, relating to detached
              dwellings
19-  6-25-    Creates a new Article 2A in Chapter 21; new §§ 21-2.150-3 and 21-5.730; and
18   2019     amends §§ 21-2.150-2, 21-4.110-1, 21-4.110-2, 21-5.640, 21-10.1, and Tables 21-3,
              21-6.1 through 21-6.3, and 21-9.6(A), relating to short term rentals
20-6 5-20-    Amends §§ 21-4.110, 21-5.720, 21-8.20, relating to condominium property regimes
     2020
20-  9-17-    Amends Section 20 of Ord. 19-18, relating to short-term rentals
30   2020
20-  10-22-   Amends § 21-5.290, relating to group living facilities
33   2020
20-  12-23-   Amends § 21-9.100-5, relating to interim planned development-transit projects and
40   2020     permits
              Repeals Article 6 of Chapter 21; creates a new Article 6 to Chapter 21; amends §
20-  12-23-   21-2.140-1; amends Table 21-3 (as amended by Section 6 of Ord. 19-18); amends §§
41   2020     21-3.80-1, 21-3.90-1, 21- 4.30, 21-4.70, 21-4.110, 21-5.40, 21-5.390, 21-5.480,
              21-9.60-7, 21-9.60-9, 21-9.60-11, 21-9.80-4, 21-9.100-5, 21-9.100-8, and 21-10.1,
              relating to off-street parking and loading
20-  12-23-   Amends § 21-3.70-1 and amends § 21-10.1, relating to detached dwellings
43   2020
21-  9-20-    Amends § 21-4.110, relating to nonconforming uses
30   2021
     4-26-    Amends §§ 21-1.40, 21-2.150-2, 21-2A.10, and 21-2A.40; amends Table 21-3 (as
22-7 2022     amended by Ord. 20-41); amends §§ 21-4.110-1, 21-4.110-2, and 21-5.730; amends
              Table 21-9.6(A); and amends § 21-10.1, relating to transient accommodations
              Amends §§ 21-4.60, 21-4.100, and 21-10.1, relating to height limits for rooftop
22-  10-24-   structures (encouraging rooftop solar panels by allowing such panels to be placed
28   2022     above rooftop equipment and allowing the creation of new rooftop gathering spaces
              underneath rooftop solar panels)
              Amends §§ 21-2.110-2, 21-9.100, 21-9.100-2, 21-9.100-5, 21-9.100-8, 21-9.100-10,
              21-9.100-11, 21-9.100-12; amends Chapter 21, Article 9 by replacing Exhibits 21-
              9.19 and 21-9.20 with new Exhibits 21-9.19 and 21-9.20, and adding new Exhibits
22-  10-24-   21-9.21, 21- 9.22, and 21-9.23, relating to the transit-oriented development
29   2022     (“TOD”) special district (expanding the TOD special district to include three
              additional Honolulu Rail Transit Project station areas and to incorporate land
              use standards and guidelines for those areas based on the Aiea-Pearl City
              Neighborhood TOD Plan)
23-  12-13-   Amends §§ 21-9.100-2, 21-9.100-8, 21-9.100-11, and 21-9.100-12; adds new Exhibit
32   2023     21-9.24, relating to the transit-oriented development special district
24-  6-25-    Amends § 21-2.150-2, relating to large dwellings
13   2024
24-  6-25-    Amends § 21-5.730, relating to registration requirements for bed and breakfast
14   2024     homes and transient vacation units
              Repeals Article 5; adds a new Article 5; amends §§ 21-2.40-1, 21-2.90-1, 21-2.90-
              2, 21-2.120-1, 21-2.130, 21-2.140-1, 21-2.150-2, 21-3.50, 21-3.50-2, 21-3.60-2,
              21-3.70, 21-3.70-1, 21-3.80, 21-3.100, 21-3.130, 21-4.60, 21-4.70, 21-4.70-1, 21-
              4.80, 21-4.100, 21-4.110, 21-4.110-1, 21-4.110-2, 21-6.20, 21-6.30, 21-6.40, 21-
              6.50, 21-6.70, 21-6.110, 21-7.40, 21-7.50, 21-8.20A, 21-8.30, 21-8.40, 21-8.50-1,
              21-8.50-2, 21-8.50-4, 21-8.50-6, 21-9.10, 21-9.40-5, 21-9.40-6, 21-9.50-5, 21-
25-2 9-30-    9.60-8, 21-9.60-9, 21-9.80-4, 21-9.80-5, 21-9.80-6, 21-9.80-8, 21-9.90-5, 21-
     2025     9.100, 21-9.100-5, 21-9.100-7, 21-10.1, Figure 21-6.1, Figure 21-10.3, Table 21-
              3.1, Table 21-3.2, Table 21-3.3, Table 21-3.4, Table 21-6.2, Table 21-6.5, Table
              21-9.1, Table 21-9.2, Table 21-9.3, Table 21-9.4, Table 21-9.5, Table 21-9.6(A),
              Table 21-9.6(C), Table 21-9.7; repeals § 21-2.110-3, 21-8.20, 21-8.20-1, Table
              21-3, relating to use regulations (addressing the regulation of uses throughout
              Chapter 21, and updating and moving provisions located in other articles of the
              LUO to the new Article 5)
 
APPENDIX 21-C: ZONING MAPS
Editor’s note:
   Ordinances before 1988 may be found in Appendix B-1 to Chapter 21, Revised
Ordinances 1978 (1983 Ed.) and in Appendix 21A.2 to the Revised Ordinances 1987
Supp. to 1983 Ed. Department and agency acronyms may be found in Appendix 21-A.
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. No. Approval Date
                       Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waikele and
88-2     1-20-1988     Hoaeae, Ewa. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 9,
                       Waipio (Crestview), Ord. 86-111.) Halekua Development
                       Co.
                       Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waianae. (Amending
88-10    1-20-1988     portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha, Ord. 86-
                       117.) M’s Investors
                       Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Paalaa, Waialua
88-11    1-21-1988     district. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 17,
                       Mokuleia- Haleiwa, Ord. 86-134.) DLU
88-18    3-7-1988      Rezoning a parcel of land Downtown. (Amending portion of
                       zoning map No. 4, Nuuanu McCully, Ord. 86-107.) DLU
                       Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at
88-32    4-7-1988      Waipio, Oahu. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 10,
                       Waipio (Mililani), Ord. 86-112.) YMCA of Honolulu
                       Rezoning a parcel and a portion of a parcel of land
88-37    4-7-1988      situated at Ewa. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 12,
                       Ewa Beach Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-114.) The Myers Corp.
                       Amending Ord. 86-150 by amending the unilateral
88-38    4-7-1988      agreement incorporated therein by reference. (Zoning map
                       No. 11, Wahiawa Whitmore, Ord. 86-113.) Oceanic
                       Properties
                       Amending zoning map No. 6, Red Hill Ft. Shafter, Ord.
88-49    5-11-1988     86-109, relating to height limit on lands situated at
                       Moanalua. DLU
                       Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waianae. (Amending
88-55    5-18-1988     portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei Makaha, Ord. 86-
                       117.) Rockwell Rogers
                       Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Kalihi. (Amending
88-63    6-6-1988      portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu, Ord. 86-
                       108.) Terry W. Hay
                       Rezoning parcels of land situated at Waianae. (Amending
88-79    6-19-1988     portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei Makaha, Ord. 86-
                       117.) Makaha Valley, Inc.
                       Rezoning parcels of land situated at Pearl City.
88-85    7-5-1988      (Amending portions of zoning map No. 7, Halawa Pearl
                       City, Ord. 86-133.) Holiday Developers, Inc.
                       Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at
88-94    7-20-1988     Mililani. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio
                       (Mililani), Ord. 86-112.) Mililani Town, Inc.
                       Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waialua. (Amending
88-108   9-29-1988     portion of zoning map No. 17, Mokuleia Haleiwa, Ord. 84-
                       134.) Philip B. Calilao
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. Approval
No.  Date
88-  10-24-   Rezoning parcels of land situated at Laie Point, Oahu. (Amending portion
111  1988     of zoning map No. 19, Kahuku Laie, Ord. 86-120.) DLU
88-  10 24    Amending Ord. 86 92 by amending the unilateral agreement incorporated
116  1988     therein by reference. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio
              (Mililani), Ord. 86-112.) Oceanic Properties
89-1 1-19-    Rezoning land situated at Haleiwa. (Amending portion of zoning map No.
     1989     17, Mokuleia Haleiwa, Ord. 86-134.) Henry E. Nowicki
     1-19-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waipio. (Amending portion of zoning
89-4 1989     map Nos. 9 and 10, Waipio (Crestview) and Waipio (Mililani), Ords. 86-111
              and 86-112.) DLU
89-  2-23-    Amending a parcel of land situated at Makiki. (Amending portion of zoning
20   1989     map No. 4, Nuuanu McCully, Ord. 86-107.) Richard Y. and Hong Kwum Pang
89-  2-23-    Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at Halawa. (Amending
21   1989     portion of zoning map No. 7, Halawa Pearl City, Ord. 86-133.) Lani
              Properties Corp.
89-  2-23-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Ewa. (Amending portion of zoning
27   1989     map No. 14, Barber’s Point-Kahe-Nanakuli, Ord. 86-116.) Roy Tokujo-Cove
              Enterprises, Inc.
89-  2-23-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Moanalua. (Amending portion of
28   1989     zoning map No. 6, Red Hill Ft. Shafter, Ord. 86-109.) Circle K Hawaii,
              Inc. (Unilateral agreement was amended by Ord. 98-14)
89-  2-23-    Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at Kalihi Valley.
30   1989     (Amending portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi Nuuanu, Ord. 86-108.) DLU
89-  4-18-    Amending zoning map Nos. 4 and 5, Nuuanu McCully and Kalihi Nuuanu, Ords.
53   1989     86-107 and 86-108, respectively, to reflect amendments to special
              district regulations. DLU
89-  4-18-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Ewa. (Amending portion of zoning
55   1989     map No. 12, Ewa Beach Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-114.) Puuloa Homes, Ltd.,
              and Herbert K. Horita Realty, Inc.
89-  5-5-1989 Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Makaha. (Amending portion of zoning
57            map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha, Ord. 86-117.) Aki Brothers
89-  6-1-1989 Rezoning parcels of land situated at Halawa. (Amending portion of zoning
72            map No. 7, Halawa Pearl City, Ord. 86-133.) Halawa Associates, Inc.
89-           Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at Pearl City. (Amending
73   6-1-1989 portion of zoning map No. 7, Halawa Pearl City, Ord. 86-133.) Pearl City
              Youth Complex
89-  7-20-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Kewalo. (Amending portion of zoning
97   1989     map No. 4, Nuuanu McCully, Ord. 86-107.) King Birch Joint Venture
89-  8-3-1989 Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Nuuanu. (Amending portion of zoning
100           map No. 4, Nuuanu McCully, Ord. 86-107.) DHCD
89-           Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Kaimuki. (Amending portion of
107  8-3-1989 zoning map No. 3, Moiliili Kaimuki, Ord. 86-106.) Allan Y. and Janet M.
              Yamauchi
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. Approval
No.  Date
89-  9-27-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Hoaeae, Ewa. (Amending portion of
111  1989     zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Crestview), Ord. 86-111.) Blackfield Hawaii
              Corp.
89-  10-4-    Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at Kailua. (Amending
112  1989     portion of zoning map No. 23, Kailua-Keolu, Ord. 86-124.) Lone Star, Inc.
89-  10-4-    Rezoning parcels of land situated at Kaimuki. (Amending portion of zoning
120  1989     map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki, Ord. 86-106.) Ukishima/Sullivan Properties
89-  10-4-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Kaneohe. (Amending portion of
122  1989     zoning map No. 22, Heeia Kaneohe Maunawili, Ord. 86-123.) William O.
              Farrior and Robert E. Willis
89-  10-4-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waipio. (Amending portion of zoning
123  1989     map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani), Ord. 86-112.) Mililani Town, Inc. (UA
              amended by Ord. 93-23)
89-  10-23-   Rezoning parcels of land situated at Waianae. (Amending portion of zoning
124  1989     map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha, Ord. 86-117) Honvest Corp.
89-  10-23-   Rezoning parcels of land situated at Hawaii Kai. (Amending portion of
128  1989     zoning map No. 1, Hawaii Kai, Ord. 86-104.) CCL
89-  11-21-   Rezoning parcels of land situated at Kapalama. (Amending portion of
131  1989     zoning map No. 5, Kalihi Nuuanu, Ord. 86-108.) Gabrielsen & Co.
90-7 2-7-1990 Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waipahu. (Amending portion of
              zoning map No. 8, Ord. 86-110 (Waipahu).) Honpa Hongwanji
90-8 2-7-1990 Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Palolo. (Amending portion of zoning
              map No. 3, Moiliili Kaimuki, Ord. 86-106.) Emma International, Inc.
90-  2-7-1990 Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waipio. (Amending portion of zoning
10            map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani), Ord. 86-112.) DLU
90-  3-9-1990 Rezoning parcels of land situated at Moanalua, Oahu. (Amending portion of
18            zoning map No. 6, Red Hill Ft. Shafter, Ord. 86-109.) Rokan Partners
90-  3-29-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Wailupe. (Amending portion of
25   1990     zoning map No. 2, Kahala Kuliouou, Ord. 86-105.) CCL
90-  4-11-    Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated in Ewa. (Amending portion
30   1990     of zoning map No. 13, Makakilo, Ord. 86-115, and portion of zoning map
              No. 14, Barber’s Point Kahe Nanakuli, Ord. 86-116.) Campbell Estate
90-  4-11-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Makaha. (Amending portion of zoning
36   1990     map No. 15, Lualualei Makaha, Ord. 86-117.) DLU
90-           Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Makiki. (Amending portion of zoning
39   5-3-1990 map No. 4, Nuuanu McCully, Ord. 86-107.) Walter K. Kitagawa and May H.
              Kitagawa Okazaki
90-  7-25-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waiau, Ewa, Oahu. (Amending portion
61   1990     of zoning map No. 7, Halawa Pearl City, Ord. 86-133.) The Lusk Co.
90-  7-26-    Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at Waialae Nui. (Amending
69   1990     portion of zoning map No. 2, Kahala Kuliouou, Ord. 86-105.) Bishop Estate
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. Approval
No.  Date
90-  8-22-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Pearl City. (Amending portion of
72   1990     zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City, Ord. 86-133.) Melville & Blake
90-  9-26-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Maunawili. (Amending portion of zoning
75   1990     map No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili, Ord. 86-123.) Edward and Margarita
              Mager
90-  10-16-   Rezoning parcels of land situated at Honouliuli. (Amending portions of
78   1990     zoning map Nos. 8 and 13, Waipahu and Makakilo, Ords. 86-110 and 86-115.)
              DLU
90-  11-26-   Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Nuuanu. (Amending portion of zoning
85   1990     map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu, Ord. 86-108.) Casey Family Program
90-  11-26-   Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waipio. (Amending portion of zoning
94   1990     map Nos. 9 and 10, Waipio (Crestview) and Waipio (Mililani), Ords. 86-111
              and 86-112.) Mililani Town, Inc.
91-  2-28-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waikele and Hoaeae, Ewa. (Amending a
11   1991     portion of zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Crestview), Ord. 86-111.) Halekua
              Development Corp. (Unilateral agreement was amended by Ord. 01-42.)
91-  3-21-    Rezoning parcels of land situated at Ewa. (Amending portion of zoning map
17   1991     No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-114.) Gentry Development Co.
91-  3-21-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Kalihi. (Amending portion of zoning
18   1991     map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu, Ord. 86-108.) Erlinda M. Cachola
91-  3-21-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Makaha. (Amending portion of zoning
20   1991     map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha, Ord. 86-117.) ANA Hotels Hawaii, Inc.
91-           Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at Waipio. (Amending portion
36   6-5-1991 of zoning map No. 9, Waipio-Makai (Crestview), Ord. 86-111.) Mililani Group,
              Inc.
91-  7-29-    Rezoning parcels of land situated at McCully. (Amending portion of zoning
39   1991     map No. 4, Nuuanu-McCully, Ord. 86-107.) Fu Tsu Co., Ltd.
91-  9-20-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Ewa. (Amending portion of zoning map
65   1991     No. 13, Makakilo, Ord. 86-115, and zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Point-Kahe-
              Nanakuli, Ord. 86-116.) James Campbell Estate
91-  10-8-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Kaneohe. (Amending portion of zoning
67   1991     map No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili, Ord. 86-123.) RFD Publications, Inc.
91-  10-18-   Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Maili. (Amending portion of zoning map
71   1991     No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha, Ord. 86-117.) Nowlin Correa
91-  11-27-   Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at Moanalua. (Amending
85   1991     portion of zoning map No. 6, Red Hill-Fort Shafter, Ord. 86-109.) Michael
              Kujubu, et al.
              Rezoning parcels of land situated at Waikele and Hoaeae. (Amending portion
92-  3-11-    of zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Crestview), by amending two unilateral
19   1992     agreements, Ord. 86-111.) Halekua Development Corp. and Royal Oahu Resort,
              Inc. (A unilateral agreement and addendum to the unilateral agreement were
              amended by Ord. 01-42.)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. Approval
No.  Date
92-           Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at Waipio. (Amending portion of
21   4-6-1992 zoning map No. 10, Waipio-Mauka (Mililani), Ord. 86-112.) Honbushin Mission
              International of Hawaii
92-  4-27-    Rezoning parcels of land situated at Kalihi. (Amending portion of zoning map No.
32   1992     5, Kalihi-Nuuanu, Ord. 86-108.) DLU
92-  4-27-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waianae. (Amending portion of zoning map
33   1992     No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha, Ord. 86-117.) George Plechaty, M.D.
92-  5-15-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Makiki. (Amending portion of zoning map
41   1992     No. 4, Nuuanu-McCully, Ord. 86-107.) Calvin Lyau
92-  6-12-    Rezoning parcels and portions of parcels of land situated at Waipio. (Amending
64   1992     portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani), Ord. 86-112; amending
              unilateral agreement, Ords. 86-92 and 88-116.) Castle & Cooke Properties, Inc.
92-  6-29-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Ewa. (Amending portion of zoning map No.
81   1992     13, Makakilo, Ord. 86-115.) Lusk Hawaii (Unilateral agreement was amended by
              Ord. 99-60)
92-  6-30-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Lualualei. (Amending portion of zoning map
85   1992     No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha, Ord. 86-117.) Irene M. Okabe, et al.
92-  7-21-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Mililani. (Amending portion of zoning map
92   1992     No. 10, Waipio (Mililani), Ord. 86-112.) Castle & Cooke Properties, Inc.
92-  9-10-    Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at Honouliuli, Ewa. (Amending
106  1992     portion of zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Point-Nanakuli, Ord. 86-116.) James
              Campbell Estate
92-  10-27-   Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waipio (Mililani). (Amending portion of
117  1992     zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani), Ord. 86-112.) Castle & Cooke Residential,
              Inc.
92-  10-27-   Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Nuuanu. (Amending portion of zoning map
118  1992     No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu, Ord. 86-108.) Ms. Debbie Mori
92-  10-27-   Rezoning two parcels of land situated at Waimalu. (Amending portion of zoning
120  1992     map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City, Ord. 86-133.) DLU
92-  11-18-   Rezoning parcels of land situated at Waipio (Mililani). (Amending portion of
128  1992     zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani), Ord. 86-112.) Waihuna Joint Venture;
              Castle & Cooke Properties, Inc.
92-  11-18-   Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waianae. (Amending portion of zoning map
130  1992     No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha, Ord. 86-117.) DLU
92-  12-09-   Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waialae-Nui. (Amending portion of zoning
132  1992     map No. 2, Kahala-Kuliouou, Ord. 86-105.) Episcopal Homes of Hawaii, Inc.
              Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Makiki. (Amending a portion of zoning map
93-  2-25-    No. 4, Nuuanu-McCully, Ord. 86-107.) Charn-Sing and Rosalia Chan (Sec. II and
08   1993     Exhibit “B” of Ord. 93-08 were repealed, and all conditions set forth in the UA
              and Declaration for Conditional Zoning dated 2-11-1993 were released by Ord. 07-
              6.)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. No. Approval Date
                       Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Kailua. (Amending
93-16    3-19-1993     portions of zoning map No. 23, Kailua-Lanikai-Keolu,
                       Ord. 86-124.) DLU
                       Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at
93-23    4-16-1993     Mililani. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio
                       (Mililani), Ord. 86-112; amending unilateral agreement,
                       Ord. 89-123.) Castle & Cooke Residential, Inc.
                       Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at Maili
93-44    6-14-1993     (off Maipalaoa Road). (Amending portion of zoning map
                       No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha, Ord. 86-117.) The Lusk Co.
                       (Unilateral agreement was amended by Ord. 97-51.)
                       Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Mililani.
93-45    6-14-1993     (Amending portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio
                       (Mililani), Ord. 86-112.) Castle & Cooke Residential,
                       Inc.
                       Rezoning parcels of land situated at Ewa. (Amending
93-54    6-14-1993     portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point,
                       Ord. 86-114.) Gentry Development Co.
                       Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Kaimuki. (Amending
93-66    7-28-1993     portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki, Ord. 86-
                       106.) Waialae Kahala Partners (Unilateral agreement was
                       amended by Ord. 96-63)
                       Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Niu Valley.
93-67    7-28-1993     (Amending portion of zoning map No. 2, Kahala-Kuliouou,
                       Ord. 86-105.) John and Debra Hunt
93-71    8-27-1993     Amends zoning map No. 4, Nuuanu-McCully, to reflect
                       higher height limits. DLU
                       Rezoning various parcels of land situated at Waipio.
93-79    11-4-1993     (Amending portion of zoning map No. 9, Waipio-Makai
                       (Crestview), Ord. No. 86-111.) Gentry Hawaii, Ltd.
                       Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Nuuanu. (Amending
93-86    11-29-1993    portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu, Ord. 86-
                       108.) Robert Midkiff and Elizabeth Midkiff Myers
                       Rezoning parcels of land situated at Ewa Beach.
93-94    12-13-1993    (Amending portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-
                       Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-114.) Haseko (Ewa), Inc. (UA
                       amended by Ord. 02-58.)
                       Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Pupukea. (Amending
93-96    12-13-1993    portion of zoning map No. 18, Kawailoa-Waialee, Ord. 86-
                       119.) Corp. of the Presiding Bishop of the Church of JC
                       of LDS
                       Rezoning a parcel of land and portions of parcels of
93-111   12-13-1993    land situated at Haleiwa. (Amending portion of zoning
                       map No. 17, Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa, Ord. 86-134.)
                       North Shore Market Place
                       Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Keolu. (Amending
94-04    2-10-1994     portion of zoning map No. 23, Kailua-Lanikai-Keolu, Ord.
                       86-124.) Richard and Carol Palmer
                       Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at
94-07    2-10-1994     Kahaluu. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 21, Kualoa-
                       Kahaluu, Ord. 86-122.) Raymond Nylen
                       Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Palolo. (Amending
94-20    3-15-1994     portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki, Ord. 86-
                       106.) Yee Palolo Corp.
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. Approval
No.  Date
94-  4-28-    Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at Kailua. (Amending portion
22   1994     of zoning map No. 23, Kailua-Lanikai-Keolu, Ord. 86-124.) Sea Breeze, Ltd.
94-  5-18-    Rezoning parcels of land situated at Heeia. (Amending portion of zoning map
29   1994     No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili, Ord. 86-123.) DLU
94-           Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at Waipio. (Amending portion
40   6-8-1994 of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani), Ord. 86-112.) Castle & Cooke
              Properties, Inc.
94-  7-6-1994 Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at Kalihi. (Amending portion
51            of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu, Ord. 86-108.) William Craddick
94-  7-29-    Rezoning land situated at Ewa. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa
57   1994     Beach-Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-114.) Gentry Development Co. (UA was amended
              by Ord. 06-26)
94-  7-29-    Rezoning land situated at Heeia Kea. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 22,
59   1994     Heeia-Maunawili, Ord. 86-123.) MK Pacific Realty Inc.
94-  9-15-    Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at Maili. (Amending portion
60   1994     of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha, Ord. 86-117.) P. H. Property
              Development Company
94-  9-15-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Pupukea. (Amending portion of zoning
66   1994     map No. 18, Kawailoa-Waialee, Ord. 86-119.) DLU
94-  11-21-   Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at Kapolei. (Amending
81   1994     portion of zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Point-Nanakuli, Ord. 86-116.) James
              Campbell Estate (Unilateral Agreement was amended by Ord. 98-08)
94-  11-21-   Rezoning land situated at Makiki-Punchbowl. (Amending portion of zoning map
83   1994     No. 4, Nuuanu-McCully, Ord. 86-107.) Kazutoshi Yato
94-  11-21-   Rezoning land situated at Mililani. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 10,
84   1994     Waipio (Mililani), Ord. 86-112.) Aloha Management Co.
95-  3-23-    Rezoning land situated at Waipio. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 9,
08   1995     Waipio (Crestview), Ord. 86-111.) Halekua Development Corporation
              Rezoning parcels and a portion of a parcel of land situated at Pupukea.
95-  5-26-    (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 18, Kawailoa-Waialee, Ord. 86-119.)
19   1995     Obayashi Hawaii Corporation (Sec. II and Exhibit “B” of Ord. 95-19 were
              repealed, and all conditions set forth in the UA and Declaration for
              Conditional Zoning dated 5-17-1995 were released by Ord. 07-5.)
95-           Rezoning portions of parcels of land situated at Waipio. (Amending portion
53   9-1-1995 of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani), Ord. 86-112.) Castle & Cooke Homes
              Hawaii, Inc.
95-           Amending Ord. 92-92 by amending the unilateral agreement incorporated
54   9-1-1995 therein by reference. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio
              (Mililani), Ord. 86-112.) Castle & Cooke Homes Hawaii, Inc.
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. Approval
No.  Date
95-           Amending Ord. 93-23 by amending the unilateral agreement incorporated therein
55   9-1-1995 by reference. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani), Ord.
              86-112.) Castle & Cooke Homes Hawaii, Inc.
95-  9-1-1995 Rezoning land situated at Waipio. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 10,
56            Waipio (Mililani), Ord. 86-112.) DLU
95-           Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at Makaha. (Amending portion
57   9-1-1995 of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha, Ord. 86-117.) Leeward Wholesale
              Nursery
95-  10-4-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waianae. (Amending portion of zoning
59   1995     map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha, Ord. 86-117.) Ronny Baker
95-  12-18-   Amending zoning height for parcels of land situated at Kapolei. (Amending
70   1995     portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-114.) James
              Campbell Estate
96-  2-7-1996 Rezoning land situated at Sand Island. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 5,
03            Kalihi-Nuuanu, Ord. 86-108.) Sand Island Business Association
96-  2-27-    Rezoning land situated at Kalihi-Palama. (Amending portion of zoning map No.
05   1996     5, Kalihi-Nuuanu, Ord. 86-108.) Bishop Museum
96-  2-27-    Rezoning land situated at Kaneohe. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 22,
07   1996     Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili, Ord. 86-123.) Pacific Atlas (Hawaii) Inc.
96-  3-29-    Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at Nanakuli. (Amending
10   1996     portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha, Ord. 86-117.) Leeward Hawaii,
              Inc.
96-  3-29-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waimanalo. (Amending portion of zoning
14   1996     map No. 24, Waimanalo, Ord. 86-125.) Waimanalo Teen Project, Inc.
96-  4-25-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Honolulu. (Amending portion of zoning
21   1996     map No. 4, Nuuanu McCully, Ord. 86-107.) Real Estate Inc.
96-  4-25-    Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at Honouliuli. (Amending
22   1996     portion of zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Point-Kahe-Nanakuli, Ord. 86-116.)
              Estate of James Campbell
96-  5-15-    Rezoning land situated at Haleiwa. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 18,
28   1996     Kawailoa-Waialee, Ord. 86-119.) Charles P. Booth, et al.
96-           Rezoning land situated at Waianae (Waianae Coast Comprehensive Health
46   7-9-1996 Center). (Amending portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha, Ord. 86-
              117.) DLU
96-           Rezoning land situated at Pearl City. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 7,
48   7-9-1996 Pearl City-Halawa, Ord. 86-133.) Laborers’ International Union of America -
              Local 368)
96-  10-10-   Rezoning a parcel of land situated near the airport. (Amending portion of
57   1996     zoning map No. 6, Red Hill-Fort Shafter, Ord. 86-109.) Airport Industrial
              Park Associates
96-  10-10-   Rezoning parcels of land situated at Lualualei, Nanakuli. (Amending portion
60   1996     of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha, Ord. 86-117.) Sanjiro Nakade
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. Approval
No.  Date
96-  10-10-   Rezoning land situated at Waipahu. (Amending a portion of zoning map No.
61   1996     8, Waipahu, Ord. 86-110.) Ben Takayesu (Unilateral agreement was amended
              by Ord. 00-61.)
96-  10-31-   Amending unilateral agreement incorporated in Ord. 93-66, which rezones a
63   1996     parcel of land situated at Kaimuki, and which amends portion of zoning map
              No. 3, Moiliili- Kaimuki, Ord. 86-106.) Waialae Kahala Partners
96-  11-27-   Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waialua. (Amending portion of zoning
64   1996     map No. 17, Mokuleia-Haleiwa, Ord. 86-134.) Waialua United Church of
              Christ
96-  11-27-   Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waimanalo. (Amending portion of
65   1996     zoning map No. 24, Waimanalo, Ord. 86-125.) Corp. of the President of the
              Church of Jesus Christ LDS
96-  11-27-   Rezoning land situated at Ewa. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa
68   1996     Beach-Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-114.) Gentry Development Co.
96-  11-27-   Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waipahu. (Amending portion of zoning
69   1996     map No. 8, Waipahu, Ord. 86-110.) AMFAC/JMB HAWAII
              Rezoning parcels of land situated at Waikiki. (Amending portion of zoning
96-  12-18-   map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki, Ord. 86-106, to conform to various ROH
71   1996     amendments, to implement the primary urban center development plan land
              use map and corresponding special provisions for the Waikiki special area,
              and to amend the zoning map legend.) DLU
96-  12-19-   Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Maunawili. (Amending portion of
78   1996     zoning map No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili, Ord. 86-123.) Le Jardin
              Academy
97-  2-12-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Wailupe. (Amending portion of zoning
04   1997     map No. 2, Kahala-Kuliouou, Ord. 86-105.) (Unilateral agreement was
              amended by Ord. 99-08) MBC Corporation
97-  4-30-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waipio. (Amending portion of zoning
12   1997     map No. 9, Waipio [Crestview], Ord. 86-111.) Halekua Development
              Corporation
97-  5-16-    Rezoning land situated at Kaneohe. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 22,
19   1997     Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili, Ord. 86-123.) Hawaiian Memorial Park Cemetery
97-  8-22-    Amending Ord. 93-44 by amending the unilateral agreement incorporated
51   1997     therein by reference. (Zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha, Ord. 86-117.)
              Schuler Homes, Inc.
97-  12-17-   Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Kahaluu. (Amending portion of zoning
71   1997     map No. 21, Kualoa-Waiahole-Kahaluu, Ord. 86-122.) Margaret L. Watson
              Trust
97-  12-17-   Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Wahiawa-Whitmore. (Amending portion
72   1997     of zoning map No. 11, Wahiawa-Whitmore, Ord. 86-113.) McDonald’s
              Corporation
97-  12-17-   Rezoning land situated at Honouliuli, Ewa. (Amending portion of zoning map
75   1997     No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-114.) James Campbell Estate
98-  1-15-    Rezoning land situated at Waiawa. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 9,
01   1998     Waipio (Crestview), Ord. 86-111.) Gentry Development Company (Unilateral
              agreement was amended by Ord. 98-69)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. Approval
No.  Date
98-           Amending Ord. 94-81 (an ordinance to rezone land at Kapolei) by amending
08   3-4-1998 the unilateral agreement incorporated therein by reference. (Zoning map No.
              14, Barber’s Point-Kahe-Nanakuli, Ord. 86-116.) James Campbell Estate
98-  3-23-    Rezoning land situated at Kapaa Valley. (Amending portion of zoning map No.
13   1998     22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili, Ord. 86-123.) CCL
              Amending Ord. 89-28 (an ordinance to rezone a parcel of land at Moanalua)
98-  3-23-    by amending the unilateral agreement incorporated therein by reference.
14   1998     (Zoning map No. 6, Red Hill-Ft. Shafter, Ord. 86-109.) Circle K Hawaii,
              Inc.
98-  4-20-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Pearl City. (Amending portion of
15   1998     zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City, Ord. 86-133.) DHCD
98-  4-20-    Rezoning land situated at Waiau. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 7,
16   1998     Halawa-Pearl City, Ord. 86-133.) Jaymark Komer
98-           Rezoning parcels of land situated at Waiwai Loop, intersection of Lagoon
24   6-9-1998 Drive and Nimitz Highway. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 6, Red Hill-
              Fort Shafter, Ord. 86-109.) Shelton Investments, Inc.
98-  7-23-    Rezoning land situated at Ewa. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 12,
44   1998     Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-114.) Gentry Investment Properties (UA
              was amended by Ord. 06-26)
98-  7-23-    Rezoning land situated at Kailua. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 23,
45   1998     Kailua-Lanikai-Keolu, Ord. 86-124.) DLU
98-  7-23-    Rezoning land situated at Kalihi. (Amending portion of zoning map No. 5,
47   1998     Kalihi-Nuuanu, Ord. 86-108.) Kokua Kalihi Valley
98-  8-18-    Rezoning a portion of a parcel of land situated at Kalihi. (Amending a
52   1998     portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu, Ord. 86-108.) DLU
98-  10-1-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Kaneohe. (Amending a portion of
56   1998     zoning map No. 22, Heeia-Maunawili, Ord. 86-123.) Kaiser Foundation Health
              Plan, Inc.
98-  10-1-    Rezoning land situated at Lualualei. (Amending portion of zoning map No.
57   1998     15, Lualualei-Makaha, Ord. 86-117.) Quality Home Care, Inc. and Joseph
              Kauwale, Jr.
98-  11-20-   Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Waipahu. (Amending portion of zoning
61   1998     map No. 8, Waipahu, Ord. 86-110.) Amfac Property Development Corp.
98-  11-20-   Amending the zoning height for land situated at Kahala Avenue. (Amending a
63   1998     portion of zoning map No. 2, Kahala-Kuliouou, Ord. 86-105.) DLU
98-  12-17-   Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Kalama Valley. (Amending a portion of
67   1998     zoning map No. 1, Hawaii Kai, Ord. 86-104.) Maunalua Associates, Inc.
96-  12-17-   Rezoning land situated at Nanakuli. (Amending a portion of zoning map No.
68   1998     15, Lualualei-Makaha, Ord. 86-117.) Filemon and Leticia Ancheta
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord.  Approval
No.   Date
               Amending Ord. 98-01 (an ordinance to rezone land situated at
98-69 12-17-   Waiawa) by amending the unilateral agreement incorporated
      1998     therein by reference. (Zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Crestview),
               Ord. 86-111.) Gentry Investment Properties
      3-12-    Amending Ord. 4320 (an ordinance to rezone land situated at
99-04 1999     Aiea) by amending the unilateral agreement incorporated therein
               by reference. Crazy Shirts, Inc.
               Amending Ord. 97-04 (an ordinance to rezone land situated at
99-08 3-30-    Kalanianaole Highway) by amending the unilateral agreement
      1999     incorporated therein by reference. (Zoning map No. 2, Kahala-
               Kuliouou, Ord. 86-105.) William Weinberg
99-18 5-28-    Rezoning land situated at Halawa. (Amending a portion of zoning
      1999     map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City, Ord. 86-133.) DLU
               Rezoning land situated at the intersection of Koapaka Street
99-38 6-22-    and Ohohia Street (airport vicinity). (Amending a portion of
      1999     zoning map No. 6, Red Hill-Fort Shafter, Ord. 86-109.) Taihook
               Assocs.
      6-22-    Rezoning land situated at Kaelepulu, Keolu, Kailua. (Amending a
99-39 1999     portion of zoning map No. 23, Kailua-Lanikai-Keolu, Ord. 86-
               124.) CCL
               Rezoning land situated at Ewa. (Amending a portion of zoning
99-47 8-5-1999 map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-114.) James
               Campbell Estate
      10-6-    Rezoning land situated at Honolulu. (Amending a portion of
99-56 1999     zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu, Ord. 86-108.) Maximo D.
               Pajela, et al.
      10-6-    Rezoning land situated at Hawaii Kai. (Amending a portion of
99-57 1999     zoning map No. 1, Hawaii Kai, Ord. 86-104.) Maunalua
               Associates, Inc.
      10-6-    Rezoning land situated at Palolo. (Amending a portion of zoning
99-58 1999     map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki, Ord. 86-106.) Palolo Land
               Partnership
               Amending Ord. 92-81 (an ordinance to rezone land situated at
99-60 11-4-    Ewa) by amending the unilateral agreement incorporated therein
      1999     by reference. (Zoning map No. 13, Makakilo, Ord. 86-115.)
               Schuler Homes, Inc.
99-61 11-4-    Rezoning land situated at Kailua. (Amending a portion of zoning
      1999     map No. 23, Kailua-Lanikai-Keolu, Ord. 86-124.) KBC Partners
               Amending Ord. 84-53 (an ordinance to rezone land situated at
99-67 11-26-   Kalihi Kai [Colburn Street zone change]) by deleting the
      1999     unilateral agreement incorporated therein by reference. George
               and Edward Motonaga
99-68 11-26-   Rezoning land situated at Kuliouou. (Amending a portion of
      1999     zoning map No. 2, Kahala-Kuliouou, Ord. 86-105.) CCL
      12-16-   Rezoning land situated at Barber’s Point. (Amending a portion
99-70 1999     of zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Point-Nanakuli, Ord. 86-116.)
               DLNR
      3-30-    Rezoning land situated at Kaneohe. (Amending a portion of
00-04 2000     zoning map No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili, Ord. 86-123.)
               Clinton and Joan Ashford
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord.  Approval
No.   Date
00-17 5-10-    Rezoning land situated at Kalihi. (Amending a portion of zoning
      2000     map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu, Ord. 86-108.) Servco Pacific Inc.
               Rezoning land situated at Halekauwila Farms, Kaneohe. (Amending
00-21 6-7-2000 a portion of zoning map No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili, Ord.
               86-123.) T. Iida Contracting, Ltd.
00-44 7-27-    Rezoning land situated at Waianae. (Amending a portion of zoning
      2000     map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha, Ord. 86-117.) AT&T/GTE
      7-27-    Rezoning a parcel of land situated at Hawaii Kai. (Amending a
00-46 2000     portion of zoning map No. 1, Hawaii Kai, Ord. 86-104.) Maunalua
               Associates, Inc.
00-49 11-2-    Rezoning land situated at Manoa. (Amending a portion of zoning
      2000     map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki, Ord. 86-106.) Savas A. Mojarrad
      11-2-    Rezoning land situated at Waimalu, Pearl City. (Amending a
00-51 2000     portion of zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City, Ord. 86-133.)
               CCL
00-55 11-2-    Rezoning land situated at Kapolei. (Amending a portion of zoning
      2000     map No. 13, Barber’s Point-Kahe-Nanakuli, Ord. 86-115.) Cutter
      11-2-    Rezoning land situated at Waipio (Mililani). (Amending a portion
00-56 2000     of zoning map No. 10, Waipio Mauka (Mililani), Ord. 86-112.)
               Trinity Church Leeward
               Amending Ord. 96-61 (an ordinance to rezone land situated at
00-61 11-30-   Waipahu) by amending the unilateral agreement incorporated
      2000     therein by reference. (Zoning map No. 8, Waipahu, Ord. 86-110)
               Gisei Takayesu
00-62 11-30-   Rezoning land situated at Waimanalo. (Amending a portion of
      2000     zoning map No. 24, Waimanalo, Ord. 86-125.) Circle Z Ranch
               Amending Ord. 86-88 (an ordinance to rezone certain parcels of
00-70 12-8-    land situated at Hawaii Kai) by amending the unilateral
      2000     agreement incorporated therein by reference. (Zoning map No. 1,
               Hawaii Kai, Ord. 86-104) Maunalua Associates, Inc.
      12-8-    Rezoning land situated at Waialua. (Amending a portion of zoning
00-71 2000     map No. 17, Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa, Ord. 86-134.) Aloha Ke
               Akua High School
00-74 12-11-   Rezoning land situated at Palolo. (Amending a portion of zoning
      2000     map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki, Ord. 86-106.) Pacific Century Trust
01-04 3-29-    Rezoning land situated at Barber’s Point. (Amending a portion of
      2001     zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Point-Nanakuli, Ord. 86-116.) DLNR
      3-29-    Rezoning lands situated at Kapolei, Ewa. (Amending a portion of
01-07 2001     zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-114, and a
               portion of zoning map No. 13, Makakilo, Ord. 86-115.) DPP
      4-19-    Rezoning land situated at Haleiwa. (Amending a portion of zoning
01-13 2001     map No. 17, Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa, Ord. 86-134.) David M.
               Robichaux
      4-19-    Rezoning land situated at Ewa. (Amending a portion of zoning map
01-14 2001     No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-114.) Gentry
               Investment Properties
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. No. Approval Date
                       Rezoning land situated at Waipio, Ewa. (Amending a
01-15    4-19-2001     portion of zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Crestview), Ord.
                       86-111.) HRT Limited; Honolulu Ltd.; and 300 Corporation
                       Rezoning land situated at Haleiwa. (Amending a portion
01-16    4-19-2001     of zoning map No. 17, Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa, Ord. 86-
                       134.) Senn-Delaney Leadership Consulting Group
                       Rezoning land situated at Waialua. (Amending a portion
01-40    7-26-2001     of zoning map No. 17, Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa, Ord. 86-
                       134.) Presiding Bishop, Church of Jesus Christ LDS
                       Rezoning land situated at Manoa. (Amending a portion of
01-41    7-26-2001     zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki, Ord. 86-106.) Ayano
                       Okamura Trust
                       Amending Ords. 91-11 and 92-19 rezoning land situated at
                       Waikele and Hoaeae (amending a portion of zoning map No.
01-42    7-26-2001     9, Waipio (Crestview), Ord. 86-111), by amending a
                       unilateral agreement and addendum incorporated therein
                       by reference. JAC Hawaii, Inc.
                       Rezoning land situated at Liliha. (Amending a portion of
02-04    2-13-2002     zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu, Ord. 86-108.) Dr.
                       Elenita Alvarez
                       Rezoning parcels and portions of parcels of land
02-09    3-6-2002      situated at Ewa Beach. (Amending a portion of zoning map
                       No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-114.) Haseko
                       Hawaii (UA amended by Ord. 02-58.)
02-13    5-3-2002      Rezoning land situated at Manana. (Amending a portion of
                       zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City, Ord. 86-133.) DPP
                       Rezoning land situated at Palama. (Amending a portion of
02-16    5-3-2002      zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu, Ord.86-108.) Kunawai
                       Terrace
                       Rezoning land situated at Honouliuli. (Amending a
02-23    6-14-2002     portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point),
                       Ord. 86-114.) Child and Family Service
                       Rezoning land situated at Mililani. (Amending a portion
02-29    6-14-2002     of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani), Ord. 86-112.)
                       Castle and Cooke Homes Hawaii, Inc.
02-38    7-30-2002     Rezoning land situated at Maunalua. (Amending a portion
                       of zoning map No. 1, Hawaii Kai, Ord. 86-104.) DPP
                       Rezoning land situated at Kokokahi. (Amending a portion
02-41    7-30-2002     of zoning map No. 23, Kailua-Lanikai-Keolu, Ord. 86-
                       124.) Friendship Garden Foundation
                       Rezoning land situated at Waiau. (Amending a portion of
02-42    7-30-2002     zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City, Ord. 86-133.)
                       Roxanne Okazaki and Helen Chun
                       Rezoning land situated at Heeia. (Amending a portion of
02-44    7-30-2002     zoning map No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili, Ord. 86-
                       123.) DPP
                       Rezoning land situated at the Airport Business/
02-56    11-27-2002    Industrial District. (Amending a portion of zoning map
                       No. 6, Red Hill-Fort Shafter, Ord. 86-109.) Loyalty
                       Development Co., Ltd.
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. Approval
No.  Date
              Amending a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-
02-  11-27-   114, by amending the unilateral agreement incorporated by reference into Ord.
58   2002     93-94, as amended, and further incorporated by reference into Ord. 02-09, as
              set forth in Exhibit “A.” Haseko (Ewa), Inc.
02-  11-27-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 18, Kawailoa-Waialee, by amending Ord. 86-
59   2002     119 and repeals Ord. 4336 relating to the Sunset PD-H District No. R-41 at
              Waialee, North Shore. Western United Life Assurance
02-  11-27-   Rezoning land situated at Kapolei. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 12,
61   2002     Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-114.) Hawaii Village Associates
03-  2-12-    Rezoning land situated at Waiawa. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 9,
01   2003     Waipio (Crestview), Ord. 86-111.) Gentry Investment Properties
03-  3-11-    Rezoning land situated at Ko Olina. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 14,
02   2003     Barber’s Point-Kahe-Nanakuli, Ord. 86-116.) Seagull Schools, Inc. and Ko
              Olina Development, LCC
03-  6-19-    Rezoning land situated at Kahaluu. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 21,
16   2003     Kualoa-Waiahole-Kahaluu, Ord. 86-122.) Alice Higa Trust
03-  11-20-   Rezoning land situated at Kahaluu. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 21,
33   2003     Kualoa-Waiahole-Kahaluu, Ord. 86-122.) Rodney Oshima and Judy Burke
03-  11-20-   Rezoning land situated at Kailua. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 23,
36   2003     Kailua-Lanikai-Keolu, Ord. 86-124.) Kaneohe Ranch Co., Ltd.
03-  12-18-   Rezoning land situated at Maili. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 14,
39   2003     Barber’s Point-Kahe-Nanakuli, Ord. 86-116.) Schuler Homes Hawaii, Inc.
04-  2-12-    Rezoning land situated at Pearl City. (Amending a portion of zoning map No.
02   2004     7, Halawa-Pearl City, Ord. 86-133.) DPP
04-  3-24-    Rezoning land situated at Waimalu. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 7,
04   2004     Halawa-Pearl City, Ord. 86-133.) Best Buy Purchasing, LLC
04-  4-7-2004 Rezoning land situated at Foster Village. (Amending a portion of zoning map
05            No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City, Ord. 86-133.) Oahu Veterans Council
04-  4-7-2004 Rezoning land situated at Ewa Beach. (Amending a portion of zoning map No.
06            12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-114.) Seagull Schools, Inc.
04-           Rezoning land situated at Ewa. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa
08   4-7-2004 Beach-Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-114.) Gentry Investment Properties (UA was
              amended by Ord. 06-25)
04-  8-26-    Rezoning land situated at Waimanalo. (Amending a portion of zoning map No.
29   2004     24, Waimanalo, Ord. 86-125.) Harry Akagi (et al.) and H&R Nurseries, Inc.
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. Approval
No.  Date
04-  12-15-   Rezoning land situated at the City of Kapolei. (Amending a portion of zoning map
45   2004     Nos. 12, 13, and 14, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point, Makakilo, and Barber’s Point-
              Nanakuli, Ords. 86-114, 86-115, and 86-116.) Kapolei Property Development, LLC
              Rezoning land situated at Ewa. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa
04-  12-15-   Beach-Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-114.) D. R. Horton, Schuler Division (“School
46   2004     Site” zone change designated on Exhibit A-1 shall become effective on July 2,
              2007)
05-  10-13-   Rezoning land situated at Honolulu. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 4,
029  2005     Nuuanu-McCully, Ord. 86-107.) Central Union Church
05-  11-21-   Rezoning land situated at Kaimuki. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 3,
034  2005     Moiliili-Kaimuki, Ord. 86-106.) Kaimuki Villa Association
06-  6-20-    Rezoning lands situated at 230 and 254 North Beretania Street between Aala
24   2006     Street and College Walk, Kalihi-Palama. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 5,
              Kalihi-Nuuanu, Ord. 86-108.) 3D Investments, LLC
06-  6-20-    Rezoning land situated at Ewa. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa
25   2006     Beach-Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-114, and Ord. 04-08 by amending the unilateral
              agreement.) Gentry Investment Properties
              Amending Ords. 94-57 and 98-44, rezoning parcels of land situated at Ewa.
06-  6-20-    (Amending portions of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-114,
26   2006     by amending conditions in two existing unilateral agreements related to a future
              child-care facility for Ewa by Gentry.) Gentry Investment Properties
              Rezoning land situated at Kapolei. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 13,
06-  6-20-    Makakilo, Ord. 86-115, and a portion of zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Point-Kahe-
28   2006     Nanakuli, Ord. 86-116.) The Waters of Kapolei, L.L.C., DBA Hawaiian Waters
              Adventure Park
06-  12-27-   Rezoning land situated at Kapolei. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 14,
53   2006     Barber’s Point-Kahe-Nanakuli, Ord. 86-116.) Aina Nui Corporation
              Rezoning land situated at Pupukea and Paumalu. (Amending a portion of zoning map
07-5 3-30-    No. 18, Kawailoa-Waialee, Ord. 86-119.) (Sec. II and Exhibit “B” of Ord. 95-19
     2007     are repealed, and all conditions set forth in the UA and Declaration for
              Conditional Zoning dated 5-17-95 are released.) DDC
              Rezoning land situated at Makiki. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 4,
07-6 3-30-    Nuuanu-McCully, Ord. 86-107.) (Sec. II and Exhibit “B” of Ord. 93-08 are
     2007     repealed, and all conditions set forth in the UA and Declaration for Conditional
              Zoning dated 2-11-93 are released.) Peter and Chrystal Ahn
07-9 4-26-    Rezoning lands situated at Honolulu. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 4,
     2007     Nuuanu-McCully, Ord. 86-107.) The Queen’s Medical Center
07-  5-17-    Rezoning land situated at Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili. (Amending a portion of zoning
16   2007     map No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili, Ord. 86-123.) Kamehameha Schools
07-  6-20-    Rezoning land in Kapolei. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-
31   2007     Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-114.) Costco Wholesale
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. Approval
No.  Date
07-  7-20-    Rezoning land situated at 548 Kapahulu Avenue between Campbell Avenue and
32   2007     Herbert Street, Kapahulu. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-
              Kaimuki, Ord. 86-106.) DLNR
07-  7-20-    Rezoning land situated at Ocean Pointe Master Planned Development, Ewa.
35   2007     (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point, Ord. 86-
              114.) Haseko (Ewa), Inc.
07-  10-4-    Rezoning land situated in Makaha. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 15,
38   2007     Lualualei-Makaha, Ord. 86-117.) Patricia Chinn
07-  10-4-    Rezoning land situated at Waipio. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 9,
39   2007     Waipio (Crestview), Ord. 86-111.) Core Realty, LLC
07-  10-29-   Rezoning land situated at Hawaii Kai. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 1,
41   2007     Hawaii Kai, Ord. 86-104.) 21st Century Homes Inc.
07-  10-29-   Rezoning land situated at 91-101 Malakole Street, Ewa. (Amending a portion of
42   2007     zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Point - Kahe - Nanakuli, Ord. 86-116.) HMC
              Irongate Hawaii Raceway Investors, LLC
07-  11-26-   Rezoning land situated at Moiliili-Kaimuki. (Amending a portion of zoning map
46   2007     No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki, Ord. 86-106.) Brenda Hashimoto
08-  9-29-    Rezoning land in Kapolei. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 14, Barber’s
25   2008     Point-Kahe-Nanakuli, Ordinance 86-116.) Kapolei Property Development LLC
08-  9-29-    Rezoning lands situated in Ewa. (Amending a portion of zoning map Nos. 13 and
26   2008     14, Makakilo and Barber’s Point-Kahe-Nanakuli, Ordinance Nos. 86-115 and 86-
              116.) Makaiwa Hills LLC
08-  9-29-    Rezoning land situated in Kapolei. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 14,
27   2008     Barber’s Point-Kahe-Nanakuli, Ordinance 86-116.) Aina Nui Corporation
08-  11-21-   Rezoning lands situated at Kapolei. (Amending a portion of zoning map Nos. 12
30   2008     and 13, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point and Makakilo, Ordinances 86-114 and 86-115.)
              University of Hawai’i
08-  11-21-   Rezoning lands situated at Kapolei. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 12,
31   2008     Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Ordinance 86-114.) The Salvation Army
09-3 3-12-    Rezoning land in Pupukea, North Shore. (Amending a portion of zoning map No.
     2009     18, Kawailoa-Waialee, Ordinance 86-119.) A Charitable Foundation Corporation
09-  6-26-    Rezoning land situated at Honouliuli. (Amending a portion of zoning map No.
22   2009     12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point, Ordinance 86-114.) Ewa Industrial Park, LLC
09-  12-31-   Rezoning lands situated at Haleiwa, North Shore. (Amending a portion of zoning
34   2009     map No. 17, Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa, Ordinance 86-134.) Scott C. Wallace
09-  12-31-   Rezoning land in Kaimuki. (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-
35   2009     Kaimuki, Ordinance 86-106.) Robert E. Hazzard
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. No. Approval Date
                       Rezoning land situated at Waipio, Ewa. (Amending a
10-7     5-6-2010      portion of zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Crestview),
                       Ordinance 86-111.) Hawaii United Okinawa Association
                       Rezoning land situated at Ewa. (Amending a portion of
10-27    10-27-2010    zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point, Ordinance
                       86-114.) The Mutual Housing Association of Hawaii
                       Rezoning land situated at Kailua. (Amending a portion of
10-28    10-27-2010    zoning map No. 23, Kailua-Lanikai-Keolu, Ordinance 86-
                       124.) Kailua Hongwanji Temple
                       Rezoning land situated in Mokuleia. (Amending a portion
11-4     5-3-2011      of zoning map No. 17, Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa,
                       Ordinance 86-134.) Ralph Gray
                       Rezoning land situated at Waimanalo. (Amending a portion
11-27    11-28-2011    of zoning map No. 24, Waimanalo, Ordinance 26-125.) S.
                       Kodama Inc.
                       Rezoning land situated at Haleiwa, North Shore.
12-35    10-18-2012    (Amending a portion of zoning map No. 17, Mokuleia-
                       Waialua-Haleiwa, Ordinance 86-134.) Trustees of the
                       Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop
                       Rezoning land situated at Kapahulu. (Amending a portion
13-11    4-19-2013     of Zoning Map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki, Ordinance 86-
                       106.) Kee Thelma Inc.
                       Rezoning land situated at Ewa. (Amending a portion of
13-13    5-20-2013     Zoning Map No. 12, Ewa-Iroquois Pt., Ordinance 86-114.)
                       Gentry Investment Properties
                       Rezoning land situated at Waimalu. (Amending a portion
14-8     4-30-2014     of Zoning Map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City, Ordinance No.
                       86-133.) CP Kam Properties
                       Rezoning land situated at Wahiawa. (Amending a portion
14-11    6-20-2014     of Zoning Map No. 11, Wahiawa-Whitmore, Ordinance 86-
                       113.) Vine4, LLC.
                       Rezoning land situated at 47-357 Ahuimanu Road, Kahaluu.
14-14    6-20-2014     (Amending a portion of Zoning Map No. 21, Kualoa-
                       Waiahole-Kahaluu, Ordinance 86-122.) Bertha S.M. Awa
                       Trust (aka Bertha P. Awa Trust)
                       Rezoning land situated at Makaha Valley. (Amending a
14-15    6-20-2014     portion of Zoning Map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha,
                       Ordinance 86-117.) Hawaii MGCW LLC
                       Rezoning land situated at Kaneohe. (Amending a portion
14-23    7-23-2014     of Zoning Map No. 22, Keeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili, Ordinance
                       86-123.) MW Group, Ltd
                       Rezoning land situated at Lualualei Valley. (Amending a
14-32    10-23-2014    portion of Zoning Map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha,
                       Ordinance 86-117.) Corporation of the Presiding Bishop
                       of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints
                       Rezoning land situated at Moanalua. (Amending a portion
15-2     2-11-2015     of Zoning Map No. 6, Red Hill-Fort Shafter, Ordinance
                       86-109.) Armed Services Special Education and Training
                       Society
                       Rezoning land situated at Waialua. (Amending a portion
15-9     4-22-2015     of Zoning Map No. 17, Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa,
                       Ordinance 86-117.) Corp. of the Presiding Bishop of the
                       Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. Approval
No.  Date
15-  5-20-    Rezoning land situated at Ewa. (Amending a portion of Zoning Map
13   2015     No. 13, Ordinance No. 86-115.) D.R. Horton - Schuler Homes, LLC
15-  7-23-    Rezoning land situated at Aiea. (Amending a portion of Zoning Map
31   2015     No. 7, Ordinance No. 86-133.) Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day
              Saints
              Rezoning land situated in Waikiki. (Amending a portion of Zoning
15-  11-20-   Map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki, Ordinance 86-106.) Waikiki Pride,
47   2015     LLC, Albert D.K. Chee, Lu Ching-Shui Family Corp., Copley
              Investment Group, LLC, Hawaiian Telcom, Kupuni Development Corp.,
              MB Investments III, LLC
15-  11-20-   Rezoning land situated in the Waikiki Special District. (Amending
48   2015     a portion of Zoning Map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki, Ordinance 86-
              106.)
16-  8-17-    Rezoning land situated at Waimanalo. (Amending a portion of Zoning
23   2016     Map No. 24, Waimanalo, Ordinance 86-125.) Kole Group, LLC
16-  10-21-   Rezoning land situated in Ewa Beach. (Amending a portion of Zoning
27   2016     Map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point, Ordinance 86-114.) HASEKO
              (Ewa), Inc.
              Rezoning land situated at Moanalua. (Amending a portion of Zoning
17-4 3-9-2017 Map No. 6, Red Hill-Fort Shafter, Ordinance 86-109.) Trinity
              Missionary Baptist Church
              Rezoning land situated at Moanalua. (Amending a portion of Zoning
17-9 4-7-2017 Map No. 6, Red Hill-Fort Shafter, Ordinance 86-109.) Holy Family
              Catholic Academy
17-           Rezoning land situated at Moanalua. (Amending a portion of Zoning
10   4-7-2017 Map No. 6, Red Hill-Fort Shafter, Ordinance 86-109.) Church of
              Christ at Pearl Harbor
17-  5-12-    Rezoning land situated at Kaneohe. (Amending a portion of Zoning
17   2017     Map No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili, Ordinance 86-123.) Ohana
              Pacific Management Company Offices
17-  5-12-    Rezoning land situated at Moanalua. (Amending a portion of Zoning
18   2017     Map No. 6, Red Hill-Fort Shafter, Ordinance 86-109.) Island Family
              Christian Church
17-  10-26-   Rezoning land situated at Waipahu. (Amending a portion of Zoning
56   2017     Map No. 8, Waipahu, Ordinance 86-110.) DPP
18-  4-13-    Rezoning land situated at Waialua. (Amending a portion of Zoning
11   2018     Map No. 17, Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa, Ordinance 86-134.) Leo’ole
              Subdivision
18-  4-13-    Rezoning land situated at Maunawili. (Amending a portion of Zoning
12   2018     Map No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili, Ordinance 86-123.) Oswald K.
              Stender
18-  7-25-    Rezoning land situated at Kaneohe. (Amending a portion of Zoning
28   2018     Map No. 23, Kailua-Lanikai-Keolu, Ordinance 86-124.) Richard
              Maruya
18-  12-21-   Amending portions of Zoning Map No. 17, Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa,
44   2018     Ordinance 86-119, to reflect the boundaries of the Haleiwa Special
              District as shown in Exhibit 21-9.16
     3-22-    Rezoning land situated at Moanalua. (Amending a portion of Zoning
19-2 2019     Map No. 6, Red Hill-Fort Shafter, Ordinance 86-109.) Holy Family
              Catholic Church
20-           Rezoning land situated at Haleiwa. (Amending a portion of Zoning
12   6-4-2020 Map No. 17, Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa, Ordinance 86-134.) Haleiwa
              Kem 7309, LLC
              Rezoning land situated at Wailupe. (Amending a portion of Zoning
21-5 3-1-2021 Map No. 2, Kahala-Kuliouou, Ordinance No. 86-105.) Honolulu City
              Council
21-  8-25-    Rezoning land situated at Moiliili. (Amending a portion of Zoning
25   2021     Map No. 3 (Moiliili-Kaimuki, Ordinance No. 86-106.) Lily Ochoco,
              Wayne and Ann Okubo (Portion of Kanewai Community Park)
              Rezoning land situated at Halawa - Pearl City and Waipahu.
22-  10-24-   (Amending a portion of Zoning Maps No. 7 (Halawa - Pearl City,
30   2022     Ordinance 86-133) and 8 (Waipahu, Ordinance 86-110)) (zoning maps
              amended to reflect TOD plans approved in Ord. 22-29) Department of
              Planning and Permitting
              Rezoning land situated at Halawa. (Amending a portion of Zoning
23-  12-13-   Map No. 7 (Halawa - Pearl City, Ordinance 86-133) (zoning map
33   2023     amended to reflect TOD plan approved in Ord. 23-32) Department of
              Planning and Permitting
               
 
APPENDIX 21-D: RESOLUTIONS—PLAN REVIEW USE APPROVALS
*Editor’s note:
   Plan use resolutions adopted before 1988 may be found in Appendix C to
Chapter 21, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu 1978 (1983 Ed.) and in Appendix
21A.3 to the 1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.
Resolution:
Resolution:
            Issued to Hasegawa Komuten of Hawaii for landowner Tokai University a plan
88-121      review use to permit construction of a university on A-3 high-density
            apartment-zoned parcels located at 2329 and 2341 Kapiolani Boulevard in
            Honolulu. 6-8-88.
            Issued to Castle Medical Center a plan review use to permit building additions
88-165      and renovations on R-5-zoned property located at 640 Ulukahiki Street in
            Kailua. 6-8-88.
            Issued to State department of accounting and general services a plan review use
88-171      to permit expansion of the Hawaii State Hospital on AG-2 general agricultural-
            zoned parcels in Kaneohe. 6-8-88.
89-124      Issued to Kuakini Medical Center to expand its existing facilities on A-1 low-
            density apartment-zoned parcels located in Punchbowl. 5-10-89.
            Issued to the State department of accounting and general services to expand
89-155      Kapiolani Community College. 5-24-89. (Amended by Resolution 92-193; modified
            by Resolution 10-276.)
89-411      Issued to the board of regents, University of Hawaii, to expand the University
            of Hawaii, Manoa campus. 12-13-89. (Modified by Resolution 92-286.)
            Issued to Shriners Hospital for Crippled Children to permit expansion of the
89-412      hospital on an A-2 medium-density apartment-zoned parcel located in Makiki. 11-
            8-89.
            Issued to First Development, Inc., for the development of the Honolulu
90-146      Convention Center complex on BMX-3 community business mixed use district and A-
            2 medium-density apartment district-zoned parcels at Kapiolani Boulevard and
            Kalakaua Avenue. 4-25-90. Modified by Resolution 93-229.)
            Issued to Chaminade University to allow the continuance of Chaminade
90-254      University’s existing facilities and to permit expansion of the university on
            R-5 residentially zoned parcels located in Kaimuki. 10-17-90.
            Issued to Nitto Hawaii Co., Inc./Takashi Niino to allow a nine-hole expansion
91-260      to the Makaha Valley Country Club Golf Course and accessory uses on P-2 general
            preservation-zoned parcels located in Waianae. 10-14-92.
            Issued to Saint Francis Medical Center to permit modification and expansion of
92-93       the Saint Francis Medical Center - West on two AG-1 restricted agricultural
            district-zoned parcels of land located in Ewa. 5-27-92.
 
Resolution:
Resolution:
            Amending Resolution 89-155 to require removal of portable buildings at Kapiolani
            Community College by December 31, 1992 and to allow the city department of
92-193      transportation services to determine if signalization at the intersection of
            Diamond Head Road and 19th Avenue should be required within the five-year PRU
            period for Kapiolani Community College. 10-14-92.
            Approving a major modification to Resolution 80-270 to permit modification and
92-242      expansion of the Rehabilitation Hospital of the Pacific complex on an R-
            5 residential district-zoned parcel of land located on Kuakini Street in Nuuanu.
            12-2-92.
            Approving a major modification to Resolution No. 89-411 to increase the seating
            capacity of the Physical Education Facilities Phase II from 4,000 to 10,000
92-286      seats at the University of Hawaii, Manoa lower campus, on R-5 residential-zoned
            parcels located in Manoa and to redesignate the Physical Education Facilities
            Phase II as the Special Events Arena. 3-10-93.
            Approving a major modification to Resolution No. 78-450 to permit Saint Francis
93-212      Medical Center to renovate and expand certain buildings and to construct a
            medical office building, a medical imaging center, and a parking structure at
            the Saint Francis Medical Center located in Puunui. 8-11-93.
            Approving a major modification to Resolution 90-146, submitted by Hawaii
            Convention Center Partners to amend parking and development standards and
            phasing plans for the convention center facility, amend parking and development
93-229      standards for non-convention center uses and structures, and amend off-street
            parking and infrastructure conditions of the master plan approval for the
            Honolulu Convention Center complex on BMX-3 community business mixed-use
            district and A-2 medium density apartment district-zoned parcels located in
            Honolulu. 8-11-93.
            Issued to the State department of accounting and general services a plan review
            use to construct new buildings and renovate existing buildings, and to develop
94-87       related infrastructure improvements at the Windward Community College, on a
            portion of an AG-2 general agricultural zoned parcel located in Kaneohe. 5-4-94
            (Amended by Reso. 08-258 on 12-3-08)
94-123      Issued to Pacific Atlas (Hawaii), Inc., a plan review use to allow expansion and
            redevelopment of the Bayview Golf Course located in Kaneohe. 9-21-94
            Issued to Kahuku Hospital a plan review use to expand the existing physician’s
94-297      office building, enclose certain lanais and construct a new adult day-care/
            maintenance building located in Kahuku. 1-25-95
            Issued to State department of accounting and general services a plan review use
            to allow the construction of new buildings, the relocation and renovation of
94-367      existing buildings, the development of support infrastructure, and the removal
            of nonconforming status for the Oahu Community Correctional Center (OCCC)
            complex located in Kalihi Kai. 5-3-95
            Issued to Kapiolani Medical Center for Women and Children to construct
95-354      improvements to the existing hospital, including the demolition of the Bingham
            Building and expansion of existing parking facilities in Honolulu. 1-24-96
            Issued to Kapiolani Medical Center at Pali Momi to expand the existing parking
96-121      facility by completing the parking structure for the medical center developed on
            property in Aiea. 8-7-96
96-272      Issued to Pacific Atlas (Hawaii), Inc., to modify and expand the existing
            Bayview Golf Course located in Waikalua, Kaneohe. 12-4-96
 
Resolution:
Resolution:
            Issued to Brigham Young University-Hawaii Campus to expand and renovate
96-321      support, academic, and living facilities for the students, faculty, and staff
            in Laie. 5-7-97
            Issued to department of public safety to allow the construction of a new
98-179      building, the conversion of existing buildings to housing units, and the
            installation of privacy fences at the Oahu Community Correctional Center
            Complex and the Laumaka Work Furlough Center. 10-14-98.
            Issued to Castle Medical Center to allow the addition of a new medical office
98-224      building, off-site parking lot and other major improvements to an existing
            hospital facility. 6-30-99
            Issued to Haseko (Ewa), Inc., to allow the development and operation of a
98-294      golf course at Ocean Pointe in the P-2 General Preservation district located
            in Ewa. 2-24-99
            Issued to Queen’s Medical Center to allow the construction of a new parking
            structure, construction of underground parking below the ambulance parking
99-22       area, increase in floor area for emergency services, consolidation of
            outpatient services, relocation of functional activities, and interior
            renovations to existing buildings. 8-11-99
            Issued to UH Facilities Planning Office to allow construction of new school
99-359      facilities, expansion and interior renovations to existing buildings, and
            upgrading of infrastructure improvements at Leeward Community College. 3-15-
            00
            Issued to St. Francis Healthcare System of Hawaii to allow the development of
            the remaining future planned projects approved under Resolution 92-93, CD1,
00-40       and subsequent modifications, and the construction of a women’s addiction
            treatment center, facility maintenance building, and a senior living center
            at St. Francis Medical-West facility. 5-24-00
00-46       Issued to Kuakini Health System to update the master plan to allow expansion
            of the Kuakini Health System. 5-24-00
01-211      Issued to Chaminade University to update the master plan to expand Chaminade
            University’s existing facility. 12-12-01
04-120      Issued to Castle Medical Center to allow for the expansion of the existing
            hospital facility located in Kailua. 6-4-04
            Issued to Queen’s Medical Center to approve a five-year master plan for new
            facilities development and expansion, relocation, renovation, alteration and
04-244      upgrade and redevelopment of existing facilities and structures, including
            the partial and total demolition of existing facilities and structures. 10-
            13-04
05-415      Issued to Shriners Hospitals for Children to update the master plan to expand
            its existing facility. 2-15-06
            Issued to the University of Hawaii at Manoa for a major modification to the
06-255      University of Hawaii, Manoa campus, five-year master plan, Resolution 89-411,
            CD-2, to allow redevelopment of the Frear Residence Hall. 9-6-06
08-140      Issued to the University of Hawaii to develop the new UH West Oahu campus.
            11-12-08
08-258      Approving an amendment to Resolution 94-87 by eliminating Condition 8
            submitted by Windward Community College. 2-3-08
 
Resolution:
Resolution:
            Issued to the University of Hawaii at Manoa to allow implementation of the 2007
09-341      Long Range Development Plan (LRDP) which includes future buildings and projects
            that are on the Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) or are anticipated for
            development within the next five to ten years, or both. 3-17-10
            Issued to the Marianist Center of Hawaii for projects proposed in the Future
10-134      Campus Plan (Chaminade University, Saint Louis School, and Marianist Center of
            Hawaii) which are anticipated for development within the next ten years. 9-22-10
            Issued to Kapiolani Medical Center for Women and Children to allow
            implementation of a 15-year Master Plan, including demolition of certain
10-143      buildings, renovation and expansion of the Shared Services Building (new
            Neonatal Intensive Care Unit/Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (NICU/PICU) Building,
            construction of a new hospital tower and parking structure, reconstruction of
            the Punahou Parking Structure and four new ice storage tanks. 8-18-10
            Issued to Kapiolani Community College, University of Hawaii, for a major
10-276      modification to Plan Review Use Permit No. 87/PRU-3 for the development of a new
            instructional facility, Culinary Institute of the Pacific, on the former Fort
            Ruger Cannon Club site. 12-8-10
            Issued to Honolulu Community College, University of Hawaii, to establish
10-323      existing uses and facilities, and to allow for improvement and development over
            the next ten years. 1-26-11
            Approving an application for a Plan Review Use Permit submitted by the Queen’s
11-179      Medical Center, to allow the implementation of a 15-Year Master Plan which
            includes future buildings and projects that are anticipated for development
            within the next 15 years. 9-16-11
17-329      Approving an application for a Plan Review Use permit for Hawaii State Hospital.
            12-6-17
17-332      Approving an application for a Plan Review Use permit for the St. Francis
            Healthcare System of Hawaii at Liliha campus expansion. 12-6-17
19-87       Approving an application for a Plan Review Use permit for the Brigham Young
            University Hawaii campus expansion. 8-17-19
            Approving an application for a Plan Review Use permit for a new Oahu Community
19-136      Correctional Center in Halawa, to replace the current facility in Kalihi. 2-19-
            20
19-139      Approving an application for a Plan Review Use permit for the expansion of the
            Women’s Community Correctional Center in Kailua. 9-4-19
            Approving an application for a major modification to Plan Review Use Permit No.
21-127      2009/PRU-3 to allow for the expansion of the University of Hawaii Manoa Campus
            boundaries and construction of the Atherton Mixed-Use Student Housing Innovation
            and Entrepreneurship Center. 8-11-21
21-216      Approving an application for a Plan Review Use permit for the redevelopment of
            Queen’s Medical Center - West Oahu. 12-1-21
21-219      Approving an application for a Plan Review Use permit for the redevelopment of
            the Straub Medical Center - Honolulu. 12-1-21
22-62       Approving an application for a Plan Review Use permit for the redevelopment of
            the Queen’s Medical Center - Honolulu. 8-10-22
23-244      Approving an application for a Plan Review Use permit for the University of
            Hawaii at Manoa campus Ten-Year Master Plan. 12-1-23
             
 
APPENDIX 21-E: INTERIM CONTROL ORDINANCES
Editor’s note:
   Ordinances before 1988 may be found in Appendix F to Chapter 21, Revised
Ordinances 1978 (1983 Ed.) and in Appendix 21A.5 to the Revised Ordinances1987
Supp. to 1983 Ed.
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. Approval
No.  Date
88-  3-16-    Regulating for an interim period the granting of applications for the
31   1988     issuance of certain grading and building permits in the Lanikai Hillside
              area of Kailua.
89-  3-15-    Control for an interim period of the construction of golf courses in the
36   1989     AG-2 general agricultural district.
89-  5-30-    Regulating for an interim period the issuance of building permits in the
71   1989     area immediately mauka of Kalanianaole Highway in the vicinity of Sandy
              Beach identified by TMK: 3-9-10: por. of 1.
89-  12-28-   Regulating for an interim period urban development within Oahu hillsides in
150  1989     the City and County of Honolulu.
90-  3-29-    Regulating for an interim period the granting of applications for certain
27   1990     grading and building permits in the Lanikai Hillside area.
              Regulating for an interim period the granting of applications for
90-  10-26-   conditional use permits and other applications under the land use
81   1990     ordinance, the granting of applications for the subdivision of
              consolidation of land, and the issuance of building and grading permits for
              development, in designated portions of the OR&L right-of-way.
90-  10-26-   Regulating for an interim period development within portions of Kalihi
83   1990     Valley.
91-  2-27-    Amends 3.A, 3.B, and 3.C of Ord. 89-150, regulating for an interim period
09   1991     urban development within Oahu hillsides.
91-  3-14-    Regulating for an interim period development within the Barber’s Point
12   1991     shoreline area.
91-  4-22-    Regulating for an interim period development within the Waikiki area.
22   1991
              Amends § 3 of Ord. 90-81, regulating for an interim period the granting of
91-  4-23-    applications for conditional use permits and other applications under the
26   1991     land use ordinance, the granting of applications for the subdivision of
              consolidation of land, and the issuance of building and grading permits for
              development, in the designated portions of the OR&L right-of-way.
              Amends Ord. 90-81, regulating for an interim period the granting of
91-  11-4-    applications for conditional use permits and other applications under the
79   1991     land use ordinance, the granting of applications for subdivision or
              consolidation of land, and the issuance of building and grading permits for
              development in the designated portions of the OR&L right-of-way.
91-  11-8-    Amends Ord. 90-83, regulating for an interim period development within
81   1991     portions of Kalihi Valley.
91-  12-17-   Amends Ord. 89-150, regulating for an interim period urban development
94   1991     within Oahu hillsides in the City and County of Honolulu.
92-           Regulating for an interim period development within portions of the IMX-
31   4-7-1992 1 Industrial-Commercial Mixed-Use zoning district in the City and County of
              Honolulu.
93-  3-19-    Regulating for an interim period development along Kamehameha Highway near
18   1993     Heeia Kea Boat Harbor (Heeia, Koolau Poko).
              Regulating for an interim period the issuance of building permits for the
     3-13-    planning and development of large residential structures in residential
18-6 2018     districts in order to provide time for the city to establish appropriate
              policies in its long-range plans and zoning ordinances to address the
              impacts of such structures.
 
APPENDIX 21-F: KAKAAKO SPECIAL DESIGN DISTRICT (KSDD)
Sections
   
21-F.1   Legislative purpose
   
21-F.2   Establishment of the Kakaako special design district
   
21-F.3   Kakaako special design district boundary
   
21-F.4   Land use control system
   
21-F.5   Special conditions
   
21-F.6   Project eligibility
   
21-F.7   Project classification
   
21-F.8   Applicability of regulations
   
21-F.9   Application procedures
   
21-F.10   Certificate of occupancy
   
21-F.11   Violations—Penalty
   
21-F.12   Expiration of the development conformance certificate
   
21-F.13   Exhibits
   
21-F.14   Severability
§ 21-F.1 Legislative purpose.
   The purpose for establishment of the Kakaako special design district is:
(a)   To guide the growth of Kakaako toward a balanced mixture of residential,
commercial, and industrial uses;
(b)   To create residential environments along with commercial and industrial
services which will be compatible with the residential uses;
(c)   To maintain regional commercial and industrial service facilities;
(d)   To relate the development of Kakaako to adjoining area and regional
objectives;
(e)   To ensure that there exists public and private developments which will
encourage diversification of uses that are sensitive to their physical
environment;
(f)   To protect, by means of planning and control, the value of private and
public investments within the district and its surrounding communities; and
(g)   To create the criteria which will allow every lot to be developed and
become a compatible element in the evolution of the mixed-use concept in
Kakaako.
(Sec. 21-13B.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 21,
Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.1)
§ 21-F.2 Establishment of the Kakaako special design district.
   In accordance with
Article 15 of the comprehensive zoning code, Ordinance 4541, as amended, the
Kakaako special design district is established. Zoning district classifications
for all land parcels shall be repealed by the use precincts contained in this
article. Except as otherwise permitted in this article, all land use and
development applications shall, as of July 23, 1980, conform to the
requirements and provisions of the Kakaako special design district.
(Sec. 21-13B.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 21,
Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.2)
Editor’s note:
   * “July 23, 1980” is substituted for “the effective date of this article.”
§ 21-F.3 Kakaako special design district boundary.
   The Kakaako special design district boundary is delineated on
Figure 21-F-1 and attached hereto. This article, including procedural
requirements for any modification of, additions to, and deletion from any
existing use or structure as well as the establishment of any new use or
structure, shall apply to all land areas within the Kakaako special design
district.
(Sec. 21-13B.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 21,
Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.3)
§ 21-F.4 Land use control system.
   The following use precincts are established within the district, the
boundaries of which are indicated on the use precinct map marked
Figure 21-F-1.
(a)   Mixed-use precinct.
(1)   Legislative intent. The purpose of the mixed-use precinct is to permit a
mixture of business, apartment, community, and regional commercial service uses
in a harmonious relationship.
(2)   Use regulations. Within the mixed-use precinct, the following uses and
structures shall be permitted:
(A)   Housing and community service uses:
(i)   Multiple-family dwellings;
(ii)   Private schools which do not involve the operation of woodwork or
machine shops, or other similar facilities;
(iii)   Nursing, convalescent, aged, disabled, and handicapped homes;
(iv)   Child care and senior citizen centers;
(v)   Churches;
(vi)   Private clubs, lodges, social centers, eleemosynary establishments, and
athletic clubs;
(vii)   Public uses; and
(viii)   Parking lots and parking garages.
(B)   Commercial uses:
(i)   Offices, professional clinics, studios, and medical laboratories;
(ii)   Eating and drinking establishments;
(iii)   Retail establishments, including the incidental manufacturing of goods
for sale only at retail on the premises;
(iv)   Banks, savings and loans, escrow, and similar financial services;
(v)   Personal service establishments, including but not limited to barber and
beauty shops, shoe repair shops, cleaning, dyeing, laundry, pressing,
dressmaking, tailoring and garment repair shops with incidental processing on
the premises;
(vi)   Theaters;
(vii)   Repair services for radio, television, bicycles, business machines, and
household appliances other than those with internal combustion engines;
(viii)   Wholesaling and distribution operations; provided that such operations
do not involve the use of more than 2,000 square feet of floor area for the
storage of wares to be sold at wholesale or to be distributed;
(ix)   Printing, lithographing, publishing, photographic processing, or similar
uses;
(x)   Commercial recreation facilities; provided that all facilities are
totally enclosed in a building;
(xi)   Radio and television studios, excluding towers;
(xii)   Building contractors;
(xiii)   Commercial kennels; provided that all operations are enclosed;
(xiv)   Automobile service stations, car washes, and car rental establishments;
provided that they comply with the following requirements:
(aa)   A solid fence or wall of 6 feet in height shall be required on the side
and rear property lines;
(bb)   The station shall be illuminated so that no unshielded, unreflected, or
undiffused light source is visible from any public area or private property
immediately adjacent thereto;
(cc)   All areas not landscaped shall provide an all weather surface; and
(dd)   No water produced by activities on the lot shall be permitted to fall
upon, or drain across, public streets or sidewalks.
(xv)   Commercial services including pest control services, establishments; and
(xvi)   Public utility installations and substations; provided that maintenance
facilities shall not be permitted; and provided further, that utilities’
substations, other than individual transformers, shall be surrounded by a solid
wall except for entrances and exits, or by a fence with a screening hedge not
less than 6 feet in height; and provided further, that transformer vaults for
underground utilities and like uses shall require only a landscaped solid
screening hedge, except for across opening.
(C)   Accessory uses.
(b)   Marine precinct.
(1)   Legislative intent. The purpose of the marine precinct is to include only
those uses which support the marine activities and facilities of Kewalo Basin.
(2)   Use regulations. Within the marine precinct, only the following uses and
structures shall be permitted:
(A)   Commercial marine facilities;
(B)   Eating and drinking facilities;
(C)   Retail facilities not including automobile sales;
(D)   Public uses;
(E)   Public utility installations and substations conforming to conditions
stated in subsection (a)(2)(B)(xvi); and
(F)   Accessory uses.
(c)   Waterfront industrial precinct.
(1)   Legislative intent. The purpose of the waterfront industrial precinct is
to reserve such area for port-related activities only and to exclude those
areas which are inappropriate to the precinct and which can be appropriately
located elsewhere.
(2)   Use regulations. Within the waterfront industrial precinct, only the
following uses and structures shall be permitted:
(A)   Waterfront terminal facilities;
(B)   Wholesale and distribution establishments receiving or shipping materials
from waterfront terminal facilities located within the precinct;
(C)   Public uses;
(D)   Public utility installations and substations conforming to conditions
stated in subsection (a)(2)(B)(xvi); and
(E)   Accessory uses.
(d)   Industrial service precinct.
(1)   Legislative intent. The purpose of the industrial services precinct is to
retain and provide convenient industrial services to meet the needs of central
Honolulu.
(2)   Use regulations. Within the industrial service precinct, all uses and
structures permitted in subsection (a)(2)(B) and the following uses and
structures shall be permitted, however, unless otherwise required by this
article, automobile service stations, car washes, car rental establishments,
and public utility installation and substations shall be exempted from fencing,
walls, and screening hedge requirements, unless required for safety or security
purposes;
(A)   Repair services; provided that all operations are enclosed;
(B)   Manufacturing, except for explosives;
(C)   Lumber and wood manufacturing products;
(D)   Wholesale supplies and distribution;
(E)   Warehouses;
(F)   Trade schools;
(G)   Parking lots and garages;
(H)   Radio/television broadcasting, excluding towers; and
(I)   Accessory uses.
(e)   Public use precinct.
(1)   Legislative intent. The purpose of the public use precinct is to set
aside public lands to meet public requirements and the recreation and open
space needs of the Kakaako special design district.
(2)   Use regulations. Public uses and structures, including accessory
activities operated by private lessees under supervision of a public agency
shall be permitted.
(Sec. 21-13B.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 21,
Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.4)
§ 21-F.5 Special conditions.
(a)   Mixed-use precinct.
(1)   When multiple-family dwellings are integrated with other uses, pedestrian
access areas for the residents shall be independent from other uses and shall
be designed to enhance the privacy for residents and their guests.
(2)   Where an arcade is used as block frontage, guidelines indicated on
Figure 21-F-5 shall be followed; provided that:
(A)   Only uses listed in subsection (a)(2)(B)(i) through (a)(2)(B)(x) of §
21-F.4 shall be located adjacent to the arcade along streets on the ground
level of any building. At least one-half of the total width of any new or
reconstructed building, parallel to and facing such frontage, shall be devoted
at the ground floor to entrances, show windows or other displays of such uses.
(B)   All other permitted uses shall be located either on floors above or below
the ground floor or at a distance of not less than 20 feet behind the front of
the building at the ground level. No more than one-third the width of any lot,
parallel to and facing such street, shall be devoted to entrances to such other
permitted uses.
(3)   Outdoor entertainment or music, establishments with outdoor ordering or
receiving facilities, or outdoor storage of any materials shall not be
permitted.
(4)   All loading and unloading areas shall be either enclosed in a building or
located on the rear or the side of the building and screened from public view.
(b)   Industrial services precinct.
(1)   Automobile service stations, car washes, car rental establishments or
public utility installations or substations on lots fronting or adjacent to the
mixed-use precinct, shall comply with the requirements of such facilities in
the mixed-use precinct.
(2)   Accessory open storage areas, and loading and unloading areas for lots
fronting or adjacent to the mixed- use precinct shall be located either in a
building or on the rear or side of buildings and when located on the side shall
be screened from public view from adjacent streets.
(c)   Density.
(1)   The floor area ratio (FAR) for all uses without multiple-family dwellings
shall not exceed 2.5.
(2)   The FAR for mixed uses which include multiple-family dwellings shall not
exceed 3.5; provided that a minimum FAR of 1.0 and a maximum of 2.5 is
developed as multiple-family dwellings.
(3)   The FAR for multiple-family dwellings without other uses shall not exceed
2.5.
(d)   Heights.
(1)   Permitted maximum heights of buildings and structures within the Kakaako
special design district are delineated on
Figures 21-F-2 and
21-F-5. All heights shall be measured vertically from the existing ground
surface at any point along the perimeter of the building or structure to the
roof level.
(2)   Exemption for certain architectural features. Subject to the review and
approval of the director of planning and permitting, exemption from the height
regulations may be made for the following architectural features provided they
are erected only to such height as is necessary to accomplish the purpose for
which they serve, but in no case exceeding 12 feet above the maximum height
limits.
The following building elements or features may be exempt; provided, that the
director of planning and permitting finds they do not obstruct any significant
views which are to be preserved, protected, and enhanced, and are consistent
with the intent of the objectives of this article.
(A)   Necessary mechanical appurtenances of the building on which they are
erected; provided that they are screened from view;
(B)   Necessary utilitarian features including stairwell enclosures,
ventilators, and skylights; and
(C)   Decorative or recreational features, including rooftop gardens, planter
boxes, flag poles, parapet walls, or ornamental cornices.
(e)   Yard requirements.
(1)   Front yard requirements are shown on
Figures 21-F-3 and
21-F-5.
(2)   Side and rear yards are not required except for nonparking structures
containing windows or openings adjoining side or rear property lines in which
case the minimum side and rear yards shall be 20 feet. In addition to the
height and yard regulations stated hereinabove, for any portion of a structure
containing windows or openings above 10 feet in height, additional side and
rear yard setbacks equal to 1 foot for each 10 feet in height or fraction
thereof shall be provided; the additional setback shall be a continuous
vertical plane beginning at the floor level of the first windows or openings to
the top of the structure.
(f)   Required open space.
(1)   A minimum of 30 percent of each lot, exclusive of required yards and
setbacks shall be devoted to open space. This open space may be provided on
another lot within a five-minute walking distance of the respective use,
preferably in conjunction with other existing open spaces; provided that such
open space is dedicated in fee and accepted by the city.
(2)   Where applicable, the open space, exclusive of required yards and
setbacks, may be considered as part of the area required for park dedication.
(3)   Exclusive common space for residents of multiple-family dwellings based
upon 110 square feet per dwelling or lodging unit shall be provided in any of
the following combinations:
(A)   All or any portion of the required open space that is located on the
project lot and designed for exclusive use of the occupants;
(B)   Roof top recreation areas at or below 40 feet above ground elevation; and
(C)   Interior recreation rooms within the development.
(g)   Open space treatment.
(1)   Open space is that portion of a lot that is a required yard or setback
area or required open space. Such open space shall be:
(A)   Open and unobstructed from ground level to the sky;
(B)   Landscaped and maintained, and shall not be used for loading purposes or
storage, or parking of cars; and
(C)   Landscaped with a minimum of 50 percent of the area devoted exclusively
to plant material rooted directly in the ground or permanently fixed plant
containers.
(2)   Berms, landforms, or underground structures covered with landscape
treatment on the roof for which the finished height is 4 feet or less measured
from ground elevation, shall be considered as part of the required open space.
(h)   Off-street parking.
(1)   Parking requirements.
(A)   Multiple-family dwellings:
 
Floor Area of Unit                          Required Parking Per Unit
600 square feet or less                     1
More than 600 but less than 800 square feet 1-1/4
800 square feet and over                    1-1/2
 
(B)   Churches and theaters: one space per every five fixed seats;
(C)   Nursing, convalescent, aged, disabled, and handicapped homes: one space
per four patient beds, dwelling units, or lodging units;
(D)   Public school: one space per classroom;
(E)   All other uses listed in the mixed-use and marine precincts: one space
per 400 square feet of floor area;
(F)   Industrial service precinct uses listed in §
21-F.4(d)(2)(A) through (d)(2)(H): one space per 800 square feet of floor area;
and
(G)   Waterfront industrial precinct uses: one space per 1,000 square feet of
floor area.
(2)   Off-site provisions.
(A)   Except for multiple-family dwellings, permits for off-site and joint use
parking facilities may be granted under
Chapter 21 §§ 21-2.67, 21-2.68, and 21-2.69.
(i)   Signs.
(1)   In connection with any permitted use, only one wall or marquee facia
identification sign of 1 square foot per 1 linear foot of the building frontage
not directly illuminated, nor illuminated from within the sign structure and
not exceeding 24 square feet in area shall be permitted per street front for
each ground floor establishment having one or more principal pedestrian
entrances to the building; provided that if all buildings on the street
frontage are set back a minimum of 25 feet from the property line, one ground
identification sign, not directly illuminated, nor illuminated from within the
sign structure and not exceeding 12 square feet in area, shall also be
permitted for each principal pedestrian entrance side. Such ground signs shall
not be located closer than 10 feet to any property line. In lieu of one of the
above signs, one garden sign may be permitted.
(2)   Wherever the
Chapter 21, Article 7 sign regulation for a specific use is more restrictive
than the above regulation, the sign dimensions and location shall comply with
the
Chapter 21 regulation for the specific use.
(j)   Architectural criteria.
(1)   The orientation range of the long axis of buildings above 40 feet in
height expressed in azimuth degrees from north shall be within zero to 60. The
width of the building measured perpendicular to the long axis shall not exceed
100 feet, nor shall the length of the building parallel to the axis exceed 200
feet.
(2)   Street frontage first floor elevation shall not deviate more than 18
inches from the adjacent curb elevation unless modified by the director of
planning and permitting because of unusual design considerations.
(3)   Ground floor establishments shall provide clear glass when glass is used
as a ground floor facade.
(4)   All rooftop mechanical appurtenances, stairwells and elevator enclosures,
ventilators, and air-conditioning equipment shall be screened from view by
architectural or landscape treatments.
(5)   Parking structures shall have a minimum 10-foot landscape strip along
adjacent streets; rooftop parking shall be substantially screened from oblique
as well as overhead views by landscaping or architectural features, such as
trellises in combination with landscaping.
(k)   Circulation criteria.
(1)   The approval of the directors of planning and permitting and
transportation services is required on plans for the addition to, or deletion,
modification, or alteration of existing streets shown on the district ordinance
Figure 21-F-3.
(2)   Public or private midblock pedestrian or bicycle circulation paths shall
be created and maintained in conjunction with development projects. These
circulation paths shall be lighted and have a minimum width of 12 feet,
accessible to the public at all times.
(l)   Landscaping.
(1)   Trees and street landscaping for all streets shall be provided by all new
development applicants in accordance with
Figures 21-F-4 and
21-F-5 of this appendix and the following list:
(A)   Major street system tree species and spacing:
(i)   South King Street: Rainbow Shower 25 feet on center (o/c) maximum;
(ii)   Kapiolani Boulevard: Monkeypod 80 feet o/c maximum;
(iii)   Queen Street to Auahi Street: Royal Poinciana and Coconut palm. Two
Rainbow and three Coconut palms per 100 feet of street frontage;
(iv)   Pohukaina Street: Madagascar Olive 25 feet o/c maximum;
(v)   Ala Moana Boulevard: Monkeypod and Coconut palm. Three Coconut palms and
one Monkeypod per 100 feet of street frontage;
(vi)   Punchbowl Street: Monkeypod 80 feet o/c maximum;
(vii)   South Street: Autograph 25 feet o/c maximum;
(viii)   Cooke Street: Yellow Poinciana 25 feet o/c maximum;
(ix)   Ward Avenue: Native Wiliwili 60 feet o/c maximum;
(x)   Kamakee Street: Jack-in-the-Box 25 feet o/c maximum;
(xi)   Pensacola: Royal Poinciana 50 feet o/c maximum; and
(xii)   Piikoi Street: Monkeypod 80 feet o/c maximum.
(B)   Local street system tree species shall be subject to the approval of the
director of planning and permitting in consultation with the director of parks
and recreation. The maximum spacing shall be 30 feet on center.
(C)   Street trees shall be a minimum 3-inch caliper except palms which shall
have a minimum trunk height of 15 feet.
(D)   On the major street system, the area between the curb and a sidewalk
shall be landscaped, except for necessary walks and drives, and provided with
an irrigation system. Planting in these areas shall not exceed 30 inches in
height and shall be grass only where adjacent curbside parking is permitted.
(E)   Where landscaping is required between the sidewalk and building, at least
25 percent of the area shall include plant material 36 inches or higher.
(2)   Sidewalk materials shall conform to the city and county standards for a
minimum of 75 percent of the required sidewalk area. The total sidewalk pattern
and the material of the 25 percent area shall be subject to the approval of the
director of planning and permitting. Upon the recommendations of the director
and chief engineer of the department of facility maintenance, exceptions to the
city and county standard paving may be made if the texture and color closely
approximate the standard material and finish.
(3)   Any tree 6 inches or greater in trunk diameter shall not be removed with
the following exceptions:
(A)   The tree is not predominately visible from any street, park, or other
public viewing area;
(B)   There are no alternatives to removal to achieve appropriate development
on the site;
(C)   The tree is a hazard to public safety or welfare; and
(D)   The tree is dead.
(4)   Replacement of trees.
(A)   Any tree removed which is predominately visible from any street, park, or
other public viewing area shall be replaced by a tree of minimum 3-inch
caliper.
(B)   Where possible, trees proposed for removal shall be relocated to another
area of the project site.
(m)   Off-street loading. Off-street loading shall comply with
Chapter 21 for similar uses.
(n)   Uses and activities permitted in yards. No business activity of any kind,
including advertising, promotion, solicitation, merchandising, or distribution
of commercial handbills, or structures or any other use or activity, except
newspaper sales and distribution shall be located or carried out within any
required yard, street, or street setback area except those areas occupied by
enclosed nonconforming buildings.
(o)   Utilities. Public utility companies shall place utility lines underground
within the district. The director of planning and permitting may modify this
requirement for an electric distribution or transmission system in excess of 15
kilovolts when it is satisfactorily justified that the alternative will equally
achieve the intent and objectives of the district.
(p)   Subdivision. No parcel shall be subdivided into lots of less than 10,000
square feet with a minimum lot width of 50 feet. Consolidation of lots,
regardless of the cumulative size, in conformity with
Chapter 22 shall be permitted.
(q)   Temporary uses. Carnivals, circuses, and fairs of not exceeding three
days shall be permitted in all precincts.
(r)   Nonconforming uses.
(1)   Nonconforming expansion or replacement. A new temporary structure or a
minor expansion to or replacement of a portion of a structure for a
nonconforming use is permitted; provided that such expansion or replacement
would not substantially prolong the nonconforming use. However, once 25 percent
of the land area within a block is in compliance with the precinct
requirements, then nonconforming uses in the remainder of the block shall not
be permitted to expand or be replaced.
(2)   Nonconforming use reestablishment. A nonconforming use located within the
Kakaako special design district may be incorporated in a conforming
development; provided that the applicant shall submit a compatibility analysis
indicating to the satisfaction of the director the nonconforming use would have
no more adverse impact upon the development project or the adjacent areas than
permitted uses in the precinct. The analysis would include such consideration
as operational characteristics of the use, noise, odor, hours of operation,
traffic generation, and other pertinent data unique to the proposal. Such uses
would be considered as part of the nondwelling uses within the project.
(s)   Joint precinct development. Where a development is within more than one
precinct, the allocation of uses shall be in proportion to that which is
permitted within each precinct. The location of such uses within the
development need not comply with the precinct boundaries.
(t)   Joint parcel development. A single project may consist of several
parcels, either adjoining or separated by a street. Such projects will be
reviewed as a total project in terms of permitted density and uses. All parcels
involved shall be bound by the conditions and plans of the approved project.
(Sec. 21-13B.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 21,
Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.5)
§ 21-F.6 Project eligibility.
(a)   Before the processing of a building permit or project approval, except
for applications relating to demolitions, signs and such interior and exterior
repairs or alterations not involving a change or intensification of the
existing use, a property owner or developer shall obtain an approval of project
eligibility from the director of planning and permitting. The approval shall
not be issued except upon a finding by the director that all necessary
infrastructure facilities for the area are congruent with the proposed
development.
(b)   Infrastructure facilities shall include but not be limited to streets,
pedestrian and bicycle circulation, sanitary sewers, drainage, and water. The
director of planning and permitting shall approve the project’s eligibility
upon a finding that:
(1)   Off-site infrastructure facilities for the project are in place and
adequate, or are proposed with firm construction schedules to be installed to
coincide with the construction schedule of the project;
(2)   Subsequent development of necessary infrastructure facilities in the area
will not disrupt the normal operation of completed projects; and
(3)   The proposed development does not involve temporary connections to
facilities which are programmed to be replaced within six years from the date
of application for a building permit.
(c)   In determining project eligibility, the director of planning and
permitting shall consult with the applicable governmental agencies.
(d)   No application for building permit shall be considered before obtaining
an approval from the director of planning and permitting as to the project’s
eligibility to proceed.
(Sec. 21-13B.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 21,
Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.6)
§ 21-F.7 Project classification.
(a)   Significant projects. Projects involving demolitions and exterior repairs
or alterations which adversely change the character or visual appearance of a
structure or site on the Hawaii register of historic places and the national
register of historic places shall be considered as significant projects.
(b)   Nonsignificant projects. The following projects shall be considered as
nonsignificant:
(1)   Nonconforming expansion or replacement of uses and structures;
(2)   Reestablishment of a nonconforming use;
(3)   Joint precinct and joint parcel developments;
(4)   Projects containing multiple-family dwellings;
(5)   Projects in industrial services precinct abutting or fronting on mixed-
use precinct; and
(6)   All projects within the public use precinct.
(c)   Exempt. The following projects shall be exempted from the requirement to
obtain a development conformance certificate:
(1)   Demolitions, except for structures and sites on the Hawaii register of
historic places and the national register of historic places;
(2)   All interior repairs or alterations;
(3)   All exterior repairs or alterations, except for those which conflict with
the objectives of this article;
(4)   Signs; and
(5)   All other projects not classified as significant or nonsignificant.
(Sec. 21-13B.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 21,
Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.7)
§ 21-F.8 Applicability of regulations.
   All developments within the district shall comply with those
Chapter 21 provisions not superseded or modified by this article.
(Sec. 21-13B.8, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 21,
Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.8)
§ 21-F.9 Application procedures.
   All applications for structures and uses within the Kakaako special design
district shall comply with § 21-13.8, application procedure, of
Chapter 21.
(Sec. 21-13B.9, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 21,
Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.9)
§ 21-F.10 Certificate of occupancy.
   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any development within the
district until it is determined by the director of planning and permitting that
all of the conditions, specifications, and requirements of this article have
been met.
(Sec. 21-13B.10, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 21,
Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.10)
§ 21-F.11 Violations—Penalty.
(a)   The city may maintain an action for an injunction to restrain any
violation of this article and may take any other lawful action to prevent or
remedy any violation.
(b)   Any person violating this article shall upon conviction, be punished by a
fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment. The continuance of any such
violation after conviction shall be deemed a new offense for each day of such
continuance.
(Sec. 21-13B.11, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 21,
Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.11)
§ 21-F.12 Expiration of the development conformance certificate.
   The development conformance certificate shall be void upon applicant’s
failure to secure building permits within two years of the date of issuance of
the certificate.
(Sec. 21-13B.12, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 21,
Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.12)
§ 21-F.13 Exhibits.
   The following are figures used in this appendix:
(a)   
Figure 21-F-1 — Use Precincts;
(b)   
Figure 21-F-2 — Height Limits;
(c)   
Figure 21-F-3 — Circulation;
(d)   
Figure 21-F-4 — Street Trees; and
(e)   
Figure 21-F-5 — Street Frontage Design Criteria.
(Sec. 21-13B.13, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 21,
Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.13)
§ 21-F.14 Severability.
   This article shall be severable and if any provisions shall be determined to
be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining provisions shall not be affected thereby but shall remain in full
force and effect.
(Sec. 21-13B.14, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 21,
Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.14)
FIGURE 21F-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-317.png]
FIGURE 21F-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-319.png]
FIGURE 21F-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-321.png]
FIGURE 21F-4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-323.png]
FIGURE 21F-5
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-325.png]
APPENDIX 21-G: LIST OF FIGURES
   Figures are added for the benefit of the users of
Chapter 21, and are an official part of the ordinance. They are included to
illustrate specific provisions and to make those provisions easier to
interpret.
Fig. No. Subject
Fig. No.          Subject
21-2.1            Permit Application Processing Time
21-2.2            Zoning Adjustment: Grade Irregularities
                  
21-3.1            Height Setbacks (P-2, Agricultural and Country Districts)
21-3.2            Heights on Sloping Lots (Country District)
21-3.3            A-2, A-3, AMX-2, AMX-3, B-2, BMX-3 and IMX District Height
                  Setback
21-3.4            Resort District Height Setback
21-3.5            Transitional Heights (Business, BMX, IMX and all Industrial
                  Districts)
21-3.6            Front Yards (B-2, BMX-3, BMX-4, IMX and all Industrial
                  Districts)
21-3.7            Street Setbacks (I-2 and I-3 Districts)
21-3.8            Front Yard (BMX-4 District)
21-3.9            65-Degree Angle Height Limit (BMX-4 District)
21-3.10           Height Measurement in Residential Districts
                  
21-4.1            Flag Lot
21-4.2(A) and (B) Retaining Walls
21-4.3            Height Measurement
21-4.4            Parking Lot Landscaping
                  
                  Bed and Breakfast Homes and Transient Vacation Units
21-5.1            Permitted Areas - Waikiki Special District Mauka of Kuhio
                  Avenue
21-5.2            Bed and Breakfast Homes and Transient Vacation Units
                  Permitted Areas - Close Proximity to the Ko Olina Resort
21-5.3            Bed and Breakfast Homes and Transient Vacation Units
                  Permitted Areas - Close Proximity to the Turtle Bay Resort
                  
21-6.1            Permitted Vehicle Overhangs
21-6.2            Permitted Vehicle Overhangs
                  
21-7.1            Sign Area
                  
21-9.1            Front Yard - Waikiki
21-9.2            Transitional Height Setback - Waikiki
 
Fig. No. Subject
Fig. No. Subject
         Yards and Maximum Setbacks on All Streets in the BMX-3 Business Mixed-
21-9.3   Use and B-2 Community Mixed-Use Districts and on Key Streets in the
         IMX-1 Industrial Commercial Mixed-Use and I-2 Intensive Industrial
         Districts
21-9.4   Yards and Maximum Setbacks on Key Streets, Apartment and Apartment
         Mixed-Use Districts
21-9.5   Building Facade Placement on Corner Lots Fronting Two Key Streets
21-9.6   Building Facade Placement on Lots 100 feet or Less
21-9.7   Building Facade Placements on Lots Greater than 100 feet
21-9.8   Building Facade and Parking Placement on Lots Fronting Two Key Streets
21-9.9   Building Facade and Parking Placement on Lots Fronting Three Key
         Streets
21-9.10  Primary and Secondary Building Entrances
21-9.11  For Lots with Irregular Property Lines, Building Facades Parallel to
         Streets
21-9.12  Primary Entrances Should Face the Street
21-9.13  Building Transparency
21-9.14  Pedestrian Walkway Connectivity Across Zoning Lots
21-9.15  Pedestrian Walkways within a Zoning Lot
21-10.1  Arcade
21-10.2  Basement
21-10.3  Dwellings (Types)
21-10.4  Floor Area
21-10.5  Open Space, Public
21-10.6  Yard, Front
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Appendix 21-G)
APPENDIX 21-H: AMENDMENTS TO PLANNED DEVELOPMENT, CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT, AND
CLUSTER ORDINANCES; AND RESOLUTIONS APPROVING
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT-APARTMENT, PLANNED DEVELOPMENT-RESORT, INTERIM PLANNED
DEVELOPMENT-TRANSIT, AND PLANNED DEVELOPMENT-TRANSIT PROJECTS
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 78-65, effective 7-12-1978, transferred approval authority for Planned
Development-Housing, Conditional Use Permits, and Cluster Developments to the
Department of Land Utilization (predecessor to the Department of Planning and
Permitting) from the City Council. However, Planned Developments-Housing,
Conditional Use Permits, and approvals previously approved by ordinance may be
amended by ordinance.
 
Measure No. Effective or Approval Date
                                       Amends Ord. 4122 relating to the Yacht
94-06       2-10-1994                  Club Terrace planned development-
                                       housing district No. R-28 at Kaneohe
 
Reso. No. Effective or Approval Date
Reso. No.        Effective or Approval Date
                                            Approving conceptual plan for
                                            Hilton Hawaiian Village PD-
02-226, CD1, FD1 8-7-2002                   R Project - Construction of
                                            highrise tower and other
                                            improvements, Waikiki (Hilton
                                            Hotels Corporation)
                                            Approving conceptual plan for
                                            Outrigger Beach Walk PD-R Project
02-272, CD1, FD1 11-13-2002                 in the Lewers-Saratoga Area of
                                            Waikiki (Outrigger Enterprises,
                                            Inc.)
                                            Approving conceptual plan for
10-211, CD1, FD1 8-18-2010                  Princess Kaiulani Hotel Complex PD-
                                            R Project, Waikiki (Kyo-ya Hotels
                                            and Resorts, LP)
                                            Approving conceptual plan for the
10-212, CD1, FD1 8-18-2010                  Moana Surfrider Hotel Complex PD-
                                            R Project, Waikiki (Kyo-ya Hotels
                                            and Resorts, LP)
                                            Approving conceptual plan for
                                            Hilton Hawaiian Village PD-
11-278           12-7-2011                  R Project improvements, including
                                            two new time-share towers, Waikiki
                                            (Hilton Hawaiian Village Beach &
                                            Spa)
                                            Extension of time to 8-18-2019 to
14-277, CD1      12-10-2014                 obtain building permit for PD-
                                            R project approved by Reso. 10-211,
                                            CD1, FD1 (Kyo-ya Kaiulani LLC)
                                            Extension of time to 8-18-2019 to
                                            obtain building permit for PD-
14-278           12-10-2014                 R project approved by Reso. 10-212,
                                            CD1, FD1 (Kyo-ya Hotels and
                                            Resorts, LP)
 
Reso. No. Effective or Approval Date
      Effective
Reso. or
No.   Approval
      Date
16-             Approving a conceptual plan for a planned development-resort project for the
52,   4-20-2016 redevelopment of 1.05 acres with a mixed-use retail, hotel, and residential
CD1,            project in Waikiki, Oahu (MK Development Consulting, LLC)
FD1
16-             Approving a conceptual plan for a planned development-resort project for the
155,  7-6-2016  redevelopment of 4.05 acres with a mixed use retail, hotel, and residential
CD1             project in Waikiki, Oahu (PACREP LLC, PACREP 2 LLC, SMK Inc.)
16-             Approving a conceptual plan for an interim planned development-transit
172,  10-5-2016 project for the development of the Manaolana Place hotel and residential
CD1,            condominium development project (Manaolana Partners, LLC)
FD1
17-             Approving a conceptual plan for an interim planned development-transit
175,  3-28-2018 project for the development of the Hawaii Ocean Plaza mixed use development
CD1             project (Hawaii Ocean Plaza LP)
17-             Approving a conceptual plan for an interim planned development-transit
221,  9-6-2017  project for the development of the 1500 Kapiolani condo-hotel and residential
CD1             development project (Manaolana AREP III Holdings, LLC)
17-             Approving a conceptual plan for an interim planned development-transit
305,  12-6-2017 project for the development of the Hawaii City Plaza condominium development
CD1,            project (Hawaii City Plaza LP)
FD1
17-             Approving a conceptual plan for an interim planned development-transit
333,  2-25-2018 project for the development of the ProsPac Tower-Residential condominium and
CD1,            commercial development project (ProsPac Holdings Group, LLC)
FD1
18-             Approving a conceptual plan for a planned development-apartment project for
236,  12-5-2018 the redevelopment of 2.52 acres with mixed use commercial and residential
CD1             project in Waikiki (OliverMcMillan Kuhio, LLC)
18-             Approving a conceptual plan for an interim planned development-transit
248,  11-14-    project for the development of the Sky Ala Moana condo-hotel and residential
CD1,  2018      project (Avalon Group, LLC)
FD1
19-             Extension of time to obtain building permit for proposed PD-R project
67,   4-17-2019 approved by Reso. 16-52, CD1, FD1 (MK Development Consulting, LLC)
CD1
19-             Approving a conceptual plan for an interim planned development-transit
224,  3-18-2020 project for the development of the Keeaumoku condominium and commercial
CD1             project (Keeaumoku Development, LLC)
19-             Approving a conceptual plan for a planned development-resort project for the
225,  11-6-2019 redevelopment of 4.153 acres with a mixed use retail and resort project in
CD1             Waikiki (Kyo-ya Kaiulani, LLC)
20-             Extension of time to obtain building permit for IPD-T project approved by
170,  8-19-2020 Reso. 17-221, CD1 (Manaolana AREP III Holdings, LLC)
CD1
20-             Approving a conceptual plan for an interim planned development-transit
315,  3-17-2021 project for the Ala Moana Plaza Development (GGP Ala Moana L.L.C.)
CD1
23-             Approving a conceptual plan for an interim planned development-transit
62,   8-9-2023  project for the Ala Moana Plaza Development (GGP Ala Moana L.L.C.)
CD1
23-             Approving a conceptual plan for an interim planned development-transit
132,  8-9-2023  project for the 1538 Kapiolani Tower mixed-use development (JL Ala Moana LLC)
CD1
23-             Amending Resolution 17-221, CD1, as amended by Resolution 20-170, CD1, to
272,  12-6-2023 further extend the deadline to obtain a building permit for an interim
CD1             planned development-transit project located at 1500 Kapi‘olani Boulevard
                (Mana‘olana Partners 1500, LLC)
24-
23,   4-17-2024 Approving a conceptual plan for an interim planned development-transit
CD1,            project for the Chinatown hotel development (Ikenakea Hokele LLC)
FD1
                Amending Resolution 17-221, CD1, as amended by Resolution 20-170, CD1, as
24-             further amended by Resolution 23-272, CD1, to further extend the deadline to
80,   4-17-2024 obtain a building permit for an interim planned development-transit project
CD1             located at 1500 Kapi‘olani Boulevard, and to approve certain project
                modifications (Mana‘lana Partners 1500, LLC)
24-   10-9-2024 Approving a conceptual plan for an interim planned development-transit
227             project for the 1667 Kapi‘olani Development (KCR Development)
                Approving a conceptual plan for a planned development-resort project to
25-             modify the boundaries of the Hilton Hawaiian Village Master Plan area, and
92,   4-16-2025 allow for certain improvements, including the construction of a new hotel
CD1             tower in Waikīkī, Oahu (Hilton Hawaiian Village Beach Resort & Spa and Park
                Ala Moana LLC)
                 
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 21, Appendix 21-H)
APPENDIX 21-I: TRANSIT-ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT PLAN RESOLUTIONS
Reso. No. Approval Date
Reso. No.        Approval Date
14-47, CD1       4-16-2014     Approving the Waipahu Neighborhood Transit-
                               Oriented Development Plan
14-71, FD1       9-10-2014     Approving the Aiea-Pearl City Neighborhood
                               Transit-Oriented Development Plan
16-247, CD1, FD1 9-6-2017      Approving the Downtown Neighborhood Transit-
                               Oriented Development Plan
17-33, CD1, FD1  3-22-2017     Approving the Kalihi Neighborhood Transit-
                               Oriented Development Plan
20-120, CD1      8-19-2020     Amending the Downtown Neighborhood Transit-
                               Oriented Development Plan
20-222, CD1      12-9-2020     Approving the East Kapolei Neighborhood Transit-
                               Oriented Development Plan
20-224, CD1      12-9-2020     Approving the Halawa Area Neighborhood Transit-
                               Oriented Development Plan
21-174, CD1      9-8-2021      Approving the Ala Moana Neighborhood Transit-
                               Oriented Development Plan
22-1, CD1        3-16-2022     Approving the Airport Area Neighborhood Transit-
                               Oriented Development Plan
                                
 
CHAPTER 21A: FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
Article
   
1.   General Provisions
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections
   
21A-1.1   Purpose
   
21A-1.2   Statutory authority
   
21A-1.3   Administration
   
21A-1.4   Definitions
   
21A-1.5   Special flood hazard areas
   
21A-1.6   General development standards
   
21A-1.7   Floodway area
   
21A-1.8   Flood fringe area
   
21A-1.9   Coastal high hazard area
   
21A-1.10   General floodplain
   
21A-1.11   Developments adjacent to watercourse outside the flood hazard area
   
21A-1.12   Flood variance
   
21A-1.13   Substantial improvements
   
21A-1.14   Certification standards
§ 21A-1.1 Purpose.
(a)   Within the City and County of Honolulu, certain areas are subject to
periodic inundation by flooding or tsunami or both, resulting in loss of life
and property, creation of health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services as well as extraordinary public expenditures for flood
and tsunami protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(b)   These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazards, which increase flood heights
and velocities also contribute to flood losses.
(c)   Congress has determined that regulation of construction in areas subject
to flood hazards is necessary for the protection of life and property and
reduction of public costs for flood control, rescue and relief efforts, thereby
promoting the safety, health, convenience, and general welfare of the
community. To achieve these purposes, this chapter establishes flood hazard
areas and imposes restrictions upon man-made changes to improved and unimproved
real estate within the areas. These restrictions are necessary to qualify the
city for participation in the federal flood insurance program.
(d)   Failure to participate in the program would result in the denial of
federal financial assistance for acquisition and construction purposes, and
would jeopardize the making, securing, extension, and renewal of loans secured
by improved real estate by lending institutions regulated by the federal
government.
(e)   This chapter is designed to:
(1)   Protect human life and health and promote the general welfare;
(2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
(6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted
areas caused by flood damage;
(7)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
(8)   Ensure that those who occupy or develop, or both, the areas of special
flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.1) (Added by Ord. 14-9)
§ 21A-1.2 Statutory authority.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the U.S. National Flood Insurance Act of
1968 (Public Laws 90-448 and 91-152), as amended, and the U.S. Flood Disaster
Protection Act of 1973 (Public Law 93-234), as amended, and HRS Chapter 46.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.2) (Added by Ord. 14-9)
§ 21A-1.3 Administration.
(a)   Designation of floodplain administrator. The director of planning and
permitting is appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by
granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions.
(b)   Duties and responsibilities shall include but not be limited to the
following:
(1)   Review all development permits to determine that the requirements of this
chapter have been satisfied, the project site is reasonably safe from flooding,
and other required federal or State approvals are obtained;
(2)   Where base flood elevation data have not been provided on the federal
flood insurance rate maps, the director shall obtain, review, and reasonably
use any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or
State agency, or other source, to administer this chapter;
(3)   Whenever a watercourse is proposed to be altered or relocated, require
that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated watercourse be
maintained;
(4)   Obtain and maintain for public inspection, certifications and
documentation required by this chapter, including a record of all variance
actions;
(5)   Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions; and
(6)   Take action to remedy violations of this chapter.
(c)   Appeals. This chapter is a zoning ordinance and appeals from the actions
of the director in the administration of this chapter shall be to the zoning
board of appeals as provided by Charter § 6-1516. Appeals shall be filed within
30 days of the date of mailing or personal service of the director’s written
decision.
(d)   Enforcement. If the director determines that there is a violation of this
chapter or any permit issued pursuant thereto, the violator shall be subject to
the code enforcement rules of the department.
(e)   Warning and disclaimer of liability.
(1)   The degree of flood and tsunami protection required by this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on standard
engineering methods of study. Larger floods or tsunamis than the base flood as
designated on the flood maps, may occur on occasions, or flood or tsunami
elevations may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside the flood hazard area will be free from flooding
or damage.
(2)   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any
officer, official, or employee for any flood or tsunami damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
under this section.
(f)   Other laws and regulations. All construction and improvements subject to
this chapter shall comply with federal, State, and other applicable city laws
and regulations including but not limited to the zoning, building, housing,
plumbing, and electrical codes, and grading ordinances. This chapter, designed
to reduce flood losses shall take precedence over any less restrictive,
conflicting laws, ordinances, or regulations.
(g)   No exemptions. Neither the city nor any agency, department, or division
under its control shall be exempted from compliance with this chapter.
(h)   Severability. This chapter and the various parts thereof are declared to
be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to
be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so
declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(i)   Fees.
 
Type of Permit                                                          Fee
(1) Floodway permit                                                     $600
(2) Flood variance                                                      $600
(3) Letter of map amendment (LOMA), and revision based on fill (LOMR-F) $300
(4) Letter of map revision (LOMR), and physical map revision (PMR)      $600
(5) Flood hazard area interpretation                                    $150
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.3) (Added by Ord. 14-9; Am. Ord. 16-30)
§ 21A-1.4 Definitions.
   Definitions contained in regulations governing the National Flood Insurance
Program, 44 CFR Parts 59 through 77, as amended, are incorporated by reference
and made a part of this chapter as though set forth fully herein. Where terms
are not defined in this chapter, they shall have their ordinary accepted
meanings within the context in which they are used. For the purposes of this
chapter, the following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
Architect. A person who has a license to practice architecture in the State of
Hawaii.
Base Flood. The flood having a 1 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year (also called the “100-year flood”).
Base Flood Elevation. The water surface elevation of the base flood.
Basement. Any area of a building having its floor below ground level on all
sides.
Breakaway Wall. Any type of wall, whether solid or lattice, and whether
constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic, or any other suitable
building material, which is not part of the structural support of a building
and which is designed to break away without damaging the structural integrity
of the building or other buildings to which it might be carried by floodwaters.
Coastal High Hazard Area. A special flood hazard area subject to high velocity
wave action from storms or seismic sources and designated on the flood
insurance rate map as zone VE or V.
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
Director. The director of planning and permitting of the City and County of
Honolulu or the director’s authorized representative.
Encroachment. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill,
excavation, walls, buildings, permanent structures, or development into a
floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
Engineer. A person who is licensed to practice civil or structural engineering
in the State of Hawaii.
FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal
waters, resulting from any source, such as tsunamis, or the unusual and rapid
accumulation of runoff of surface waters or mud from any source.
Flood Fringe Area. A special flood hazard area consisting of the area of the
flood fringe designated on the flood insurance rate map as zone AE, AO, and AH.
Flood Insurance Rate Map or FIRM. The map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the
risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study. The report provided by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood
hazard boundary map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures and properties that reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures, and their contents.
Floodway. The channel or watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than 1 foot.
Floodway Area or AEF. A special flood hazard area consisting of the portion of
zone AE designated on the flood insurance rate map as a floodway.
Floodway Permit. A permit required under this chapter for a structure within
the floodway area.
Fraud and Victimization. As related to §
21A-1.12, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or
victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city will
consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government
responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years.
Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation
are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods,
while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to
all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood
damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware
that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very
high flood insurance rates.
Functionally Dependent Use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose,
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, and does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
General Floodplain. A special flood hazard area for which detailed engineering
studies were not performed by FEMA to determine the base flood elevations or to
identify the floodway, and is identified as zone A on the flood insurance rate
map.
Hardship. As related to §
21A-1.12, means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to
grant the requested variance. The city requires that the variance be
exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or
financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic
considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of
one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional
“hardship”. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without
granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the
property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than
originally intended.
Highest Adjacent Grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
before construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
Historic Structure. A structure that is:
(1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district
or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
(3)   Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places pursuant to a
historic preservation program approved by the Secretary of Interior; or
(4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places pursuant to a
historic preservation program certified either:
(A)   By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
(B)   Directly by the Secretary.
Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not modified so as to render the use in violation of the elevation
design requirement of this chapter.
Manufactured Home. A structure (other than a recreational vehicle),
transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis
and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to
the required utilities.
Mean Sea Level. The national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other
datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s flood insurance
rate map are referenced.
New Construction. Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on
or after May 22, 2014* and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
Public Safety and Nuisance. As related to §
21A-1.12, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything
which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood,
or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage
or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream,
canal, or basin.
Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1)   Built on a single chassis;
(2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection;
(3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
(4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Repetitive Loss Structure. A structure that was damaged by flood two or more
times within any 10-year period, where the cost of fully repairing the flood
damage to the structure, on average, equaled or exceeded 25 percent of its
market value at the time of each flood.
Special Flood Hazard Area or SFHA. An area having special flood or flood-
related erosion hazards, and shown on a FIRM as zone A, AO, AE, AEF, AH, VE, or
V.
Start of Construction. Includes substantial improvement and other proposed new
development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the
permit. The “actual start” means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footing,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erections of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, and a
manufactured home.
Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or
exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure (excluding land) before
the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
series of reconstruction, rehabilitation, or additions, or other proposed new
development of a structure or repetitive loss structure, in any five-year
period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market
value of the structure (excluding land) before the “start of construction” of
the first improvement during that five-year period. This term includes
structures that have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term also includes the relocation of a structure
even if the cost of improvements associated with the relocation does not equal
or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure. An improvement shall
constitute a substantial improvement only if:
(1)   The structure was constructed on or before September 3, 1980;
(2)   The structure was constructed after September 3, 1980, and was not within
a special flood hazard area at the time of the issuance of the building permit;
(3)   The structure was constructed after September 3, 1980, and was the
subject of a map change that resulted in higher base flood elevations; or
(4)   The structure was constructed after September 3, 1980, and was the
subject of a map change that resulted in a FIRM zone change.
The term does not, however, include either:
(5)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or county health, sanitary, or safety specifications; or
(6)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.
Surveyor. A person who is licensed to practice surveying in the State of
Hawaii.
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without a
required elevation certificate, other certification, or other evidence of
compliance with this chapter shall be presumed to be in violation until such
time as the required certificate or other evidence of compliance is provided.
Watercourse. A stream, wash, channel, or other topographic feature on or over
which waters flow at least periodically.
Water Surface Elevation. The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specific), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
Zoning Lot. A zoning lot as defined by the land use ordinance,
Chapter 21, as amended.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.4) (Added by Ord. 14-9)
Editor’s note:
   * “May 22, 2014” is substituted for “the effective date of this ordinance,
as amended.”
§ 21A-1.5 Special flood hazard areas.
(a)   Applicability. This chapter shall apply to all lands within the special
flood hazard areas as determined by the director or as delineated on the flood
insurance rate maps (FIRM) prepared by the FEMA, or both. The following special
flood hazard areas are established:
(1)   Floodway area (floodway in zone AE);
(2)   Flood fringe area (zones AE, AO, AH);
(3)   Coastal high hazard area (zone VE, V); and
(4)   General floodplain area (zone A).
(b)   Adoption of federal flood maps and reports. The special flood hazard
areas identified by the FEMA in the flood insurance rate maps and flood
insurance study dated January 19, 2011, and any subsequent revisions and
amendments (hereinafter called “flood maps”) are adopted and declared to be
part of this chapter. The flood maps are on file at the City and County of
Honolulu Department of Planning and Permitting, 650 S. King Street, Honolulu,
Hawaii 96813.
(c)   The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations shall be determined by
the flood maps. Where interpretation is needed as to whether or not a project
lies within a certain flood hazard area, or interpretation is needed on the
base flood elevation in the floodway, flood fringe, or coastal high hazard
areas, a request for interpretation of the flood maps shall be submitted to the
director for determination. The request shall include the project site and
location plan, property lines, and dimensions and tax map key.
(d)   Where flood hazard areas and base flood elevations have not been
determined on the flood maps, the director shall obtain and review the
information needed to make this determination. A request for interpretation
under this section shall be submitted to the director and include three sets of
documents, stamped and signed by a licensed professional engineer, containing
adequate information and substantiating data consistent with this part, such as
flood study, flood data, project site and location plan, property lines and
dimension, tax map key, and topographic data, contours, or spot elevations
based on reference marks on flood maps. Upon initial review by the director,
other related information may be subsequently required to evaluate the request.
(e)   Flood map revisions. Whenever base flood elevations may change due to a
proposed development, the applicant shall obtain a conditional letter of map
revision from the FEMA before the approval or issuance of any development
permit. A letter of map revision shall be obtained from the FEMA whenever a
development has changed the base flood elevation within any special flood
hazard area. An application for a letter of map revision shall be submitted to
the FEMA no later than six months after the completion of a development.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.5) (Added by Ord. 14-9)
§ 21A-1.6 General development standards.
   Structures within the special flood hazard areas shall conform to the
following:
(1)   Be designed and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including
effects from buoyancy caused by the base flood;
(2)   Constructed of flood-resistant materials;
(3)   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
(4)   Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning, and other service facilities that are designed or located, or
both, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
(5)   Provided with adequate drainage to minimize damage in accordance with the
storm drainage standards of the department;
(6)   For new or replacement potable water system and facilities, be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems;
(7)   For new or replacement sanitary sewer system and waste disposal system,
be designed, located, and constructed so as to minimize impairment to them or
contamination from them during and after flooding by the base flood;
(8)   Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within special flood hazard areas that are not coastal high hazard
areas shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of
the manufactured home is elevated to, or above, the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Manufactured homes that are placed
or substantially improved within coastal high hazard areas shall meet the
requirements of §
21A-1.9;
(9)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed within a special
flood hazard area shall either:
(A)   Be on site for fewer than 30 consecutive days;
(B)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on wheels or a jacking system, is attached to
the site only by a quick disconnect type utilities and security device, and has
no permanently attached additions); or
(C)   Meet the requirements for manufactured homes under subsection (8).
(10)   A structure that straddles two or more special flood hazard areas shall
comply with the standards of the flood hazard area that is considered to have
the most stringent or restrictive standards.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.6) (Added by Ord. 14-9)
§ 21A-1.7 Floodway area.
   The floodway identified on the flood maps and located within areas of
special flood hazard is the watercourse reserved to discharge the base flood.
Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
floodwaters which could carry debris, and erosion potential, the following
apply.
(a)   A floodway permit must be obtained from the director before approval or
issuance of any other permits for all new construction of or substantial
improvements to structures within the floodway area.
(b)   A restrictive covenant shall be inserted in the deeds and other
conveyance documents of the property and recorded or filed with the bureau of
conveyances or the land court of the State of Hawaii, or both, as appropriate,
providing that a permit has been granted to a property located in a floodway
area that is subject to flooding and flood damage, increases risks to life and
property, and the property owners shall not file any lawsuit, action, or claim
against the city for costs or damages, and shall indemnify and save harmless
the city from any liability when such loss, damage, injury, or death results
due to the permit and the flooding of the property. Upon approval of the
floodway permit, such covenant shall be fully executed and recorded. Proof of
recordation shall be submitted to the director before issuance of any building
permits.
(c)   Any temporary or permanent encroachment, including fill, structures,
storage of material or equipment, or other development within the floodway,
shall not be approved, unless certification and supporting data, including
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
engineering practice, are provided by a licensed engineer demonstrating that
the proposed encroachment will not cause any increase in base flood elevations
during the occurrence of the base flood.
(d)   Proposed structures in the floodway area shall additionally comply with
the general development standards and flood fringe area provisions of this
chapter.
(e)   No more than two dwelling units shall be permitted on a single zoning lot
whose only buildable area is in the floodway.
(f)   Within an area designated AE without a floodway on the flood maps, until
a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvement, or
other development (including fill) shall be permitted, unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood more than 1 foot at any point.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.7) (Added by Ord. 14-9; Am. Ord. 16-30)
§ 21A-1.8 Flood fringe area.
   In addition to the general development standards, the following standards
shall be applicable in the flood fringe area.
(a)   In areas designated on the flood maps as zone AE or AH.
(1)   All new construction or substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basements, elevated to or
above the base flood elevation.
(2)   All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the base flood
elevation; or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
designed and constructed so that below the base flood elevation, the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy due to the base flood.
(3)   Within zone AH, adequate drainage paths shall be provided around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
(b)   In areas of shallow flooding designated on the flood maps as zone AO.
(1)   All new construction or substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basements, elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the
flood maps.
(2)   All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures shall have the lowest floor elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the flood maps; or
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed and
constructed so that below that level, the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy.
(3)   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(c)   All new construction or substantial improvements of structures with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are
subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the following
minimum criteria:
(1)   For nonengineered openings:
(A)   Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a total net area
of not less than 1 square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject
to flooding;
(B)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above internal
or external grade whichever is highest;
(C)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices; provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters; and
(D)   Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior
walls for each area to allow floodwater directly enter.
(2)   Be certified by a licensed engineer or architect.
(d)   A licensed professional architect or engineer shall develop or review the
design, specifications, and plans and certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the provisions of this chapter, and include the elevation to which such
structures are floodproofed.
(e)   New construction and substantial improvements of below-grade crawlspaces
must be constructed in accordance with the requirements of FEMA Technical
Bulletin 11-01 and amendments thereto. A licensed engineer or architect must
certify that designs for below-grade crawlspaces meet these requirements.
(f)   Accessory residential structures of less than 600 square feet that are
used solely for parking or limited storage or both, and are constructed with
the lowest floor below the base flood elevation, must be designed to meet the
following minimum criteria.
(1)   The structure must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement;
(2)   Any portion of the structure located below the base flood elevation must
be constructed of flood-resistant materials;
(3)   The structure must be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters in accordance with preceding subsection (c);
(4)   All mechanical and utility equipment housed inside the structure must be
elevated to or above the base flood elevation; and
(5)   The use of the structure must be limited to parking or limited storage or
both.
A licensed engineer or architect shall certify that designs for accessory
residential structures subject to this subsection meet these minimum criteria.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.8) (Added by Ord. 14-9; Am. Ord. 16-30)
§ 21A-1.9 Coastal high hazard area.
   In addition to the general development standards, the following standards
shall be applicable in the coastal high hazard area.
(a)   (1)   All new construction or substantial improvements of residential and
nonresidential structures shall be elevated on pilings or columns so that the
bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor
(excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to or above the base flood
elevation.
(2)   Piles or column foundations and structures attached thereto shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects
of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Wind
and water loading values shall each have a 1 percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
(b)   (1)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall have the
space below the lowest floor free of obstructions or constructed with breakaway
walls, open wood latticework, or insect screening intended to collapse under
wind and water loads without causing collapse, displacement, or other
structural damage to the elevated portion of the structure or supporting
foundation.
(2)   Such enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation and shall be
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage.
(3)   A breakaway wall shall have a design-safe loading resistance of not less
than 10 and not more than 20 pounds per square foot, or a licensed architect or
engineer shall certify that the breakaway wall shall collapse from a water load
less than that which would occur during the base flood.
(c)   The use of fill for structural support of buildings shall be prohibited.
(d)   All new development shall be constructed landward of the reach of the
mean high tide.
(e)   Human alterations of sand dunes and native mangrove stands which would
increase potential flood damage shall be prohibited.
(f)   A licensed architect or engineer shall develop or review the design,
specifications, and plans and certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the provisions of this chapter, and that any development in the coastal high
hazard area, including structures and improvements, would not affect the base
flood nor aggravate existing flood-related erosion hazards.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.9) (Added by Ord. 14-9)
§ 21A-1.10 General floodplain.
(a)   All proposed development within the general floodplain (unnumbered zone
A) shall be subject to review and approval of the director. The developer shall
provide information signed and stamped by a licensed engineer, to evaluate the
flooding and to determine the base flood elevation, and whether the project
site is located within a floodway or flood fringe area, under §
21A-1.5(d).
(b)   The director in reviewing the application may consult with other city,
State, and federal agencies for their comments and recommendations, and shall
review the related flood data such as flood elevation, riverine flood
velocities, boundaries, etc., and evaluate and determine whether the proposed
project is located within a floodway or flood fringe area.
(c)   If it is determined that the proposed project is within a floodway area,
the project shall comply with §
21A-1.7. If it is determined that the proposed project is within a flood fringe
area, it shall comply with §
21A-1.8. Until a floodway or flood fringe area is designated, no development
shall be allowed that would increase the water surface elevation of the base
flood more than 1 foot at any point.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.10) (Added by Ord. 14-9)
§ 21A-1.11 Developments adjacent to watercourse outside the flood hazard area.
(a)   Applications for building permits for development projects located on
property encompassing or adjacent to a property with a watercourse outside of
the special flood hazard areas identified on the federal flood maps, shall be
subject to review and approval of the director. The application shall include
information signed and stamped by a licensed engineer, to evaluate the
potential flooding of the area.
(b)   The director in reviewing the application may consult with other city,
State, and federal agencies for their comments and recommendations. If it is
determined that the proposed project is within a floodway area, the project
shall comply with §
21A-1.7. If it is determined that the proposed project is within a flood fringe
area, the project shall comply with §
21A-1.8.
(c)   No watercourse shall be modified, constructed, lined, or altered in any
way unless approved by the director.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.11) (Added by Ord. 14-9)
§ 21A-1.12 Flood variance.
(a)   The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only.
Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk
and will not be modified by the granting of a variance.
The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general
principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are
not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with
physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of
this ordinance would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the
surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property
and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain
to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property
owners.
This chapter is designed to help protect the community from flood loss and
damage. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring
a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the
flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite
rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can
only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance
guidelines provided in this article are more detailed and contain multiple
provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The
criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives
other than a variance are more appropriate.
(b)   The following may be permitted as a variance from this chapter subject to
review and approval of the director:
(1)   New construction or substantial improvement of structures, and other
proposed new development to be erected on a lot of 0.5 acre or less in area,
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood elevation;
(2)   Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that
the proposed reconstruction or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure;
(3)   Improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or
local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications, which have been
identified by a code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions;
(4)   New construction or substantial improvement of structures, and other
proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent
use; and
(5)   New construction or substantial improvement of public beach park
facilities.
(c)   The application shall be submitted to the director and signed and stamped
by a licensed architect and engineer, and shall include three sets of documents
with the following information as may be applicable:
(1)   Plans and specifications showing the site and location; dimensions of all
property lines and topographic survey of the zoning lot; existing and proposed
structures and improvements, fill, and storage areas; location and elevations
of existing and proposed streets and utilities; floodproofing measures;
relationship of the site to the location of the flood boundary; and the
existing and proposed flood control measures and improvements;
(2)   Cross-sections and profiles of the area and the base flood elevations and
profile referenced to the national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929;
(3)   Flood study and drainage report data;
(4)   Description of surrounding properties and existing structures and uses,
and the effect the variance may have on them and the base flood;
(5)   Justification and reasons for the variance in relationship to the intent
and provisions of this section, with information as may be applicable on the
following:
(A)   The danger to life and property, including surrounding properties due to
increased flood elevations or velocities caused by the variance;
(B)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to
the injury of others;
(C)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these
systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions;
(D)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners;
(E)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community;
(F)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the
proposed use;
(G)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(H)   The relationship of the proposed use to the floodplain management program
for the area;
(I)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
(J)   The expected elevations and velocity of the base flood at the site due to
the variance;
(K)   That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship
to the applicant; and
(L)   That the variance will not result in increased base flood elevations,
additional threat to surrounding properties and to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create a nuisance, cause fraud and victimization of the public,
or conflict with other laws or regulations.
(6)   A restrictive covenant which shall be inserted in the deeds and other
conveyance documents of the property and recorded or filed with the bureau of
conveyances or the land court of the State of Hawaii, or both, as appropriate,
providing that a flood variance has been granted to a property located in a
special flood hazard area that is subject to flooding and flood damage, that a
variance for a structure with its lowest floor below the base flood elevation
increases risks to life and property, and that the property owners shall not
file any lawsuit, action, or claim against the city for costs or damages, and
shall indemnify and save harmless the city from any liability when such loss,
damage, injury, or death results due to the flood variance and the flooding of
the property. Upon approval of the flood variance, such covenant shall be fully
executed and recorded. Proof of recordation shall be submitted to the director
before issuance of any building permits; and
(7)   Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this section.
(d)   The director in reviewing the variance may consult with other city,
State, and federal agencies for their comments and recommendations. A flood
variance may be granted only upon a:
(1)   Showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2)   Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant;
(3)   Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood elevations, additional threat to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create a nuisance, cause fraud and victimization of the public,
or conflict with other laws or regulations; and
(4)   Determination that a variance granted within a floodway area would not
result in any increase of the base flood elevation.
(e)   The director may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the variance.
Such conditions may include but not be limited to:
(1)   Modification of the project, including the sewer and water supply
facilities;
(2)   Limitations on periods of use and operation;
(3)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions;
(4)   Requirements for construction of channels, dikes, levees, and other flood
protective measures;
(5)   Floodproofing measures designed consistent with the base flood elevation,
flood velocities, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors
associated with the base flood; and
(6)   Other conditions as may be deemed necessary by the director to further
the purposes of this chapter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.12) (Added by Ord. 14-9)
§ 21A-1.13 Substantial improvements.
(a)   All structures proposed to be substantially improved must be brought into
compliance with this chapter. For the purpose of determining substantial
improvement, the applicant shall provide the market value of a structure and
the cost of the proposed improvements to the structure from the following
sources:
(1)   Itemized estimates made by an independent professional construction
estimator;
(2)   Appraisals prepared by an independent licensed appraiser, including
appraisals of market value; and
(3)   Calculations based on square foot cost factors published in building cost
estimating guides recognized by the building construction industry, and signed
and stamped by an independent licensed engineer or architect.
(b)   The director may require additional or revised documentation should the
estimated market value or cost of improvements appear to be inconsistent with
the specific characteristics of the building.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.13) (Added by Ord. 14-9; Am. Ord. 16-30)
§ 21A-1.14 Certification standards.
   Pre-construction, during-construction, and post-construction certification
of elevation and floodproofing of new construction, development, and
improvements within the special flood hazard areas must be submitted to the
director and must be maintained as a matter of public record, in accordance
with the following.
(a)   Pre-construction certification. Requirements for approval of the building
permit must include the following items, as applicable, and any additional
items as required by the director to promote public welfare and safety.
(1)   Certification of building plans. Each set of building plans must include
a current topographic survey map prepared by a licensed surveyor, and must be
signed and stamped by a licensed engineer or architect certifying the accuracy
of the flood boundary and elevation information.
(2)   Flood hazard certification. The city’s applicable flood hazard
certification form must be completed and signed and stamped by a licensed
engineer or architect.
(3)   Floodproofing certification. The Federal Emergency Management Agency
“Floodproofing Certificate” form must be completed and signed and stamped by a
licensed engineer or architect.
(4)   Certification of no-rise determination. For all construction and
improvements in the floodway, the Federal Emergency Management Agency “No-Rise
Certification” form must be completed and signed and stamped by a licensed
engineer.
(b)   During-construction certification. Upon placement of the lowest floor,
including the basement, and before further vertical construction of a new or
substantially improved structure in the special flood hazard area, the Federal
Emergency Management Agency “Elevation Certificate” must be completed and
signed and stamped by a licensed surveyor.
(c)   Post-construction certification. As a condition to the closing of the
building permit or issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a new or
substantially improved structure in the special flood hazard area, the Federal
Emergency Management Agency “Elevation Certificate” must be completed and
signed and stamped by a licensed surveyor, engineer, or architect.
(1990 Code, Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.14) (Added by Ord. 14-9; Am. Ord. 16-30)
CHAPTER 22: SUBDIVISION OF LAND
Articles
   
1.   Filing Fees
   
2.   Street Lights
   
3.   Subdivision and Consolidation of Land
   
4.   Sidewalks and Curbs in Residential Subdivisions
   
5.   Utility Lines
   
6.   Public Access to Shoreline and Mountain Areas
   
7.   Parks and Playgrounds
   
8.   Street Names
   
9.   Memorials and Names for City Parks, Sites, and Facilities
ARTICLE 1: FILING FEES
Sections
   
22-1.1   Filing fees
   
22-1.2   Exceptions
   
22-1.3   Payment
   
22-1.4   Refund
§ 22-1.1 Filing fees.
   Filing fees will be charged as follows:
(1)   A filing fee of $400 for every application for subdivision or
consolidation of land and an additional charge of $100 for each lot noted on
the initial preliminary map and for each additional lot resulting from any
subsequent amendment of the initial preliminary map, exclusive of any lot set
aside for roadway or easement purposes;
(2)   A filing fee of $200 for every application for the designation of a
public utility easement;
(3)   A nonrefundable filing fee of $300 for review and written verification of
agricultural restrictions that a condominium property regime established under
HRS Chapter 514B does not restrict, limit, or prohibit agricultural uses or
activities;
(4)   A nonrefundable filing fee of $400 for lot research and determination;
(5)   A nonrefundable filing fee of $300 for every application for park
dedication providing private park land in perpetuity in conjunction with
Article 7; and
(6)   A nonrefundable filing fee of $200 for every application for park
dedication providing in-lieu payment in conjunction with
Article 7; provided that the fee will be credited towards the total in-lieu
payment for the submittal.
(Sec. 22-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 1, §
22-1.1) (Am. Ords. 99-31, 03-12, 14-4, 20-18)
§ 22-1.2 Exceptions.
(a)   The filing fees and charges above prescribed shall not apply to
applications for subdivision or consolidation of land submitted by any agency
of the State or of the city.
(b)   The charge of $100 for each lot, above prescribed, shall not apply to
subdivision of land into burial or crematory plots within the confines of a
duly established cemetery area; provided that the filing fee of $400 above
prescribed shall be applicable.
(Sec. 22-1.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 1, §
22-1.2) (Am. Ords. 99-31, 03-12, 14-4)
§ 22-1.3 Payment.
   Applicable fees and charges above prescribed shall be paid to the department
of planning and permitting upon the filing of an application for subdivision or
consolidation. All such fees collected shall be deposited into the general
fund.
(Sec. 22-1.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 1, §
22-1.3)
§ 22-1.4 Refund.
   If any application for subdivision or consolidation is withdrawn by the
applicant before any consideration or action thereon by the department of
planning and permitting, all fees and charges paid on account of such
application shall be refunded to the applicant.
(Sec. 22-1.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 1, §
22-1.4)
ARTICLE 2: STREET LIGHTS
Sections
   
22-2.1   Definitions
   
22-2.2   Street lights required
   
22-2.3   Installation and energizing of street lighting system
   
22-2.4   Approval by the director
   
22-2.5   Costs
   
22-2.6   Street lighting—Installation, energizing, and
maintenance—Agreement—Bond
§ 22-2.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Department. The department of transportation services,.
Subdivider and Subdivision. Have the same meaning as defined in
Article 3.
(Sec. 22-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 2, § 22-2.1)
§ 22-2.2 Street lights required.
   Street lights, together with the related apparatus and appliances, shall be
installed by the subdivider in all subdivisions, including agricultural
subdivisions, laid out within the city. Any ordinance or regulation
inconsistent with this section is superseded.
(Sec. 22-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 2, § 22-2.2)
§ 22-2.3 Installation and energizing of street lighting system.
(a)   Street lights, together with the related apparatus and appliances, shall
be installed in accordance with the standard specifications of the department,
which incorporate and supplement the standard specifications of the
Illuminating Engineering Society of America on file in the department. Street
lighting fixtures shall further meet the energy efficiency standards provided
in§
2-35.2 and light pollution standards provided in §
2-36.2.
(b)   The type of installation which the subdivider shall provide; i.e.,
whether the system is to be underground or overhead, shall be governed by
Article 5.
(c)   The subdivider shall, at the subdivider’s own expense, make final
connection from new street lighting systems to an existing system under the
supervision of a street lighting division inspector. For 120V multiple systems
intended for individual connection to electric utility lines, the subdivider
shall make all necessary arrangements with the Hawaiian Electric Company, Ltd.
for the connections and pay all costs therefor.
(d)   In addition to the energizing of the entire street lighting system during
the period of the operating test as hereinafter provided, the subdivider shall
energize the entire street lighting system within the subdivision when the
first home in the subdivision is occupied, and pay all costs involved in the
energizing of the street lights from such date until the subdivision roadways,
together with the street improvements, are accepted by and dedicated to the
city.
(Sec. 22-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 2, § 22-2.3) (Am.
Ords. 92-01, 13-4)
§ 22-2.4 Approval by the director.
(a)   Before the installation of the street lighting systems within a
subdivision, the plans and specifications pertaining thereto shall be approved
by the director or the director’s authorized subordinate.
(b)   Plans submitted for final approval shall be prepared in ink on cloth
tracings of good quality and shall bear the stamp or seal of a registered
electrical engineer.
(c)   Two prints of the final approved plans, with the signature of the
director or the director’s authorized subordinate affixed thereon, shall be
submitted to the department for use in the inspection of the street lighting
system during installation.
(d)   After such street lighting system has been installed, and before
acceptance thereof by the city, the director or the director’s authorized
subordinate shall inspect the same. If the installation is in conformity with
the previously approved plans and specifications, and the installation is
energized and continues in proper operating condition for a period not to
exceed one week, the director shall approve the installation and issue a
certificate to the subdivider indicating such inspection, test, and approval.
The subdivider shall bear the cost of the test arrangements and electrical
energy used therein.
(e)   Upon completion of the street lighting improvements in such subdivision
as required by these regulations and certification thereof as provided by
subsection (d), the subdivider shall file with the department cloth tracings of
the street lighting construction plans as actually modified to meet
construction requirements.
(Sec. 22-2.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 2, § 22-2.4)
§ 22-2.5 Costs.
(a)   The total cost of the street lighting system and cost of maintenance
thereof, including all energy costs up to the date of dedication and acceptance
of the subdivision roadways, shall be borne by the subdivider.
(b)   In order that the requirements for the energizing of the street lighting
system and the payment of the monthly energy consumption costs and the cost of
maintenance of such system are fulfilled, the subdivider shall file with the
city such surety bonds as are required in §
22-2.6.
(Sec. 22-2.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 2, § 22-2.5)
§ 22-2.6 Street lighting—Installation, energizing, and
maintenance—Agreement—Bond.
(a)   Notwithstanding any ordinance or regulation to the contrary, final
approval of a subdivider’s final subdivision map must not be given unless:
(1)   In the case where final approval is sought under § 6-602(a) of the
subdivision rules and regulations of the city, after completion of the
construction of the required improvements and utilities in accordance with the
rules, the subdivider enters into an agreement with the city, wherein the
subdivider agrees to pay for all costs of energizing the street lighting system
and of the maintenance of such system when the first home in the subdivision is
occupied until the subdivision roadways, together with the street improvements,
are dedicated to and accepted by the city. Simultaneously with such agreement,
the subdivider shall file a surety bond (other than personal surety) with the
city as obligee, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the agreement.
(2)   In the case where final approval is sought under § 6-602(b) of the
subdivision rules and regulations of the city, the agreement referred to
therein must contain a covenant wherein the subdivider agrees to pay for all
costs of energizing the street lighting system when the first home in the
subdivision is occupied until the subdivision roadways, together with the
street improvements, are dedicated to and accepted by the city. To assure the
performance of the covenant, the subdivider shall file a surety bond (other
than personal surety) with the city as obligee, conditioned upon the faithful
performance thereof. The surety bond must be in addition to any other security
required under § 6-602(b) of the subdivision rules and regulations of the city.
The surety bonds specified in subdivisions (1) and (2) hereinabove must be in
an amount sufficient to cover the costs of energizing the street lighting
system and of the maintenance of such system from the time of installation
until the subdivision roadways, together with the street improvements, are
dedicated to and accepted by the city. The amount must be based on estimates of
the director, or the director’s authorized subordinate. The form of the
agreements and surety bonds specified in subdivisions (1) and (2) hereinabove
must be referred to the corporation counsel for approval as to form and
legality. The agreements and surety bonds, fully executed, must be filed with
the director of planning and permitting.
(b)   Notwithstanding any ordinance, rule, or regulation to the contrary, no
subdivider or subdivider’s surety may be discharged from the obligation of any
bond required under this section until the subdivision roadways, together with
the street improvements, are dedicated to and accepted by the city.
(Sec. 22-2.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 2, § 22-2.6)
ARTICLE 3: SUBDIVISION AND CONSOLIDATION OF LAND
Sections
   
22-3.1   Purpose
   
22-3.2   Definitions
    
22-3.3   Approval of subdivision or consolidation required
   
22-3.4   Compliance with regulations and requirements
   
22-3.5   Regulations governing the subdivision or consolidation of land
   
22-3.6   Approval or disapproval of maps—Procedure—Legal effect
   
22-3.7   Appeal
   
22-3.8   Permits for work of any character in unapproved subdivisions
   
22-3.9   Improvements in unapproved streets—Acceptance of streets and roadways
   
22-3.10   Advertisement, offer, contract, sale or transfer before final map
approved—Prohibited
   
22-3.11   Violations—Penalties—Additional remedies
§ 22-3.1 Purpose.
   The purpose of this article and of the subdivision regulations is to achieve
orderly development of subdivisions and consolidations of land; to secure
adequate and convenient placing of open spaces for utilities and adequate light
and air; to prevent congestion of population; to provide for adequate water
supply, sewage disposal, drainage, and other utilities and facilities to serve
the needs of the residents of the community; to provide for adequate and safe
streets for vehicles, firefighting apparatus, and other emergency vehicles; to
provide for safety of pedestrians; to promote good civic design and arrangement
of lots; and to promote the efficient expenditure of public funds; all of which
tend to promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, economy, and general
welfare of the people.
(Sec. 22-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.1)
§ 22-3.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Consolidation. Combining of two or more lots into one lot. The term shall
include reconsolidation, and when appropriate to the context, shall relate to
the land consolidated, and may include consolidation of unregistered land with
registered land.
Director. The director of planning and permitting.
Subdivider. A person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust, or
other entity, or any combination thereof, who is the owner of the land to be
subdivided or consolidated, or the duly authorized agent or lessee of the
owner.
Subdivision. Division of land into two or more lots, parcels, sites, or other
divisions of land, including designation of easements, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale, lease, rental, transfer of title to or interest
in, any or all of such lots, parcels, sites, easements, or other divisions. The
term shall include resubdivision, and when appropriate to the context, shall
relate to the land subdivided.
(Sec. 22-3.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.2)
§ 22-3.3 Approval of subdivision or consolidation required.
(a)   No person shall subdivide or consolidate any land, unless the plans
therefor conform to this article and the regulations of the planning commission
and the board of water supply, and have been duly approved by the director.
(b)   No person shall submit a map of a subdivision or consolidation of land
for recordation or filing in the office of the registrar of conveyances or the
assistant registrar of the land court, unless such map has been given final
approval by the director.
(Sec. 22-3.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.3)
§ 22-3.4 Compliance with regulations and requirements.
(a)   No subdivision or consolidation shall be approved by the director, unless
it conforms to the regulations of the board of water supply governing the
extent to which water mains and all necessary appurtenances shall be installed
to and within subdivisions, including requirements for a water supply for
domestic use and for fire protection.
(b)   In addition, no subdivision or consolidation shall be approved by the
director unless the subdivision or consolidation conforms to the general plan
and development plans, and the laws, rules and regulations of the State or the
city, or any department or agency thereof, applicable or relating to the
subdivision, consolidation or use of the land, including the zoning ordinances.
(Sec. 22-3.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.4)
§ 22-3.5 Regulations governing the subdivision or consolidation of land.
(a)   The planning commission shall adopt rules and regulations governing the
subdivision or consolidation of land, including the procedure and conditions
precedent to approval thereof.
(b)   All regulations when adopted as provided by law shall have the force and
effect of law. Such regulations may be amended or repealed by the same process
required for original adoption.
(c)   Such regulations may provide for the coordination of streets within
subdivisions with existing streets, planned streets, and other features of the
general plan and development plans of the city, or with projected street
patterns for adjoining land areas; for compliance with the general plan and
development plans; for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic,
recreation, light, and air, and for a distribution of traffic and population,
which will tend to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience,
and prosperity.
(d)   Such regulations may include provisions for the minimum right-of-way and
pavement widths of streets or roadways within the subdivision to serve the
subdivision or to provide access thereto, the extent to which and the manner in
which streets and other ways shall be graded and improved, and requirements and
standards of construction for street lighting, sidewalks, and shoulder areas,
curbs, gutters, sanitary sewers, storm drains, flood control, street name
signs, traffic signs, and other utilities and facilities to be provided or
installed to and within a subdivision or consolidation, as conditions precedent
to the approval of a subdivision or consolidation map.
(e)   The regulations may provide that a subdivider, before submitting the
subdivider’s final map for approval, may submit a preliminary map, showing the
proposed subdivision or consolidation in a general way, but not necessarily
indicating monuments and other survey points in detail, and that the director
may give such preliminary map tentative approval, with or without modifications
suggested by the director or agreed upon by the applicant. Such tentative
approval shall not be entered on the map nor constitute approval of the map for
recording.
(f)   The regulations may require the filing of construction plans for
improvements to be constructed, and the construction of improvements as
conditions precedent to final approval.
(g)   The regulations may provide that in lieu of the completion of the
improvements, utilities, and facilities in such subdivision or consolidation
before approval of the map for recordation, and subject to any conditions which
the commission may provide in such rules and regulations, the director may
accept a bond or bonds, with surety, or other security deemed sufficient by the
director and the manager of the board of water supply to secure the city and
the board of water supply the actual construction and installation of such
improvements, utilities and facilities at a time and according to
specifications fixed by or in accordance with the regulations of the commission
and the board of water supply.
(h)   The regulations may provide for the granting of modifications by the
director from the construction standards and requirements in the subdivision
rules and regulations where the director finds that the land proposed to be
subdivided or consolidated is of such size or shape or is affected by such
topographical location or condition or is to be devoted to such uses that it is
impossible or impracticable in the particular case for the subdivider to
conform fully to the provisions of the regulations; provided that such
modifications shall not be contrary to the intent and purpose of the
subdivision rules and regulations.
(Sec. 22-3.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.5)
§ 22-3.6 Approval or disapproval of maps—Procedure—Legal effect.
(a)   Within one year after the tentative approval of the preliminary map, or
such extension of time thereafter, not exceeding six months at a time, as may
be granted in writing by the director, the subdivider shall cause the proposed
subdivision to be accurately surveyed and a final map thereof to be prepared
and stamped by a licensed surveyor in accordance with the rules and regulations
and in conformity with the preliminary map and any alterations and changes
required thereto. Such final map shall be filed with the director within the
period, subject to compliance with all conditions precedent prescribed in the
rules and regulations.
(b)   The director shall approve or disapprove the final map within 45 days
after receipt thereof, unless the subdivider waives this requirement and
consents to an extension of such period in writing; otherwise, such map shall
be deemed to have been approved. Approval of a final map shall be evidenced by
the stamp of approval of the director and the director’s signature, or that of
an authorized subordinate, on a copy or print of the map.
(c)   If the final map is disapproved, the director shall communicate in
writing the reason for such action to the subdivider. The stamp of disapproval
shall be placed on a copy or print of the map. The director shall maintain a
record of all disapprovals, including the reasons therefor.
(d)   Every map approved by the director shall, by virtue of such approval, be
an addition to or a detail of the general plan. Approval of the plans shall
indicate that the same conform to the subdivision regulations. Approval of a
map or a part thereof shall not be deemed to constitute or effect acceptance by
the city of any street or other open space shown upon such map.
(e)   Failure to file a final map within the prescribed period shall
automatically terminate all proceedings and the application shall become void.
If the subdivider desires to recommence proceedings, the subdivider shall file
a new application and submit a new preliminary or final map together with the
required filing fees. Any subdivision map so submitted shall be required to
conform to any changes or amendments to the rules and regulations or other
applicable laws in effect at the time of such filing.
(Sec. 22-3.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.6)
§ 22-3.7 Appeal.
(a)   An applicant aggrieved by an action of the director in the administration
of the subdivision ordinance or rules and regulations may appeal to the zoning
board of appeals within 15 days after receipt of the notice of such action. The
applicant shall file three copies of the map and state the grounds for such
appeal. The zoning board of appeals shall afford the applicant a reasonable
opportunity to be heard.
(b)   The zoning board of appeals may sustain, modify, or overrule the
director’s action; provided that it may modify or overrule the director’s
action only if it finds that the director’s action was based on an erroneous
finding of a material fact, or that the director had acted in an arbitrary or
capricious manner, or had manifestly abused the director’s discretion.
(Sec. 22-3.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.7)
§ 22-3.8 Permits for work of any character in unapproved subdivisions.
(a)   No person shall obtain any permit to move any building onto the
subdivision or the consolidated property or to construct any building, cut a
curb, tap a sewer or water line, or install any water, lighting, or sewer
facility in any subdivision or consolidated property, unless the subdivision or
consolidation has been approved by the director. The prohibitions contained in
this subsection shall not be applicable to:
(1)   Any work done pursuant to subdivision regulations;
(2)   Work done by public utilities for the purpose of furnishing water,
electricity, gas, and telephone service; and
(3)   Work that complies with
Chapter 21 as applied to both the existing divisions of land and the proposed
subdivision or consolidation.
(b)   Where a subdivision has been granted tentative approval, permits may be
issued for the construction of:
(1)   Not more than three model homes in a subdivision consisting of 15 to 50
lots; or
(2)   Not more than five model homes in a subdivision consisting of over 50
lots.
(3)   Notwithstanding (1) and (2) above, the director may approve up to five
model homes for subdivisions consisting of less than 15 lots, or up to five
additional model homes for subdivisions consisting of 15 lots or more; provided
that:
(A)   The subdivider submits, for review and approval by the director, written
justification for the number of model homes; and
(B)   The models shall be used for sales purposes to market other such
dwellings within the proposed subdivision. All such model homes shall have
fully landscaped yards.
   However, no lot or building thereon shall be sold or any interest therein
transferred until the subdivision has been granted final approval by the
director.
(Sec. 22-3.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.8) (Am.
Ord. 95-50)
§ 22-3.9 Improvements in unapproved streets—Acceptance of streets and roadways.
(a)   No street or roadway in any subdivision or consolidation which has not
been laid out, improved, and approved in conformity with this article and the
subdivision regulations shall be taken over, received by dedication or
otherwise accepted as public highways; nor shall any street lighting system or
sewer system in a subdivision or consolidation in which such nonconforming
streets are located be taken over or accepted.
(b)   A street or roadway in any subdivision or consolidation which has been
laid out, improved, and approved in conformity with this article and the
subdivision regulations shall be deemed accepted for dedication by the city
council, without further action by the council, 30 days from receipt by the
council of a letter from the department of design and construction attesting to
that fact. The letter to the council shall be accompanied by a map showing the
street and roadway to be dedicated to the city, and a copy of the deed or other
document conveying the street or roadway to the city. This subsection shall be
repealed if HRS § 264-1(c) is amended to give the council of each county
discretion in accepting or rejecting the dedication of streets or roadways that
meet county standards.
(Sec. 22-3.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.9) (Am.
Ord. 10-20)
§ 22-3.10 Advertisement, offer, contract, sale or transfer before final map
approved—Prohibited.
   No person shall sell or transfer, or advertise, offer, or agree to sell or
transfer, any interest in land located in a subdivision or consolidation until
a final map thereof has been duly approved by the director and filed with the
department of planning and permitting.
(Sec. 22-3.10, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.10)
§ 22-3.11 Violations—Penalties—Additional remedies.
   Any person, firm, or corporation which violates this article, or any rule or
regulation made pursuant to this article, shall be fined not more than $1,000
or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. In addition, the corporation
counsel may institute an action to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any
violation of this article or of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto.
(Sec. 22-3.12, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.); Sec. 22 3.11, R.O. 1987 Supp.) (1990 Code,
Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.11)
ARTICLE 4: SIDEWALKS AND CURBS IN RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS
Sections
   
22-4.1   Requirement of sidewalks and curbs
   
22-4.2   Applicability
§ 22-4.1 Requirement of sidewalks and curbs.
   Notwithstanding any ordinance or regulation to the contrary, sidewalks and
curbs shall be constructed by the subdivider along all of the streets of any
residential subdivision in the city; provided that the construction of
sidewalks in residential subdivisions situated in areas zoned as class “AAAA”
residential districts shall be left to the discretion of the subdivider. Such
sidewalks and curbs shall be constructed in conformity with the specifications
and requirements of the city.
(Sec. 22-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 4, § 22-4.1)
§ 22-4.2 Applicability.
   The requirements of §
22-4.1 shall apply to all residential subdivisions laid out after the effective
date of this article; provided that such requirements shall not apply to any
residential subdivision situated outside of the district of Honolulu where
tentative approval of the preliminary map of such subdivision has been granted
on or before the effective date of this article and where approval of the final
map is granted, or deemed to be granted, in accordance with the subdivision
rules and regulations.
(Sec. 22-4.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 4, § 22-4.2)
ARTICLE 5: UTILITY LINES
Sections
   
22-5.1   Installation of utility lines
   
22-5.2   Exception
   
22-5.3   Modification
   
22-5.4   Appeal
   
22-5.5   Applicability
   
22-5.6   Definition
   
22-5.7   Penalty
§ 22-5.1 Installation of utility lines.
   Notwithstanding any ordinance or regulation to the contrary, utility lines,
including but not limited to those required for electric, telephone, street
lighting, cable television services, and other related facilities, shall be
installed underground in all subdivisions laid out within the city in
accordance with the applicable standards and methods employed for such
underground installation by the public utility companies involved; provided
that if a subdivision consists of three lots or less and if no other lot
situated within 500 feet of such subdivision is provided with utility lines and
related facilities installed in accordance with this article for underground
installation, the subdivider may, at the subdivider’s discretion, arrange to
have such utility lines and related facilities installed overhead in accordance
with the standards and methods employed for such overhead installation by the
public utility companies; and provided further, that the underground
installation of utility lines shall not be required within agricultural
subdivisions consisting of lots with minimum area of 2 acres and which are
exempted under § 1-109 of the subdivision rules and regulations of the city
from the requirements applicable to the construction of street improvements and
utilities. The subdivider shall be responsible for making the necessary
arrangements with the public utility companies concerned for the installation
of such utility lines and related facilities in accordance with the
requirements of this article. The utility lines and related facilities shall be
installed in such a manner so as not to interfere with other underground
utilities of the city or the proposed locations of such underground utilities.
(Sec. 22-5.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 5, § 22-5.1)
§ 22-5.2 Exception.
   This article shall not apply to the following types of utility lines and
related facilities:
(1)   Poles used exclusively for police and fire alarm boxes, traffic control
facilities, street lighting, or similar equipment belonging to or operated by
either the State or the city;
(2)   Overhead lines attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of
a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location of the building to
another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without
crossing any street or alley;
(3)   Electric distribution or transmission system in excess of 15 kV;
(4)   Electric distribution transformers and related switching and protective
equipment mounted on pads or metal poles without crossarm;
(5)   Electric distribution circuits of the 12 kV class supported by metal
poles without crossarm; and
(6)   Communication distribution terminals and television cable apparatuses
mounted on pads or aboveground pedestals.
(Sec. 22-5.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 5, § 22-5.2)
§ 22-5.3 Modification.
(a)   Whenever the strict application of the requirements of this article would
be impractical because of the nature of the surface, subsurface, or
topographical conditions of the property to be subdivided, or because of the
high cost of installing the utility lines and related facilities underground in
accordance with the requirements of this article as compared to the cost
involved in making similar type of installation in other subdivisions of
similar nature and of equivalent size in the city, or because of any
requirement under Articles 14-8 through 14-15, which prevents the strict
application of the requirement of this article to an improvement district
project, the director may make such modification thereof as in the director’s
opinion is reasonably necessary in the interest of the public and not contrary
to the intent and purposes of this article.
(b)   Before making any such modification, the director shall refer the request
for any such modification to the chief engineer and the director of
transportation services for their recommendations.
(Sec. 22-5.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 5, § 22-5.3)
§ 22-5.4 Appeal.
   Any person adversely affected by the director’s action may appeal from such
action to the zoning board of appeals, pursuant to §
22-3.7.
(Sec. 22-5.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 5, § 22-5.4)
§ 22-5.5 Applicability.
   The requirements under this article shall apply to all subdivisions laid out
after the effective date of this article; provided such requirements shall not
apply to any subdivision for which tentative approval of the preliminary map
and approval of the construction plans have been granted, and the performance
of the work under such construction plans has been secured by bond or in the
alternative for a subdivision involving five lots or less, the work under such
construction plans has started, on or before the effective date of this
article, and that approval of final map of such subdivision is subsequently
granted in accordance with the subdivision rules and regulations.
(Sec. 22-5.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 5, § 22-5.5)
§ 22-5.6 Definition.
   The terms subdivider and subdivision used herein means the same as the terms
are defined in
Article 3 of this chapter.
(Sec. 22-5.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 5, § 22-5.6)
§ 22-5.7 Penalty.
   Any person, firm, or corporation which violates this article shall be fined
not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than one year, or both.
(Sec. 22-5.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 5, § 22-5.7)
ARTICLE 6: PUBLIC ACCESS TO SHORELINE AND MOUNTAIN AREAS
Sections
   
22-6.1   Statutory authority
   
22-6.2   Definitions
   
22-6.3   Scope
   
22-6.4   Requirements
   
22-6.5   Dedication of access—Approval of subdivision
§ 22-6.1 Statutory authority.
   This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by HRS § 46-6.5,
as amended.
(Sec. 22-6.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 6, § 22-6.1)
§ 22-6.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Approval. The final approval granted to a proposed subdivision where the actual
division of land into smaller parcels is sought; provided that where
construction of a building or buildings is proposed without further subdividing
an existing parcel of land, the term approval shall refer to the issuance of
the building permit.
City. The City and County of Honolulu. The geographical limit shall include all
that portion of the State of Hawaii commonly known as the island of Oahu and
all other islands in the State of Hawaii and the waters adjacent thereto not
included in any other county.
Dedication. The conveyance of land in fee simple or easement.
Director. The director of planning and permitting.
Easement. A grant of the right to use a strip of land for specific purpose.
Multiple-Family Development. A development of a building or group of buildings,
placed on a zoning lot containing or divided into six or more dwelling or
lodging units.
Public Access. For pedestrian travel, means a public right-of-way in fee or
easement for pedestrian traffic, and may also be used as a bikeway, utility
easement, or for restricted vehicular traffic.
Shoreline. Defined as determined under the shoreline setback rules and
regulations of the City and County of Honolulu and pursuant to the authority of
HRS Chapter 205A.
Subdivision. For the purposes of this article, means any land which is divided
or proposed to be divided for the purpose of disposition into six or more lots,
parcels, units, or interests and also includes any land whether contiguous or
not, if six or more lots are offered as part of a common promotional plan of
advertising and sale.
Units. Has the same meaning as dwelling units and lodging units as defined in
the land use ordinance of the city.
Zoning Lot. Has the same meaning as defined in the land use ordinance of the
city.
(Sec. 22-6.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 6, § 22-6.2) (Am.
Ord. 96-58)
§ 22-6.3 Scope.
   In cases where adequate public access is not already provided, every
subdivider or developer as a condition precedent to final approval of a
subdivision or issuance of a building permit for a multiple-family development
shall dedicate land for public access by right-of-way in fee or easement for
pedestrian travel from a public highway or public street to the following:
(1)   The land below the shoreline; and
(2)   The mountains where there are existing facilities for hiking, hunting,
fruit picking, ti leaf sliding, and other recreational purposes, and where
there are existing mountain trails.
This article shall apply to all subdivisions and to multiple-family
development.
This article shall apply to an existing multiple-family development approved
before the effective date of this article when six or more units are added to
the existing development.
All subdivisions and multiple-family developments affecting public access,
whether separated from the shoreline or mountain areas by intervening parcels,
subdivisions or developments, shall be subject to this article.
Upon the acceptance of the dedication of land for a right-of-way in fee or
easement by the city, the city shall thereafter assume the cost of improvements
for and the maintenance of the public access.
(Sec. 22-6.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 6, § 22-6.3)
§ 22-6.4 Requirements.
(a)   Location and alignment. The location and alignment shall be consistent
with the intent and purpose of this article and shall implement the intent and
purpose of the general plan and development plan of the city; and consider the
topography; other existing access locations; lot layout; access connections;
zoning and uses of the properties on and within the surrounding area; safety;
traffic circulation; effect on the surrounding area; areawide traffic; and
conform to the standards and requirements of the department of parks and
recreation of the city.
(b)   Subdivision of land. The director shall determine the location and
alignment of the public access for pedestrian travel on subdivision of land,
upon consultation with the director of parks and recreation or other
governmental agencies affected by such public access.
(c)   Multiple-family development. All multiple-family development building
permits along or affecting public access near the shoreline or mountain areas
shall be reviewed by the director of parks and recreation of the city.
When it is determined by the director of parks and recreation that adequate
public access is already provided, the director of parks and recreation shall
notify the director of planning and permitting for approval of the building
permit.
When it is determined that adequate access is not provided, the developer shall
dedicate land for public access by right-of-way in fee or easement as a
condition precedent to approval of the building permit.
(d)   Width of public access. The minimum width of such public access shall be
12 feet, except as otherwise approved by the director upon consultation with
the director of parks and recreation.
(Sec. 22-6.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 6, § 22-6.4)
§ 22-6.5 Dedication of access—Approval of subdivision.
(a)   Subdivision of land. When it is determined that public access must be
provided upon review of a subdivision application, the subdivider shall file
the necessary deeds of conveyance with the department of parks and recreation
or other governmental agency responsible for the maintenance and improvement of
the public access. Upon written notification from the director of parks and
recreation or other agency that the dedication documents have been reviewed and
approved as to form and contents, the director shall grant approval to the
subdivision in accordance with the subdivision rules and regulations of the
city. The public access for pedestrian travel shall be clearly designated on
the final map of the subdivision in accordance with the subdivision rules and
regulations.
Upon approval of the subdivision, the subdivider shall file the executed deeds
of dedication for conveyance of the public access, free and clear of all
encumbrances, within 30 days to the city. Failure to file this document within
the 30-day period, or such extension as may be granted by the director of parks
and recreation, shall be a violation of this article. Conveyance shall be in
conformity with all applicable statutes, ordinances, and regulations.
(b)   Multiple-family development. When it is determined that public access
must be provided upon review of a multiple-family development, the developer
shall file a subdivision application to create the public access right- of-way
or easement in accordance with the subdivision rules and regulations.
The subdivider shall file the necessary deeds of conveyance with the department
of parks and recreation. Upon written notification from the director of parks
and recreation that the dedication documents have been reviewed and approved as
to form and content, the director shall grant approval to the subdivision in
accordance with the subdivision rules and regulations.
The subdivider shall file the executed deeds of conveyance free and clear of
all encumbrances upon approval of the subdivision. Upon acceptance by the city
of the dedication, the director of parks and recreation shall notify the
director of planning and permitting for approval of the building permit. The
right-of-way shall be clearly designated on the multiple family development
plan.
(Sec. 22-6.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 6, § 22-6.5)
ARTICLE 7: PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
Sections
   
22-7.1   Statutory authority
   
22-7.2   Definitions
   
22-7.3   Scope
   
22-7.4   Exceptions
   
22-7.5   Land area required for parks and playgrounds
   
22-7.6   In lieu payment—Combination in lieu payment and dedication
   
22-7.7   In lieu payment—Determination of amount
   
22-7.8   Credit for parks and playgrounds
   
22-7.9   Rules
   
22-7.10   Appeals
   
22-7.11   Refund of fees
   
22-7.12   Violations and penalties
§ 22-7.1 Statutory authority.
   This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by HRS § 46-6, as
amended.
(Sec. 22-7.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.1)
§ 22-7.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Approval. The final approval granted to a proposed subdivision where the actual
division of land into smaller parcels is sought; provided that where
construction of a building or buildings is proposed without further subdividing
an existing parcel of land, approval shall refer to the issuance of the
building permit.
City. The City and County of Honolulu. The geographical limit shall include all
that portion of the State of Hawaii commonly known as the island of Oahu and
all other islands in the State of Hawaii and the waters adjacent thereto not
included in any other county.
Dedication. Conveyance of land in fee simple.
Director. The director of planning and permitting.
Dwelling Unit. Has the same meaning as defined in the land use ordinance of the
city.
Hotel. Has the same meaning as defined in the land use ordinance of the city.
Lodging Unit. Has the same meaning as defined in the land use ordinance of the
city.
Multiple-Family Development. A building or group of buildings, other than a
hotel, placed on a zoning lot and containing or divided into three or more
dwelling or lodging units, including planned development and cluster projects
under the land use ordinance containing or divided into three or more dwelling
or lodging units.
Parks and Playgrounds. Areas, including beach parks, used for active or passive
recreational pursuits. The areas include parks and playgrounds which implement
the intent and purpose of the general plan of the city.
Privately Owned Parks and Playgrounds. Parks or playgrounds and their
facilities which are not provided in perpetuity or dedicated but which are
owned and maintained by or on behalf of the ultimate users of the subdivision
pursuant to recorded restrictive covenants. Where the privately owned park is a
part of the lot or lots on which a building or group of buildings containing or
divided into three or more dwelling units or lodging units is constructed, it
shall not be required that the private park or playground meet county
subdivision standards, nor shall the area of the private park or playground be
deducted from the area of the lot or lots for purposes of zoning or building
requirements.
Provide Land in Perpetuity. Conveyance of land in fee simple with the option on
the part of the grantor to provide for reversionary interest.
Subdivider. Any person who divides land as specified under the definition of
subdivision or who constructs a building or group of buildings containing or
divided into three or more dwelling or lodging units.
Subdivision. The division of improved or unimproved land into two or more lots,
parcels, sites, or other divisions of land for residential purposes and for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease, rental, or transfer of
title to or interest in any or all such lots, parcels, sites, or division of
land. The term includes resubdivision, and when appropriate to the context,
shall relate to the land subdivided. The term also includes a building or group
of buildings, other than a hotel, which is placed on a zoning lot, containing
or divided into three or more dwelling or lodging units.
(Sec. 22-7.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.2)
§ 22-7.3 Scope.*
(a)   Every subdivider, as a condition precedent to the:
(1)   Approval of a subdivision by the director; or
(2)   Issuance of a building permit for multiple-family development by the
department of planning and permitting;
shall provide land in perpetuity or dedicate land for park and playground
purposes, for joint use by the occupants of lots or units in subdivisions as
well as by the public. The dedication of land for a park will be subject to the
maximum ceiling in land or money in lieu thereof, calculated in accordance with
the formula designated in §§
22-7.5 and
22-7.6. In lieu of providing land in perpetuity or dedicating land, the
director may permit a subdivider to pay a fee equal to the value of the land
that would otherwise have been required to be provided in perpetuity or
dedicated, or combine the payment of a fee with the provision or dedication of
land, the total value of such combination being not less than the total value
of the land that would otherwise have been required to be provided in
perpetuity or dedicated.
(b)   This article applies to all subdivision of land into two or more lots for
residential purposes, including developments under §
21-8.30, and to construction of multiple-family developments. When a new
building or group of buildings containing dwelling or lodging units is added to
an existing multiple-family development, approved prior to October 16, 1976,
this article will apply only to such new additions, and not to the previously
approved multiple-family development.
(c)   When an existing building in a multiple-family development, approved
prior to October 16, 1976, is enlarged or altered to increase the number of
dwelling or lodging units, this article will apply to the number of dwelling or
lodging units added to the enlarged or altered building.
(d)   When an existing building in a multiple-family development, approved
prior to October 16, 1976, is enlarged or altered without increasing the total
number of dwelling or lodging units, and the cost of such work exceeds 50
percent of the total replacement cost of the building at the time of the
building permit application, this article will apply to the total number of
dwelling or lodging units contained in the enlarged or altered building. The 50
percent replacement cost is calculated on each individual building, and not on
the total replacement cost of the multiple-family development. The percentage
will be cumulative for each building after October 16, 1976. This article apply
to all new or existing units in an enlarged or altered building whenever the
cumulative 50 percent replacement cost is exceeded.
(e)   Upon acceptance of the land by the city, the city shall thereafter assume
the cost of improvements and their maintenance. Fees received will be disbursed
for the acquisition or development of parks and playgrounds, including physical
facilities.
(f)   This article also applies to any change in the use of buildings to
multiple-family dwelling use subsequent to October 16, 1976.
(g)   In any zoning district or special district where mixed uses of business,
commercial, office, and dwelling units are permitted, this article apply to all
units where kitchen and bathroom facilities are provided, or electrical and
plumbing systems are located and designed so that these units may be readily
converted to dwelling units without securing a new building permit or without
undertaking any major alterations or renovation work.
(h)   This article does not apply to those units where legal documents are
drawn up by the applicant to assure that the units will not be converted to
dwelling units. The legal documents must be recorded as covenants running with
the land and subject to the review and approval of the director of planning and
permitting and the corporation counsel. The legal documents must be fully
executed and recorded with the registrar of the bureau of conveyances or the
assistant registrar of the land court, or both, as appropriate, and proof of
such recordation must be submitted to the director of planning and permitting
prior to the issuance of building permits.
(i)   This article applies to any conversion in use of any existing nondwelling
unit to a dwelling unit, and such conversion cannot be undertaken unless the
provisions of this article have been met.
(j)   This article also does not apply to the following dwelling units:
(1)   Affordable dwelling units as defined in and as provided on-site or off-
site pursuant to
Chapter 29;
(2)   Affordable dwelling units provided pursuant to a planned development
transit permit pursuant to ROH §
21-9.100-10, or an interim planned development-transit permit pursuant to ROH §
21-9.100-5;
(3)   Affordable rental dwelling units provided in compliance with HRS § 201H-
36(a)(5); or
(4)   Affordable rental housing units that are rented to households earning 100
percent and below of the AMI, and rented at or below the rental rate limits
established by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
for households earning 100 percent of the AMI for the applicable household size
or less, pursuant to
Chapter 32.
(Sec. 22-7.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.3) (Am.
Ords. 96-58, 18-1, 19-8)
*Editor’s note:
   Section 22-7.3(j) and amendments made to Section 22-7.3(j) in Ord. 19-8 will
be repealed on June 30, 2027, in accordance with Ord. 18-1 and Ord. 19-8.
§ 22-7.4 Exceptions.
   This article shall not apply to the following:
(1)   Subdivision of land into two or more lots only for the purpose of
clarifying records, or for conveyance of portions of land and which is not and
will not be developed under this subdivision application into dwelling or
lodging units. The subdivider desiring such exception shall file with the
director a certified statement therefor, stating fully the grounds for the
exception and that the subdivided land shall not be provided with dwelling or
lodging units. These conditions shall run with the land. Upon further
subdivision or failure of the subdivider to comply with the conditions for the
exception, the subdivider shall be required to comply with the requirements of
this article;
(2)   Subdivisions for a public utility, public facility, or of a public
nature, and which will not be provided with dwelling or lodging units; and
(3)   Subdivision of land into two or less residential or country lots where
these lots cannot be further subdivided.
(Sec. 22-7.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.4) (Am.
Ord. 90-2)
§ 22-7.5 Land area required for parks and playgrounds.
   The land area required for parks and playgrounds will be calculated as set
forth in this section.
(a)   Country and residential zoning districts, excluding planned development
housing projects. The minimum land area in the country and residential zoning
districts is:
(1)   For subdivisions involving three or four zoning lots: 50 square feet per
dwelling or lodging unit;
(2)   For subdivisions involving five zoning lots: 100 square feet per dwelling
or lodging unit;
(3)   For subdivisions involving six zoning lots: 200 square feet per dwelling
or lodging unit;
(4)   For subdivisions involving seven or eight zoning lots: 300 square feet
per dwelling or lodging unit; and
(5)   For subdivisions involving nine or more zoning lots: 350 square feet per
dwelling or lodging unit.
For subdivision actions involving eight or fewer zoning lots, the applicable
rate will be based on the total number of potential lots.
A zoning lot that is not able to be further subdivided will count as one
potential lot. For a zoning lot that may be further subdivided, the potential
number of lots will be determined by dividing the area of the zoning lot by the
minimum potential lot size for the zoning district.
Dwelling or lodging units include existing, proposed, and potentially
developable units, but exclude “ohana units” and “accessory dwelling units” as
those terms are defined in §
21-10.1.
(b)   Other districts and planned development projects within residential
districts. The minimum land area required will be either 10 percent of the
maximum permitted floor area or the following, whichever is less:
(1)   Apartment, resort, and mixed use districts: 110 square feet per dwelling
or lodging unit; and
(2)   Planned development project: 110 square feet per dwelling or lodging
unit.
(c)   Special district use precincts.
(1)   Single-unit, two-unit, and duplex-unit dwellings: 350 square feet per
dwelling or lodging unit, in accordance with subsection (a) above; and
(2)   Multiple family dwelling: 10 percent of the maximum permitted floor area
or 110 square feet per dwelling or lodging unit, whichever is less.
(Sec. 22-7.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.5) (Am.
Ords. 90-2, 93-93, 16-19, 25-2)
§ 22-7.6 In lieu payment—Combination in lieu payment and dedication.
(a)   If the director determines that dedicating or providing of land in
perpetuity is not in the best interest of the city, the subdivider shall pay to
the city, in lieu thereof, a fee in a sum equal to the fair market value of the
area otherwise required under §
22-7.5.
(b)   If the area of land provided in perpetuity or dedicated by the subdivider
and approved by the city is less than the area required under §
22-7.5, the subdivider shall be required to pay a fee equal to the fair market
value of the land area which is the difference between the land area provided
in perpetuity or dedicated and the area required under §
22-7.5.
(c)   If the director determines that the subdivider shall pay a fee to the
city in lieu of dedicating or providing land in perpetuity, the subdivider
shall pay the fee in one of the two following ways:
(1)   Payment in full of the fee before the director’s approval of the
subdivider’s park dedication application; or
(2)   The filing with the director of an agreement to pay the fee, such
agreement to be accompanied by a financial guaranty bond from a surety company
authorized to do business in Hawaii, or other security acceptable to the city
to ensure payment of such fee. The agreement and surety bond or other security
shall be approved by the director and the corporation counsel as to form and
legality. The director of budget and fiscal services shall determine the
acceptability of the financial guaranty bond or other security. The agreement
shall set forth a certain date, not to exceed two years, within which time the
fee shall be paid. The financial guaranty bond or other security that must be
filed with the agreement shall be in an amount equal to the fee required under
this article. The financial guaranty bond shall be in full force and effect
until the fees have been paid. In case of security other than a financial
guaranty bond, partial releases may be made equal to the portions of the fee
paid to the city.
(d)   Payment of fees shall be made to the director of budget and fiscal
services for deposit in a special fund created and established pursuant to
Charter § 9-202. Moneys in this fund shall be expended for parks and playground
purposes in the following manner: Within five years from the date of receipt of
the fees, the city shall expend such receipts for any one or more of the
following: purchase of land for development of a new or expansion of existing
parks and playgrounds; purchase of park and playground equipment; or
improvement of existing parks and playgrounds, all according to the following
locational priorities: locational priority for creation, expansion, and
improvement of parks and playgrounds.
(1)   Neighborhood and mini parks located within 0.5 mile distance from the
project site shall be given the first priority.
(2)   Should any one or more of the following: the creation, expansion, or
improvement of a neighborhood facility prove to be unfeasible, the second
priority may be given to community parks located within 1-mile distance of the
project site.
(3)   District parks within 2-mile distance of the project site shall be
considered in the event the implementation of (1) and (2) above is unfeasible.
(4)   Regional parks shall have the last priority.
(Sec. 22-7.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.6)
§ 22-7.7 In lieu payment—Determination of amount.
(a)   Valuation. Valuation shall be based upon the fair market value of the
land before its subdivision.
(b)   Appraisal. If the city and subdivider fail to agree on the fair market
value of the land, the value shall be fixed and established by majority vote of
three land appraisers: one shall be appointed by the subdivider; one appointed
by the city; and the third appointed by the first two appraisers. All
appraisers shall be members of the American Institute of Real Estate
Appraisers, Members Appraisal Institute, or other equal national organizations.
The subdivider and the city shall equally bear the fees of appraisal and costs
thereof.
(Sec. 22-7.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.7)
§ 22-7.8 Credit for parks and playgrounds.
(a)   Credit for lands dedicated or provided in perpetuity for parks and
playground purposes before October 16, 1976. Where lands for park and
playground were dedicated or provided in perpetuity before October 16, 1976,
such land is credited against the park land which could otherwise be required
under § 22-7.5.
(b)   Credit for subdivisions where the provisions of this article were
previously met. When a subdivision is resubdivided or redeveloped, this article
applies to dwelling or lodging units above those units which originally
complied with this article. Credit is applied to such land area that would
otherwise be required under § 22-7.5, whether lands were dedicated, provided in
perpetuity, or fees were paid in lieu thereof.
(c)   Credit for privately owned parks and playgrounds. When land is provided
for a private park and playground in a subdivision and such area is to be owned
and maintained, and used by the owners (including private parties and public
agencies), purchasers, or occupants of the subdivision, such land shall be
credited against the park land area which would otherwise be required under §
22-7.5.
(Sec. 22-7.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.8)
Editor's note:
   “October 16, 1976” is substituted for “the effective date of this article.”
§ 22-7.9 Rules.
   The director shall adopt rules and regulations pursuant to HRS Chapter 91
for implementation of this article. The rules and regulations shall include but
not be limited to the following:
(1)   Standards and requirements applicable to providing or dedicating land for
parks and playgrounds to the city;
(2)   Standards and requirements applicable to credit for private parks and
playgrounds, provided that the Primary Urban Center and the city of Kapolei
multiple-family developments of three stories or more shall be allowed to
receive credit for private parks and playgrounds on a level other than the
ground level;
(3)   Procedural requirements for implementation of this article;
(4)   Administration and disbursement of fees collected for parks and
playgrounds; and
(5)   Standards and requirements applicable to valuation and appraisal of land
when fees are to be paid.
(Sec. 22-7.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.9) (Am.
Ord. 10-21)
§ 22-7.10 Appeals.
   An aggrieved party may secure a review of any decision of the director of
planning and permitting by appeal to the zoning board of appeals.
(Sec. 22-7.10, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.10)
§ 22-7.11 Refund of fees.
(a)   Refund, or partial refund pursuant to subdivision (3) below, of the
amount of fees paid to the city shall be allowed to the subdivider for
subdivisions or multiple-family developments under the following circumstances:
(1)   When subdivision applications expire and become void, or building permits
are not issued by the building department;
(2)   When subdivision or building permit applications are withdrawn; or
(3)   When the number of dwelling or lodging units for a project is reduced and
the amended project plans are approved by the director.
(b)   Requests for refunds shall be submitted in writing with justification and
return of the approved applications and building permits to the director and
shall be submitted within two years from the date of receipt of the fees by the
department of planning and permitting. If the director determines that the
request meets any of the three circumstances listed above, the director of
budget and fiscal services shall be authorized to make the refund. No interest
shall be paid on any dedication fee refunded. Partial refund pursuant to
subdivision (3) above shall be determined by the director based upon the
valuation method contained in this article as used to determine the original
fee paid. No refund shall be made for subdivisions or multiple family
development when the method of compliance with this article is revised or
amended, or when the amount of fees to be paid has changed, or the two-year
time limit has lapsed.
(c)   Subdivision or building permit applications considered under this article
shall become void upon the granting of a total refund. A new application shall
be required if a subdivider seeks to renew the project.
(Sec. 22-7.11, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.11)
§ 22-7.12 Violations and penalties.
   Any person violating this article shall upon conviction, be punished by a
fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. The continuance of any such violation after
conviction shall be deemed a new offense for each day of such continuance. The
city may maintain an action for an injunction to restrain any violation of this
article, and may take any other lawful action to prevent or remedy any
violation.
(Sec. 22-7.12, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.12)
ARTICLE 8: STREET NAMES
Sections
   
22-8.1   Authority to name streets
   
22-8.2   Nomenclature
   
22-8.3   Further requirements relative to street names
   
22-8.4   Procedural requirements
   
22-8.5   Approval
§ 22-8.1 Authority to name streets.
   The authority to name streets and to approve the change of street names
within the city is delegated to the director of planning and permitting, to be
exercised in accordance with the standards set forth in this article.
(Sec. 22-8.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 8, § 22-8.1) (Am.
Ord. 96-58)
§ 22-8.2 Nomenclature.
   The following nomenclature shall be used in the naming of streets:
(1)   The term “freeway” shall be used to describe a divided arterial roadway
for through traffic with full control of access, with grade separations at
intersections. Whenever practicable, freeways shall be named after Hawaiian
royalty;
(2)   The term “highway” shall be used to describe a roadway generally serving
through traffic on a continuous route providing the primary access between
communities. Whenever practicable, highways shall be named after Hawaiian
royalty;
(3)   The term “parkway” shall be used to describe a major collector roadway,
usually containing a medial strip with landscaped setback parklike areas on
each side of the right-of-way, generally heavily planted with trees for its
entire length;
(4)   The term “boulevard” shall be used to describe a major collector with or
without a medial strip, generally shorter than a highway, usually serving
through traffic on a continuous route;
(5)   The term “drive” shall be used to describe a long winding collector
roadway, usually through a valley, mountainous area, or plateau, having scenic
qualities;
(6)   The term “street” shall be used to describe a fully improved through
roadway serving local or minor collector traffic;
(7)   The term “avenue” shall be used to describe a fully improved through
roadway serving local or minor collector traffic, landscaped, and planted with
trees;
(8)   The term “circle” shall be used to describe a roadway having a circular
form, with only one access point to the adjoining street;
(9)   The term “loop” shall be used to describe a looped roadway having two
access points off the same roadway;
(10)   The term “place” shall be used to describe a cul-de-sac;
(11)   The term “way” shall be used to describe a cul-de-sac which is off
another cul-de-sac;
(12)   The term “court” shall be used to describe a short roadway partially or
wholly enclosed by buildings, giving the impression of a small open square;
(13)   The term “mall” shall be used to describe a street or portions thereof
on which vehicular traffic is to be restricted in whole or in part, and which
is to be used exclusively or primarily for pedestrian travel or promenade;
(14)   The term “road” shall be used to describe a collector roadway in the
rural district, generally without full improvements such as curbs and
sidewalks; and
(15)   The term “lane” shall be used to describe a narrow and short roadway
without curbs or sidewalks.
However, a roadway with the characteristics of a “road” or “lane” as above
described shall be entitled to be given a name after the effective date of this
article only in circumstances where such a roadway constitutes an extension of
an already existing and named “road” or “lane.”
(Sec. 22-8.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 8, § 22-8.2)
§ 22-8.3 Further requirements relative to street names.
   Street names within the city shall comply with the following requirements:
(1)   Street names selected shall consist of Hawaiian names, words, or phrases
and shall be selected with a view to the appropriateness of the name to
historic, cultural, scenic, and topographical features of the area;
(2)   Street names selected shall not duplicate existing street names in
spelling or sound, and shall be as dissimilar as possible in spelling or sound
from any existing street names;
(3)   Street names shall be selected so as not to exceed the space limitation
of a standard street name sign of the department of transportation services
(normally 18 spaces);
(4)   Streets that constitute a continuation of an existing street shall be
given the same name as the existing street;
(5)   Streets that are continuous shall bear the same name throughout;
(6)   A street shall be entitled to a street name only if:
(A)   The roadway has a legally defined right-of-way, by roadway lot or
easement; however, street names shall be considered for subdivisions as to
which tentative approval has been granted and construction plans have been
approved by the city;
(B)   The roadway has a minimum right-of-way of 18 feet and is paved; and
(C)   The roadway serves two or more lots or units; and
(7)   Any street names adopted after the effective date of this article shall
include appropriate diacritical marks, which shall appear on the street name
sign prepared by the department of transportation services. Appropriate
diacritical marks shall also be required for all replacement signs for street
names in effect on the effective date of this article, and to all signs where a
newly named street constitutes an extension of a street for which a name is in
effect on the effective date of this article. The department of planning and
permitting and the department of transportation services may take all steps
necessary to redesignate the names of existing streets to include appropriate
diacritical marks where such redesignation is found to be necessary or
appropriate.
(Sec. 22-8.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 8, § 22-8.3)
§ 22-8.4 Procedural requirements.
(a)   Any property owner of a street or lot fronting a street, including public
agencies, may request a new street name or a change of an existing street name
by submitting a street name application to the department of planning and
permitting.
(b)   Street name applications shall include the following:
(1)   A map showing the streets for which a name or name change is sought and
the surrounding existing streets and their names;
(2)   The street names proposed, and their meaning in English; however, the
applicant may request the director of planning and permitting to choose the
names; and
(3)   In the case of a request to name a street, other than as part of the
subdivision process, or to change an existing street name, the reasons for the
proposed name or name change, and the names and addresses of all property
owners fronting the street. Notices that a street name or name change has been
proposed shall be circulated to all property owners and residents to determine
their desires with respect to the proposal, and shall also be sent to the fire
department, the police department, and the post office. The director of
planning and permitting may approve a name or name change only as to which the
approval of a majority of the owners and residents, together with the approval
of the fire department, police department, and post office, has been obtained.
The applicant for a name or name change shall assume responsibility for
conducting a poll to establish that the proposed name is desired by the
majority of the property owners and residents; however, the applicant may
request the city to conduct the poll for changes affecting 10 or less
properties.
(Sec. 22-8.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 8, § 22-8.4)
§ 22-8.5 Approval.
(a)   The director of planning and permitting shall indicate the director’s
approval of a street name by signing the official street name map. A street
name shall become effective on the date of such signature.
(b)   Upon approval of the street name, the applicant shall install street name
signs for the naming of the streets. The signs shall conform to the standards
of the department of transportation services. The applicant shall bear the
total cost of the purchase and installation of the signs.
(Sec. 22-8.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 8, § 22-8.5)
ARTICLE 9: MEMORIALS AND NAMES FOR CITY PARKS, SITES, AND FACILITIES
Sections
   
22-9.1   Purpose
   
22-9.2   Definitions
   
22-9.3   Naming of city parks, sites, and facilities
   
22-9.4   Memorials
   
22-9.5   Procedures for naming city parks, sites, and facilities and erecting
or accepting memorials
   
22-9.6   Inventory of official names of parks, sites, facilities, statues, and
memorials
   
22-9.7   Use of official names of parks, sites, and facilities
§ 22-9.1 Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to establish guidelines and procedures to be
used in the naming of city parks, sites, and facilities, and in the use of
statues, busts, or other memorials.
(1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 9, § 22-9.1) (Added by Ord. 89-95)
§ 22-9.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Facility. Includes any office building, stadium, arena, police, or fire
station, or any other facility owned, managed or operated by the City and
County of Honolulu.
Memorial. Includes any statue, bust, monument, or plaque erected or installed
in remembrance of a person or persons or historical event.
Park. Includes any park, park roadway, playground, athletic field, beach, beach
right-of-way, tennis court, golf course, swimming pool, and other recreation
areas and facilities under the control, maintenance, and management of the
department of parks and recreation.
Site. Includes any mall or land parcel owned, managed, or operated by the City
and County of Honolulu.
(1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 9, § 22-9.2) (Added by Ord. 89-95; Am. Ord. 01-11)
§ 22-9.3 Naming of city parks, sites, and facilities. *
(a)   The names of all city parks, sites, and facilities shall be determined in
accordance with requirements set forth herein.
(1)   Existing city parks, sites, and facilities may retain the name which has
been historically accepted through common usage.
(2)   New or existing parks, sites, and facilities may be named:
(A)   For the neighborhood, community, district, or region in which the park,
site, or facility is located;
(B)   After the primary street which it abuts; or
(C)   In the Hawaiian language with a name which describes the site or its use,
function, or purpose.
(3)   In exceptional cases, a new or existing park, site, facility, or any
portion thereof may be named for a person, or for a belief, ideal, concept, or
historical event of significance to the community, city, nation, or world.
(A)   In cases involving a deceased individual, that person shall meet one or
more of the following criteria:
(i)   The person has a significant association with the park, site, or
facility;
(ii)   The person has contributed significantly to the community or area in
which the park, site, or facility is located;
(iii)   The person has achieved significant recognition historically on the
city, State, national, or international level; or
(iv)   The person has been honored for service with the armed forces of the
United States of America.
(B)   In cases involving a living individual, that person shall have
contributed 50 or more years of service to the community and only a portion of
the park, site, or facility may be named for the individual.
(b)   When Hawaiian names or words are used to name an existing or new park,
site, or facility, the authoritative Hawaiian spelling and diacritical marks
shall be used.
(c)   Any park, site, facility, or memorial name adopted after July 3, 1989**
includes appropriate diacritical marks, which shall appear on the park, site,
facility, or memorial sign name. Appropriate diacritical marks shall also be
required for all replacement signs for park, site, facility, or memorial names
in effect on July 3, 1989**. The department that controls, maintains, and
manages the park, site, facility, or memorial may take all steps necessary to
redesignate the names of existing parks, sites, facilities, or memorials to
include appropriate diacritical marks where such redesignation is found to be
necessary or appropriate.
(1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 9, § 22-9.3) (Added by Ord. 89-95; Am. Ord. 10-29)
Editor’s note:
   * Ord. 06-02 amended §
22-9.3 to provide that the names of city parks, sites and facilities may be
named for former mayors or councilmembers who are still living, but pursuant to
§ 4 of Ord. 06-02, the ordinance was repealed as of July 31, 2006.
   ** “July 3, 1989” is substituted for “the effective date of this article.”
§ 22-9.4 Memorials.
(a)   The city shall erect, install, and accept donations for permanent
statues, busts, or other memorials in accordance with requirements set forth in
this section.
(b)   Permanent statues, busts, or other memorials may be erected, placed, or
installed in city parks, sites, and facilities to honor:
(1)   Persons or groups that have a significant association with the park,
site, or facility;
(2)   Persons or groups for which a park, site, or facility has been named;
(3)   A belief, ideal, concept, or historical event of significance to the
community, city, State, nation, or world;
(4)   A historical event of significance to the park, site, or facility;
(5)   A person or group which has contributed significantly to the park, site,
or facility;
(6)   A person or group which has achieved significant recognition historically
on the city, State, national, or international level; or
(7)   A person or group which has been honored for service with the armed
forces of the United States of America.
(1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 9, § 22-9.4) (Added by Ord. 89-95)
§ 22-9.5 Procedures for naming city parks, sites, and facilities and erecting
or accepting memorials.
(a)   When a new park, site, or facility is acquired or authorized for
construction, or when a memorial is to be accepted or erected, the mayor shall
submit the mayor’s recommendations regarding the name or memorial to the
council in the form of a resolution, along with any additional information as
required in subsections (c) and (d). Any interested person may recommend names
or name changes to the city.
(b)   When a beach, stream, lake, pond, or any other geographic feature is
involved, the resolution naming, renaming, or correcting the name of a
geographic feature or place shall request the board of geographic names, office
of State planning to name, rename, or correct the name of a geographic feature
or place in accordance with HRS Chapter 4E.
(c)   When a person or historical event is recommended as the name for a park,
site, facility, or any portion thereof, the mayor shall submit the following
information regarding the proposed name or historical event:
(1)   The full name of such person, persons, group, or event;
(2)   The date of birth and the date of death, if appropriate, of the person or
persons;
(3)   The residence of the person or persons, if appropriate, including the
street address, town, and district, state or nation;
(4)   The association, if any, of the person, persons, group, or event, if
appropriate, with the park, site, facility, or portion thereof, to be named;
and
(5)   A brief biography of the person, persons, or group, or account of the
historical event, if appropriate, including all other data relevant to the
commemorative naming.
(d)   Any recommendation for acceptance or erection of a permanent memorial
shall include:
(1)   The full name of such person, persons, group, or event;
(2)   The date of birth and the date of death of the person or persons;
(3)   The residence of the person or persons, if appropriate, including street
address, town, and district, state, or nation;
(4)   The association, if any, of the person, persons, group, or event, if
appropriate, with the proposed location;
(5)   A brief biography of the person, persons, or group, or account of the
historical event, if appropriate, including all data relevant to the memorial;
and
(6)   Detailed information, such as size, shape, type of material, any
maintenance costs, and total costs, if appropriate.
Notwithstanding subsections (d)(1) and (d)(2), in cases where the memorial will
contain human skeletal remains, or iwi, subject to HRS Chapter 6E, or will
honor or be dedicated to the remembrance of persons whose identities are
unknown, the recommendation for acceptance or erection of a memorial need not
include the information specified in subsections (d)(1) and (d)(2).
(e)   All naming or renaming of city parks, sites, or facilities or any portion
thereof shall be by resolution by the council. Approval for the erection or
placement of permanent memorials shall be by resolution; provided that an
appropriate budget ordinance has been enacted where required.
(f)   The council may, on its own motion, designate a name for a new or
existing park, site, facility, or any portion thereof, or memorial, consistent
with the requirements set forth herein, by adoption of an appropriate
resolution.
(1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 9, § 22-9.5) (Added by Ord. 89-95; Am. Ord. 01-11, 10-
29)
§ 22-9.6 Inventory of official names of parks, sites, facilities, statues, and
memorials.
   The mayor shall maintain an inventory of official names of parks, sites,
facilities, and memorials, which shall be updated annually, and a listing
describing or defining names and locations of parks, sites, facilities, and
memorials under the jurisdiction of the city. The inventory and listing shall
be accessible at the municipal reference and records center.
(1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 9, § 22-9.6) (Added by Ord. 89-95)
§ 22-9.7 Use of official names of parks, sites, and facilities.
   Official names of parks, sites, and facilities shall be used in city
communications, maps, plans, documents, signs, and any other communications.
(1990 Code, Ch. 22, Art. 9, § 22-9.7) (Added by Ord. 89-95)
CHAPTER 23: STATE LAND USE CLASSIFICATION
Article
   
1.   Boundary Adjustments Between Agricultural and Urban Districts
ARTICLE 1: BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENTS BETWEEN AGRICULTURAL AND URBAN DISTRICTS
Sections
   
23-1.1   Purpose
   
23-1.2   Applicability
   
23-1.3   Petition to city council
   
23-1.4   Action by the director of planning and permitting—Petition fees
   
23-1.5   Consolidated proceedings
   
23-1.6   Standards and criteria
   
23-1.7   Planning commission action
   
23-1.8   Council action
   
23-1.9   Effective date—Notification
   
Appendix 23-A: State Land Use District Boundary Amendments
§ 23-1.1 Purpose.
   In accordance with the authority delegated to the counties by HRS § 205-3.1,
and in the interest of reducing processing time and cost to an applicant,
facilitating the processing of petitions, and reducing duplication of effort,
this chapter provides the method to process petitions to amend State land use
district boundaries for areas involving 15 acres or less.
(Sec. 34-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 26, Art. 1, §
26-1.1)
§ 23-1.2 Applicability.
   All petitions for changes in the boundary of a State land use district
involving an area of 15 acres or less in an agricultural or urban district as
the districts are defined by the State land use commission, shall be processed
in accordance this chapter.
(Sec. 34-1.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 26, Art. 1, §
26-1.2)
§ 23-1.3 Petition to city council.
(a)   Any department or agency of the State or county, or any person with a
property interest in the land sought to be reclassified, may petition the
county for a change in the classification of parcels of land of 15 acres or
less which are in the agricultural or urban district. Each petition shall be
referred to the department of planning and permitting for evaluation and
processing.
(b)   Petitions may be initiated by the council by resolution and such
petitions shall be referred to the department of planning and permitting for
evaluation and processing in the same manner as all other petitions.
(Sec. 34-1.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 26, Art. 1, §
26-1.3) (Am. Ord. 96-58)
§ 23-1.4 Action by the director of planning and permitting—Petition fees.
(a)   The director of planning and permitting shall deliver a copy of any
petition for a district boundary change permitted by this chapter to the State
land use commission and State department of business, economic development, and
tourism. The director of planning and permitting shall notify the commission
and the department of the time, date, and place of the public hearings referred
to in §§
23-1.5 and
23-1.7.
(b)   The director of planning and permitting shall adopt rules in accordance
with the Hawaii Administrative Procedure Act, HRS Chapter 91, for processing
the boundary changes permitted by this chapter.
(c)   Petitions submitted by nongovernmental parties shall be accompanied by a
fee of $700, plus $300 per acre involved or any major fraction thereof, up to a
maximum fee of $15,000. Fees shall be submitted by the applicant to the
director of planning and permitting upon acceptance of an application for a
boundary amendment by the director of planning and permitting and fees shall
not be refundable.
(Sec. 34-1.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 26, Art. 1, §
26-1.4) (Am. Ords. 96-58, 03-12, 14-4)
§ 23-1.5 Consolidated proceedings.
   The city may conduct proceedings, including public hearings, to change State
land use boundaries pursuant to this chapter, with proceedings to amend the
development plan of the affected land.
(Sec. 34-1.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 26, Art. 1, §
26-1.5)
§ 23-1.6 Standards and criteria.
   All petitions for boundary amendments shall be reviewed from the perspective
of:
(1)   Contribution to the general welfare and prosperity of the people of the
county;
(2)   Whether a public issue, need, or problem presently exists to serve as a
basis for the proposed amendment; and
(3)   Consistency with the Hawaii State plan and the county general plan.
(Sec. 34-1.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 26, Art. 1, §
26-1.6)
§ 23-1.7 Planning commission action.
   The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each boundary
amendment proposal made under this chapter. Thereafter, the planning commission
shall make a recommendation on each boundary amendment to the council.
(Sec. 34-1.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 26, Art. 1, §
26-1.7)
§ 23-1.8 Council action.
   The council shall enact all boundary amendments made pursuant to this
chapter by ordinance after holding a public hearing. No boundary amendment
petition which would redesignate agricultural lands to urban use shall be
approved, unless the council indicates its approval of such amendment by two-
thirds vote of the entire council.
(Sec. 34-1.8, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 26, Art. 1, §
26-1.8)
§ 23-1.9 Effective date—Notification.
   A change in State land use district boundaries pursuant to this chapter
shall become effective on the day designated by the council in the ordinance
enacting the boundary amendment. Within 60 days of the effective date of the
ordinance, the description and a map of the affected land shall be transmitted
to the State land use commission and department of business, economic
development, and tourism by the director of planning and permitting.
(Sec. 34-1.9, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 26, Art. 1, §
26-1.9) (Am. Ord. 96-58)
APPENDIX 23-A: STATE LAND USE DISTRICT BOUNDARY AMENDMENTS
Ord. No. Approval Date
Ord. No. Approval Date
88-44    4-22-1988     Reclassifies a portion of a parcel of land in Waianae
                       from agricultural to urban district. Rockwell Rogers
89-17    2-10-1989     Reclassifies a portion of a parcel of land in Kahuku
                       from agricultural to urban district. Campbell Estate
90-58    7-3-1990      Reclassifies parcels in Ewa from agricultural to urban
                       district. DHCD
                       Reclassifies a portion of a parcel in Waipio from
92-23    4-6-1992      agricultural to urban district. Gentry Development
                       Company
                       Reclassifies portions of parcels in Waikakalaua Gulch
92-45    5-15-1992     from agricultural to urban district. Waihuna Joint
                       Venture
                       Reclassifies a portion of a parcel of land in Mililani
92-91    7-21-1992     Mauka from agricultural to urban district. Castle &
                       Cooke Residential, Inc.
                       Reclassifies a portion of a parcel of land in
94-10    3-15-1994     Waikakalaua from agricultural to urban district. Castle
                       & Cooke Properties Inc.
                       Reclassifies a parcel and a portion of a parcel of land
94-70    10-5-1994     (less than 15 acres) in Waialua from agricultural to
                       urban district. Waialua United Church of Christ
                       Reclassifies certain lands (less than 15 acres) in Laie
95-66    11-21-1995    from agricultural to urban district. Hawaii Reserves,
                       Inc.
96-26    5-15-1996     Reclassifies certain lands (less than 15 acres) in Ewa
                       from agricultural to urban district. Campbell Estate
                       Reclassifies certain lands (less than 15 acres) in Laie
97-69    12-17-1997    from agricultural to urban district. Brigham Young
                       University (Hawaii Campus)
                       Reclassifies certain lands (less than 15 acres) in Ewa
00-12    4-19-2000     (Schofield Barracks Quadrangle) from agricultural to
                       urban district. St. Francis Medical Center-West Remnant
                       Parcels Consolidation
                       Reclassifies a portion of land (less than 15 acres) in
00-57    11-02-2000    Waipio (Waipahu Quadrangle) from agricultural to urban
                       district. Trinity Church Leeward
                       Reclassifies a portion of land (less than 15 acres) in
02-22    6-14-2002     Honouliuli (Waipahu Quadrangle) from agricultural to
                       urban district. Child and Family Service
                       Reclassifies a portion of land (15 acres or less) in
02-40    7-30-2002     Kokokahi, Map No. 0-12 (Kaneohe Quadrangle), from urban
                       to conservation district. Friendship Garden Foundation
 
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
                       Reclassifies a portion of land (15 acres or less) in
06-29    6-20-2006     Kapolei, Map No. 0-6 (Ewa Quadrangle), from agricultural
                       to urban district. The Waters of Kapolei, L.L.C., DBA
                       Hawaiian Waters Adventure Park
                       Amends portions (14.85 acres) of the state land use
                       district boundary map (Kahuku Quadrangle) in Laie from
19-6     5-13-2019     agricultural to urban district, and a portion (0.03
                       acres) from urban to agricultural. Brigham Young
                       University
 
CHAPTER 24: DEVELOPMENT PLANS
Articles
   
1.   Development Plan Common Provisions
   
2.   Primary Urban Center
   
3.   Ewa
   
4.   East Honolulu
   
5.   Central Oahu
   
6.   Koolau Poko
   
7.   Koolau Loa
   
8.   North Shore
   
9.   Waianae
   
10.   Northwestern Hawaiian Islands
ARTICLE 1: DEVELOPMENT PLAN COMMON PROVISIONS *
*Editor’s note:
   The common provisions only apply to the Northwest Hawaiian Islands
Development plan. They do not apply to development plans on Oahu.
Sections
   
24-1.1   Definitions
   
24-1.2   Implementation
   
24-1.3   Land use categories
   
24-1.4   General urban design principles and controls
   
24-1.5   General principles and controls for parks, recreation, and
preservation areas
   
24-1.6   Identification of areas, sites, and structures of historical
significance
   
24-1.7   Identification of public thoroughfares, highways, and streets
   
24-1.8   Identification of public buildings, public or private facilities for
utilities, terminals, and drainage
   
24-1.9   Sequencing of public facilities
   
24-1.10   Social impact of development
   
24-1.11   Certificate of compliance with the social impact factors
   
24-1.12   Amendment procedures
   
24-1.13   Development plan annual report and biennial report
   
24-1.14   Golf course development
§ 24-1.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Annual Amendment Review. The process for considering significant amendments to
the development plans.
CIP. The capital improvements program and budget report of the City and County
of Honolulu.
City. The body politic and corporate by the name of “City and County of
Honolulu”.
City Council. The city council of the City and County of Honolulu (“council”).
Charter. The Revised Charter of the City and County of Honolulu, 1973, as
amended.
Department of Planning and Permitting. The department of land utilization
(“DPP”) of the City and County of Honolulu.
Development Plan Annual Report. The annual report on the current status of land
use and other data pertaining to the development plans, as required by Charter
§ 6-1503.
Director of Planning and Permitting. The administrative head of the department
of planning and permitting.
Evaluation of Social Impact. A form of analysis that involves comparing current
living conditions in an area that will be affected by a proposed development
project with the living conditions that are expected to occur as a result of
the new development project.
General Plan. The general plan of the City and County of Honolulu as defined by
Charter § 6-1508.
LUO. The land use ordinance of the City and County of Honolulu,
Chapter 21, as amended.
Planning Commission. The planning commission of the City and County of
Honolulu.
Social Impact. Any positive or negative change in people’s living conditions
that occurs in conjunction with new development and that:
(1)   Is in addition to all other current changes caused by other factors; and
(2)   Is regarded as significant by those people who are affected.
(Sec. 32-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 1, §
24-1.1) (Am. Ords. 90-41, 94-26)
§ 24-1.2 Implementation.
(a)   The performance of prescribed powers, duties, and functions by all city
agencies shall conform to and implement the policies and provisions of these
common provisions and each development plan. Pursuant to Charter § 6-1511.3,
public improvement projects, and subdivision and zoning ordinances shall be
consistent with the development plan for that area; provided that development
plan amendments and zoning map amendments may be processed concurrently. In
case of a conflict between any federal aid projects and the general plan or the
development plans, the council, after public hearings, may set aside the
general plan or development plans to the extent that such conflict prevents the
obtaining or the granting of federal aid on any such project or the prosecution
of the work thereunder.
Publicly funded facilities are required to be shown on the public facilities
map when construction and land acquisition funds are budgeted. Designation on
the map is not required for the budgeting of planning and engineering funds.
(b)   Notwithstanding the land use map designations and provisions of each
development plan, existing zoning ordinances applicable to a development plan
area shall continue to regulate the use of land within demarcated zones and set
detailed standards for the height, bulk, size, and location of buildings;
provided that where the land use map designations or provisions of a
development plan are more restrictive than applicable zoning ordinances, the
department of planning and permitting shall, within 90 days of the date of
approval or amendment of the development plan, prepare and submit to the
planning commission such ordinances as are necessary to bring applicable zoning
ordinances into conformance with the development plan. The planning commission
shall forward its recommendations to the council within 45 days.
(c)   In those instances in which a development plan is more restrictive than
the existing zoning ordinances applicable to the development plan area or where
public facilities are inadequate to service the types of land uses permitted
under the applicable zoning ordinances, the department of planning and
permitting shall, within 30 days of the date of approval or amendment of the
development plan, prepare and submit to the council for its consideration
appropriate interim development controls to regulate development until the
zoning can be brought into conformance with the development plan or until
adequate service levels can be achieved.
(d)   No amendment to a development plan for the purpose of changing the land
use classification of any specific property or the nature of any designated
public facility improvement shall be adopted unless the council finds that such
amendment will be consistent with the common and special provisions of the
development plan and the objectives and policies of the general plan. In
processing any proposed amendment to a development plan, the department of
planning and permitting shall review the objectives and policies of the general
plan and the provisions of the development plan, and shall report through the
planning commission to the council its comments regarding how the proposed
amendment is consistent with or how it conflicts with the development plan and
the general plan. Any questions of interpretation regarding the consistency of
the proposed amendment with the provisions of this development plan and the
objectives and policies of the general plan shall be resolved by the council.
(e)   No amendment to the text of these common provisions or the special
provisions of each development plan shall be adopted unless the council finds
that such amendment will be consistent with the objectives and policies of the
general plan. In processing any such amendments to these common provisions or
the text of a development plan, the department of planning and permitting shall
review all of the objectives and policies of the general plan and other
development plan provisions and shall report through the planning commission to
the council its comments regarding the consistency or any conflicts of the
proposed amendment with the general plan and other development plan provisions.
Any questions of interpretation regarding the consistency of the proposed
amendment with other development plan provisions or the objective and policies
of the general plan shall be resolved by the council.
(f)   In determining whether any action relating to a proposed development is
consistent with a development plan, the responsible agency shall take into
consideration the following factors:
(1)   Whether the development is consistent with the land use map or with any
applicable zoning provisions. The land use map is intended to suggest the
overall character of the area depicted rather than precise zoning boundaries.
In preparing proposed amendments to zoning district boundaries, the department
of planning and permitting shall take into account the designation shown on the
land use map, the character of existing land uses, and zoning and the
compatibility of neighboring land uses.
(2)   Whether the development is consistent with the general height controls
set forth in a development plan. The general height controls are intended to
establish a policy for the general character of the area by setting general
height limits for the area. They are not intended to supplant specific zoning
standards which may set lower height limits. Precise height limits shall be
included by the department of planning and permitting in proposed zoning
ordinances. In preparing proposed zoning height limits, the department of
planning and permitting shall take into consideration all applicable urban
design policies and controls, and the nature of existing land uses.
(3)   Whether the development is consistent with population objective C of the
general plan, to establish a pattern of population distribution that will allow
the people of Oahu to live and work in harmony, and its related policies.
(4)   Whether consideration has been given to the expected impact of the
development upon the living conditions of residents of the area in light of
local area issues, and the social impact factors set forth in §
24-1.10 of these common provisions.
(5)   Whether the place and time at which the development is proposed to be
undertaken is consistent with the planned location and sequence for
constructing public facilities within each development plan area as determined
pursuant to §
24-1.9 of these common provisions and the section relating to development
priorities of each development plan and as depicted on the public facilities
map of each development plan.
(g)   No application for any of the following types of actions shall be
approved unless such approval is accompanied by specific findings with respect
to the factors set forth in §
24-1.2(f):
(1)   Change in zoning for the purpose of changing the zoning classification of
specific property;
(2)   Plan review use under the LUO;
(3)   Funding for land acquisition or construction of a public improvement or
project to be included for the first time in the six-year capital improvement
program.
(h)   Conflict between text and maps. In case of any conflict between the text
of these common provisions or the special provisions of each development plan
and either of the maps attached to each development plan, the provisions of the
text shall control.
(i)   The development plan land use and public facilities maps are to be
interpreted flexibly except where specific requirements are established in the
text.
(1)   Development plan land use maps. Changes in permitted land uses requiring
the adoption of an ordinance shall not require a development plan amendment and
may be processed directly as a zoning map change, when they meet the following
criteria:
(A)   The site involves a rezoning of:
(i)   Ten acres or less to a preservation or agricultural district;
(ii)   Ten acres or less to a residential or country district; or
(iii)   Five acres or less to any other zoning district.
(B)   The site abuts lands which are similarly designated and zoned; and
(C)   The change involves no major social, environmental, or policy impacts,
nor does it involve cumulative impacts resulting from separate applications in
the same area.
When a street is abandoned by the city by city council resolution, the
development plan land use map shall automatically reflect a land use
designation consistent with the underlying zoning as determined by the director
of planning and permitting in accordance with the LUO.
In addition, for master planned development projects which have received
development plan approval, minor boundary adjustments may be processed directly
as a zoning map change; provided that the proportion of land uses, the number
of residential units, acreage, and the design integrity of the approved plan
remain substantially the same.
For purposes of this subsection, master planned development projects are the
relatively large development projects which combine a variety of land use
categories, commonly residential, apartment, commercial, parks, and public and
quasi-public uses, into an integrated development proposal.
When a zone change application is filed in accordance with this section, the
director of planning and permitting shall review and certify the request with
respect to its consistency with the policies and objectives of the general plan
and development plan.
When such zoning map changes are implemented, the development plan land use map
shall be automatically changed to reflect the new zoning.
Questions of interpretation as to the degree of impact of a change shall be
resolved by the city council.
(2)   Development plan public facilities maps. The development plan public
facilities maps show general locations of proposed facilities. Where linear
facilities are depicted, they represent approximate alignments and conceptual
solutions to facility needs. Linear facilities include sewer lines, water lines
and tunnels, drainage lines and channels, regional electrical transmission
lines (above 46 kV), public thoroughfares, highways, streets and bikeways.
Changes in alignment which do not significantly alter the design solution,
change capacity, impact on surrounding land uses, or affect the natural
environment, may be made without an amendment to an existing facility symbol.
Project boundaries depicted on the public facilities maps indicate approximate
locations and shall be interpreted flexibly to allow reasonable implementation.
The approximate location of all major planned public facilities is shown on the
development plan public facilities map. However, where time is of the essence
to protect public health, safety, or property, or to prevent the loss of State
or federal funds, funding for capital improvement projects may be initiated and
appropriated without amending the development plan public facilities map. Major
facilities generally include those which:
(A)   Significantly increase system capacity;
(B)   Expand service areas;
(C)   Change the function of an existing facility;
(D)   Involve replacement of or renovations to existing facilities which would
permit significant new development or redevelopment;
(E)   Have a significant impact on surrounding land uses; or
(F)   Cost over $1,000,000 for capital improvements; however, improvement
districts, the addition of equipment, and the repair, replacement, renovation,
or modification of existing facilities which would not involve any significant
expansion of existing facilities shall not be deemed a major public facility
even if the cost exceeds $1,000,000, so long as subparagraphs (A) through (E)
immediately above are not affected.
The director of planning and permitting may administratively modify the map to
change the symbol for the timing or location or alignment of a project when the
city council appropriates the funds to implement the project.
Any question of interpretation shall be resolved by the city council.
(3)   Changes in the development plan land use and public facilities maps for
the following purposes, when directed by the department of planning and
permitting, do not require a development plan amendment:
(A)   Deleting from the public facilities map those projects for which
construction has been completed;
(B)   Deleting from the public facilities map those parks for which land has
been acquired; or
(C)   Depicting completed public facilities, or park land acquisition on the
land use map.
Before such changes, responsible agencies shall submit a letter of project
completion to inform PD and the city council that projects have been completed.
(Sec. 32-1.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 1, §
24-1.2) (Am. Ords. 89-9, 90-5, 90-41, 90-89, 92-59, 93-07, 93-11, 94-26)
§ 24-1.3 Land use categories.
   The following land use categories are established for this development plan.
(a)   Residential. Residential areas are for single-family detached residences,
duplexes, and other types of low-density cluster or common-wall housing
apartments.
(b)   Low-density apartment. Except as otherwise specified in the special
provisions of each development plan, low-density apartment areas are for low-
rise, low-density multi-family residential structures.
(c)   Medium-density apartment. Except as otherwise specified in the special
provisions of each development plan, medium-density apartment areas are for
mid-rise, medium-density multi-family residential structures.
(d)   High-density apartment. Except as otherwise specified in the special
provisions of each development plan, high-density apartment areas are for high-
rise, high-density multi-family residential structures.
(e)   Commercial. Except as otherwise specified in the special provisions of
each development plan, commercial areas are principally for business or
commercial activities, in contrast to other types of economic activities.
Limited accessory uses directly related to the principal uses may also be
permitted, but only on the same lot and not as a principal use.
(f)   Industrial. Except as otherwise specified in the special provisions of
each development plan, industrial areas are principally for processing,
construction, manufacturing, transportation, wholesaling, storage and similar
economic activities. Accessory or supporting activities that directly enhance
the viability of the principal activities may also be permitted.
(g)   Resort. Except as otherwise specified in the special provisions of each
development plan, resort areas provide a full range of facilities and services
for visitors. The term “visitor unit” as used in the special provisions
includes hotel rooms and resort condominiums, as well as other accommodations
which are located in resort designated areas and reserved for visitor use. The
principal use in resort areas shall be hotels and apartments. Accessory or
supporting uses which enhance the viability of the principal use may also be
permitted.
(h)   Agricultural. Agricultural areas are those areas suitable for crop
growing, grazing and the raising of livestock, flower gardening, nurseries or
orchards, aquaculture, or similar activities. This classification also includes
areas surrounded by or contiguous to such lands but not well suited to
agricultural or accessory activities due to topography, soils, or similar
constraints, and areas otherwise identified by the city as implementing related
general plan objectives and policies. In such areas, uses complementary to
agricultural uses may be permitted.
(i)   Public and quasi-public. Public and quasi-public areas include those
areas designated for general governmental activities; schools, colleges, and
universities; airports, harbors, bus yards and other terminals; major health
care facilities; major utility plants and substations; landfill sites,
corporation yards, and maintenance yards of public agencies; religious, social,
and social service institutions; and other public services.
(j)   Parks and recreation. Parks and recreation areas include all public parks
and recreational facilities, including beach parks, playgrounds, playfields,
district parks, botanical gardens, zoos, golf courses, and pedestrian malls as
well as privately owned or operated, or both, park and recreational facilities
which are provided as integral parts of developments.
(k)   Preservation. Preservation areas include the following types of land:
(1)   Lands necessary for protecting watersheds, water resources, and water
supplies;
(2)   Lands necessary for the conservation, preservation, and enhancement of
sites with scenic, historic, archaeologic, or ecologic significance;
(3)   Lands necessary for providing and preserving park lands, wilderness and
beach reserves, and for conserving natural ecosystems of endemic plants, fish,
and wildlife, for forestry and other related activities to these uses;
(4)   Lands having an elevation below the maximum inland line of the zone of
wave action; and marine waters, fish ponds, and tide pools of Oahu unless
otherwise designated on the development plan land use map;
(5)   All offshore and outlying islands of Oahu unless otherwise classified;
(6)   Lands with topography, soils, climate, or other related environmental
factors that may not be normally adaptable or presently needed for urban,
rural, or agricultural use;
(7)   Lands with general slopes of 20 percent or more which provide for open
space amenities or scenic values, or both;
(8)   Lands susceptible to floods and soil erosion, lands undergoing major
erosion damage and requiring corrective attention by the State or federal
government, and lands necessary to the protection of the health, safety, and
welfare of the public by reason of soil instability or the lands’
susceptibility to landslides or inundation, or both, by tsunami and flooding;
(9)   Lands used for national, State, or city parks; or
(10)   Lands suitable for growing of commercial timber, grazing, hunting, and
recreation uses, including facilities accessory to such uses when such
facilities are compatible with the natural physical environment.
(l)   Military. Military areas are enclosed by a dashed line and include all
lands used for military and military support purposes. Other land uses shown
within the dashed line reflect the detailed plans of the military for lands
under their control. Such uses are indicated for informational purposes only
and do not alter the development plan land use policy designation of military
for these lands. Upon its release from the federal government, land designated
military must receive a new appropriate land use designation through the
development plan amendment process.
(m)   Residential emphasis mixed-use. Housing shall be the predominant type of
development. Commercial uses may be limited to those which generally serve
residents in the surrounding community. Commercial uses may be located on the
first two floors within structures and, where appropriate, shall be clustered
to encourage convenient pedestrian shopping activities.
(n)   Commercial emphasis mixed use. Commercial uses may be the predominant
type of development. Where appropriate, the ground floor may be designed
primarily for commercial uses which support establishing a new or maintaining
an existing pedestrian-oriented environment. Housing may also be provided.
(o)   Commercial-industrial emphasis mixed use. Commercial and light industrial
uses may be the predominant type of development. Where appropriate, the ground
floor may be limited to commercial or light industrial uses, or both. Housing
may also be provided.
(p)   Resort mixed use. Resort uses which provide a full range of facilities
and services for visitors shall be the predominant type of development. The
resort mixed use designation shall be confined to the Waikiki special area as
defined in § 21-9.80.2. The term “visitor unit,” which is used in the special
provisions, includes hotel rooms and resort condominiums, as well as other
accommodations which are located in resort mixed use designated areas and
reserved for visitor use. Resort mixed use areas shall permit hotel, visitor
unit, apartment, housing, and commercial uses. The LUO shall establish
appropriate requirements, which may include limits on the various land uses
permitted within the resort mixed use areas, to prevent over-commercialization
and excessive development of hotels and other visitor units.
(Sec. 32-1.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 1, §
24-1.3) (Am. Ords. 90-5, 92-143)
§ 24-1.4 General urban design principles and controls.
   The following general principles, together with the more specific urban
design principles and controls set forth in Part II of each development plan,
outline the desired three-dimensional implications of the land use pattern
depicted on the land use map to be implemented through public and private
actions. These urban design principles and controls shall be applied by all
city agencies in the performance of their powers, duties, and functions as
related to both public and private developments.
(a)   Public views. Public views include views along streets and highways,
mauka-makai view corridors; panoramic and significant landmark views from
public places; views of natural features, heritage resources, and other
landmarks, and view corridors between significant landmarks.
Such public views shall be protected by appropriate building heights, setbacks,
design, and siting controls established in the LUO. These controls shall be
determined by the particular needs of each view and applied to public streets
and to both public and private structures.
The design and siting of all structures shall reflect the need to maintain and
enhance available views of significant landmarks. No development shall be
permitted that will block important public views.
Whenever possible, overhead utility wires and poles that significantly obstruct
public views shall be relocated or placed underground.
(b)   Open space. Open space areas consist of but are not limited to the ocean,
beaches, parks, plazas, institutional properties with park-like grounds,
streams, inland bodies of water, significant land forms, golf courses,
cemeteries, and agricultural and preservation lands. The functions of open
space areas are to provide visual relief and contrast to the building
environment, to serve as outdoor space for public use and enjoyment. The
preservation and enhancement of areas that are well suited to perform these
functions shall be given high priority.
The city’s mountains, hills, shoreline, and streams shall be considered as
major scenic, open space, and recreational resources. Adequate public access to
these resources shall be incorporated as part of developments adjacent to them.
Existing natural stream beds and drainageways shall be retained wherever
possible. Where further channelization must occur, materials that are
harmonious with the setting, such as stone, shall be used whenever feasible.
Open spaces that act as physical boundaries distinguishing one community from
another shall be preserved.
Additional setback requirements exceeding the minimum permitted under zoning
shall be established along shorelines subject to high erosion risks. These
setback requirements shall apply to all construction activity, including
structures, roads, seawalls, groins, revetments, and other improvements which
contribute towards shoreline erosion.
(c)   Vehicular and pedestrian routes. Landscaping shall be provided along
major vehicular arterials and collector streets as a means to increase the
general attractiveness of the community and the enjoyment of vehicular travel
for visitors and residents. The following streetscape elements shall be
considered in the design of the landscaping: plantings; street furniture;
utility fixtures; sidewalk paving treatments; small parks; signs; and building
setback and facades. Different themes appropriate to the particular character
of different communities may be provided.
Pedestrian corridors shall be provided in heavy traffic areas, such as in
resort, commercial, and apartment districts. Such elements as shade trees and
other plantings, street furniture, attractive building frontages, and other
pedestrian-oriented elements shall be part of the design of pedestrian
corridors. Pedestrian corridors shall be designed to be safe, minimize
conflicts between people and vehicular movements, and shall be integrated with
or provide access to open spaces. Provisions for bikeways shall also be made.
Major roadway intersections, particularly along arterial and collector
roadways, that serve as key community orientation points shall be made easily
identifiable through such means as distinctive landscaping, lighting, signing,
and the siting of adjacent structures.
Landscaping controls shall be established for ground-level parking areas to
provide pleasing environments and to help minimize the visual dominance of
paved surfaces.
(d)   General height controls. Maximum allowable heights for structures in each
land use classification and for designated special areas are specified in the
special provisions of each development plan. They are intended to establish a
general policy for the maximum overall height in the area, rather than to set
specific zoning standards. Lower zoning height limits may be established where
the protection of important views or other design considerations indicate they
would be appropriate. The determination of zoning height limits shall take into
consideration all applicable urban design policies and controls and the nature
of existing land uses in the area.
(e)   Energy efficiency in developments. Efficient energy use shall be
encouraged in all developments. Existing development controls and regulations
shall be reviewed and revised as necessary to eliminate any provisions which
unnecessarily restrict energy efficiency and the use of alternative energy
sources.
Development incentives may be provided for projects that propose the use of
alternative energy sources and energy-efficient designs. The director of
planning and permitting shall prepare specific criteria and incentives for
review and adoption by the city council.
The director of planning and permitting, with the assistance of the chief
engineer, shall establish energy performance guidelines for evaluation of
public and private buildings. Means of assessing direct and indirect costs to
the community shall be included in these guidelines.
(f)   Existing built-up, single-family residential areas. The areas designated
for residential use consist of both existing built-up, single-family
residential communities and areas that are considered appropriate for future
residential development. New development in existing communities shall
generally be limited to that which is compatible with or enhances the desired
physical and social character and lifestyle. Changes affecting the present
physical and social nature of these areas shall be made only when community
needs or general public interests can be demonstrated.
New residential development in rural areas shall be compatible with the general
rural character of the area.
The architectural design of nonresidential structures shall be compatible in
character with the surrounding residential uses.
(g)   Mixed use areas.
(1)   Purposes. Mixed use areas are intended to implement general plan
objectives and policies in the following areas of concern:
(A)   Provide for mutually supportive combinations of any one or more of the
following: residential and commercial or industrial uses, or both, that
optimize the use of both land in urban centers and of already available support
facilities and services;
(B)   Encourage walking and bicycling activities, especially walking to and
from jobs; thus reducing automobile dependency and demands upon the
transportation system;
(C)   Promote development designs and land use arrangements that save energy;
(D)   Provide greater opportunities for variety in urban experiences for
pedestrians;
(E)   Encourage greater social interaction within communities; and
(F)   Permit the adaptive reuse of existing structures and the preservation of
older buildings.
(2)   Performance standards. Where appropriate, performance standards shall be
applied to address potentially adverse impacts related to air, noise, and other
forms of environmental pollution, traffic congestion, and hours of operation
that may result from the permitted mixture of uses.
(h)   Rural areas. Rural areas are characterized by a preponderance of open and
agricultural lands with limited development clustered in small, low-density
residential areas which have a strong sense of community and a countrylike
environment. Large-scale agricultural operations or small farms are major
economic activities and constitute the predominant land use. Business centers
are generally modest in size, low in intensity of use, and primarily oriented
to meeting the day-to-day shopping and service needs of the surrounding area’s
residents.
The location and character of new development in rural areas shall be
consistent with the above-described characteristics of such areas and be guided
by the following principles and controls.
(1)   The visual attractiveness that distinguishes rural from urban and country
from city shall be maintained.
(2)   In designating areas for development, primary consideration shall be
given to the protection and preservation of good agricultural land and uses,
the shoreline, streams, and wetlands, the mountains and watershed areas;
ridgelines and steeply sloping: areas, and other natural resources and:
environments.
(3)   Single-family dwellings at low densities shall be the predominant form of
housing in residential areas. Clustering of dwellings shall be encouraged to
promote the preservation of important natural areas and open spaces, the
establishment of agricultural operations, and economy in the provision of
utilities and services.
(4)   Development along the shoreline and makai of arterial highways that are
within 1,000 feet of the shoreline shall be generally limited to parks,
agricultural operations, and single-family residential dwellings. Private
developments shall include public shoreline accessways at intervals of
approximately one-half mile.
(5)   Appropriately located sites shall be provided for community-based
economic activities which use locally available raw materials and the skills of
craftspeople living in the area.
(6)   Commercial development shall be characterized by extensive landscaping
and designs compatible with the rural character of the area.
(7)   Design standards for streets and other infrastructure improvements shall
reflect the reduced demands of lower density developments and be compatible
with the desired country-like environment of rural communities.
(Sec. 32-1.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 1, §
24-1.4) (Am. Ords. 90-5, 90-41)
§ 24-1.5 General principles and controls for parks, recreation, and
preservation areas.
   This section sets forth general principles and controls for the
establishment of a parks, recreation, and preservation system within each
development plan area. This system shall consist of existing and future
community- based parks and recreation sites, existing and future State and
county-based parks and recreation sites, and preservation areas.
(a)   Parks and recreation areas. Parks and recreation areas as defined in §
24-1.3 shall be located and designed so as to be suitable for different and
varied neighborhoods and available to all residents of Oahu. Wherever possible,
existing and future parks within this system shall be linked by streams and
other green belt trails, pedestrian ways, bicycle ways, hiking trails,
parkways, and boulevards.
The following principles and controls shall be applied to the elements of the
State and county and community- based parks and recreation system.
(1)   State and county parks and recreation sites.
(A)   Preservation/forest areas. Areas of recreational value shall be of low
intensity use. When development prevents the establishment of mountain parks,
streamside parks, or other upland recreational facilities, public access shall
be made available to the resource. Points of access to hiking trails, hunting
areas, swimming areas, and camping areas shall be established and space
allotted for adequate parking and other support services and as provided under
Ordinance 4311 (1974), “Public Access of Pedestrian Traffic to Shoreline and
Mountain Areas.”
(B)   Significant natural or historical parks and sites. These parks or sites
shall be used for medium or low intensity recreation activity while preserving
their natural or historical characteristics. Examples include Koko Head
Regional Park, Makapuu Beach Park, Kahana Valley State Park, Sacred Falls State
Park, Kaena Point State Park, Kualoa Regional Park, and Kawainui Marsh.
(C)   State county regional recreation parks. These parks or sites may be beach
or inland sites with some natural significance and shall be used for medium to
high intensity recreational activities, including picnicking facilities.
Examples include Sand Island State Park, Malaekahana State Park, Hoomaluhia
Park, Kaiaka State Recreation Area, and Queen Kapiolani Park.
(D)   Beach/shoreline parks. A system of public parks shall be provided and
private greenbelts encouraged along the island’s shoreline. New coastal
development shall be regulated to preserve shoreline open space, including
recreational support facilities, such as picnicking, and adequate space for
public parking.
(E)   Beach/shoreline rights-of-way. Where development prevents the
establishment of a shoreline park, public shoreline rights-of-way shall be
provided to allow access to coastal recreational sites and resources. Where
feasible in rural areas, points of public shoreline access may be no more than
one- half mile apart. Where feasible in urbanized areas, points of public
shoreline access may be no more than one-quarter mile apart. Points of public
shoreline access may be sited at closer intervals when justified by public
demand, traditional use patterns, high-quality recreational resources, barriers
to safe pedestrian thoroughfare along the shoreline, land development patterns,
or natural features. Points of access to beach/shoreline areas shall be
established and space allotted for adequate parking and other support services.
(F)   Zoos and botanic gardens. A system of public and private zoos and botanic
gardens shall be maintained wherever feasible.
(G)   Golf courses. Public or semi-public golf courses shall be provided where
possible at a standard of one 18-hole course per 100,000 people.
(2)   Community-based parks and recreation sites. Each community shall have
reasonable accessibility to all types of public parks and facilities according
to population size or community preferences, or both. Community-based parks and
recreation include public and legislatively required private park and
recreational facilities. Such uses may be permitted in any designated use area.
When such uses are located on parcels smaller than the required minimum lot
size of the surrounding uses or are not on a subdivision parcel solely for its
use, the area occupied need not be shown on the maps and may be zoned in
accordance with the use designation on the land use map.
(A)   Parks standards. The following types of parks may be established within
each community.
(i)   District parks/centers. District recreation parks shall consist of 15-20
acres or more and serve approximately 25,000 people. Facilities may include a
gymnasium/recreation complex, a pool, playfield, courts, and passive areas.
(ii)   Community parks/centers. Community recreation parks shall consist of 10
acres or more and serve approximately 10,000 people. Facilities may include a
recreational building, playfields, courts, and passive areas.
(iii)   Neighborhood parks/playgrounds. Neighborhood parks shall consist of
four to six acres or more, and serve approximately 5,000 people. Facilities may
include playfields, courts, and passive areas.
(iv)   Mini parks, urban squares, malls and passive parks. Small mini parks,
urban parks and squares shall be located wherever possible in high-density
neighborhoods as well as in high-density business and industrial areas. Passive
and picnic areas may be part of the above park types.
(B)   Built-up areas. Built-up areas with inadequate recreational opportunities
and insufficient suitable sites for future recreational development shall have
recreation opportunities made available within a reasonable distance of the
immediate service area. Land for open space and recreation purposes within and
outside of the immediate service area shall be provided at a minimum of two
acres per thousand persons.
(C)   Suburban and new development areas. Suburban and new development areas
shall include land for open space and recreation purposes at a minimum of two
acres per thousand persons.
(D)   Semi-rural or low-density areas. Semi-rural or low-density areas shall
have reasonably accessible parks and facilities according to parks and
recreation standards, but serving larger geographic areas.
(b)   Preservation areas. Preservation areas as defined in §
24-1.3 encompass elements of Oahu’s natural environment that give the island
its essential character, while also performing invaluable functions for its
residents at no cost. These functions include buffering the island from storm
winds and flood tides, stabilizing the shorelines, purifying water, and
maintaining a fresh water system that supports unique wildlife and lush
vegetation. Preservation areas and their related functions support the health,
safety, and welfare of every resident of Oahu and shall be preserved and
protected from incompatible development.
(Sec. 32-1.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 1, §
24-1.5) (Am. Ord. 90-43)
§ 24-1.6 Identification of areas, sites, and structures of historical
significance.
   The principal areas, sites, and structures of historical, archaeological, or
architectural significance include but are not limited to those registered
under the national and Hawaii registers of historic places, as amended. The
continued use, enhancement, or preservation of such areas, sites, and
structures shall be incorporated or promoted in any applicable action by the
city. Such actions shall be permitted in all areas designated for any use on
the land use map. Adjacent development shall complement registered properties
with appropriate building facades, setbacks, scale, heights, and compatible
uses.
(Sec. 32-1.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 1, §
24-1.6)
§ 24-1.7 Identification of public thoroughfares, highways, and streets.
   The existing system of public thoroughfares, highways and streets is shown
on the development plan land use map. Except for minor streets, planned
improvements to this system are shown on the public facilities map. Planned
improvements include exclusive right-of-way for at-grade and grade-separated
public transit. The descriptions of the planned facilities are not to be
interpreted as precise descriptions or exact locations, and the nature and
location of these facility systems are to be interpreted flexibly to the degree
necessary to ensure reasonable implementation. Pursuant to Charter § 6-1703 and
HRS Chapter 91, the director of transportation services, with the assistance of
the chief engineer, shall establish and maintain future right-of-way widths and
setback lines for planned street and transit improvements shown on the public
facilities map, as well as for planned improvements to minor streets.
   “Major street” means a freeway, expressway, arterial, or collector street,
whether publicly or privately owned, or both, which is primarily intended to
serve through traffic or the circulation of traffic between different
communities or portions of a community, or both. In the case of arterial and
collector streets, access to abutting properties may also be permitted.
   “Minor street” means a street which is primarily intended to provide access
to abutting property and serve local traffic to and from these properties.
   Bus routes may be established, modified, or withdrawn as required without
amendment to the development plans.
   The chief engineer, with the assistance of the director of transportation
services, shall adopt standards governing roadways and right-of-way widths for
new developments.
   Street improvements shown on the development plan public facilities map
shall be implemented in such a way as to effectuate a system of bikeways. The
design of the system of bikeways is to be guided by Bike Plan Hawaii Master
Plan, dated March, 1977, and the construction shall be implemented pursuant to
bikeway standards to be established by the department of transportation
services.
   Vacant land beneath elevated highways may be zoned and used for other than
highway purposes. Where rezoning is required, the selection of zoning district
classifications shall be compatible with the uses permitted on abutting lands,
as designated on the development plan land use map, and with the prevailing
noise levels, air quality, and other related environmental conditions.
(Sec. 32-1.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 1, §
24-1.7)
§ 24-1.8 Identification of public buildings, public or private facilities for
utilities, terminals, and drainage.
(a)   Both publicly funded and privately funded facilities are shown on the
map. The general time frame (within six years, beyond six years) for land
acquisition or construction, or both, is also shown for publicly funded
facilities. The nature and location of these facilities are to be interpreted
flexibly to the degree necessary to ensure reasonable implementation.
(b)   Sites occupied by existing facilities are shown on the development plan
land use map. Where appropriate, facilities and operations shall be screened
from incompatible uses by means of buffer areas or landscaping.
(1)   Public buildings. Public buildings are those owned by the City and County
of Honolulu, the State of Hawaii, and the federal government, except for
buildings on military bases. Public buildings that generate large amounts of
traffic shall, whenever possible, be centrally located in their service area
and on sites that are easily accessible to public and private transportation.
The design of public buildings shall strive for energy efficiency and, where
feasible, make use of natural ventilation and alternate energy sources such as
solar and wind. Life cycle costs shall be used in the selection of operating
equipment.
(2)   Public or private facilities for utilities. Energy efficiency both in
terms of any one or more of the following; facility operating and capital costs
and collection or distribution costs, or both, shall be given priority
consideration in the selection of sites for public and private utilities.
(A)   Wastewater collection and disposal system. The wastewater system consists
of treatment facilities, ocean outfalls, force mains, interceptors, trunk
sewers, and pump stations. Collection sewers which provide service to
individual properties are not shown on the public facilities map. Adequate
screening or a buffer zone of compatible uses, or both, shall be provided
around wastewater treatment facilities.
(B)   Solid waste collection and disposal system. The solid waste collection
and disposal system consists of collection baseyard facilities, transfer and
convenience stations, landfill sites, incinerators, hazardous waste facilities,
and resource recovery facilities. Adequate screening and/or a buffer zone of
compatible uses shall be provided around landfill sites, incinerators,
hazardous waste facilities, and resource recovery facilities.
(C)   Water supply system. The water supply system consists of wells, shafts,
tunnels, and other water sources; storage and control facilities; booster
stations; transmission and distribution lines; and support facilities such as
offices and base yards of the board of water supply. Exploratory wells are not
depicted and may be allowed in any land use district.
(D)   Electrical generation and regional electrical transmission facilities.
Electrical power generation facilities, regional electrical transmission lines
(above 46kV), and transmission substations served directly from these
transmission lines are shown as public facility uses on the public facilities
map. Local electrical distribution lines (46kV and below) and their substations
are not depicted and may be allowed in any land use district.
(3)   Terminals.
(A)   Airports. State-owned or operated airports are shown as public facility
uses on the public facilities maps. New general aviation airports shall not be
located where they create significant noise hazards or accident potential for
established urban uses.
New urban development shall not be permitted in areas where such development
would be incompatible with the noise hazards or accident potential of military
or civilian airports.
(B)   Harbors. The water transportation system consists of publicly-owned
commercial and recreational harbors, and launching ramp facilities. Launching
ramp facilities are not shown on the public facilities map and may be allowed
in any land use district.
Land uses directly supportive of marine activities may be allowed on harbor
fast lands. For recreational harbors, this may include such uses as
administration buildings, boatclub facilities, boat repair yards, marine
fueling facilities, marine sales and services, parking areas, food services for
harbor users, ice and cold storage facilities, hoists, launching ramps,
washracks, storage facilities and other related uses. For commercial harbors,
this may also include cargo handling and storage facilities, seafood processing
plants, shipyards, cruise or charter boat offices, passenger handling
facilities, maritime-related industrial activities, and other such uses.
(4)   Drainage. The stormwater management system includes natural streams,
drainage channels, drainage systems, drainage basins, and ponds. Natural
streams and existing major channels are delineated on the land use map. Planned
future drainage improvements to prevent or contain hazardous flooding are shown
on the public facilities map. Drainage improvements for nonhazardous flows are
not shown and are allowable in any land use district.
Whenever practical, drainage improvements shall emphasize natural means and
retention of water, with minimum reliance on structural means and rapid water
transport.
(Sec. 32-1.8, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 1, §
24-1.8) (Am. Ords. 89-9, 92-59)
§ 24-1.9 Sequencing of public facilities.
(a)   Purpose. One of the purposes of the general plan and the development
plans is to set forth the desired sequence, patterns, and characteristics of
future development. To achieve this purpose, the general plan sets forth
objectives and policies that relate to the priority or sequence of development
and thereby suggests public facility needs that must be met in the future. It
is a purpose of the development plans to provide a means of establishing the
desired sequence for constructing public facilities consistent with general
plan sequencing objectives and policies, and in a manner that will also provide
guidance for private development decisions.
Charter § 6-1503 provides that the planning and permitting department, through
its director, shall review the capital program and budget for conformance with
the general plan and development plans. It is the responsibility of the
director to review public facility proposals for their consistency with the
general plan sequencing objectives and policies and to make the director’s
recommendation to the mayor in coordination with the chief budget officer’s
preparation of the capital program and budget. This review process is designed
to allocate financial resources for the construction of public facilities in a
manner that is consistent with the sequencing objectives and policies of the
general plan.
(b)   Sequencing policies. The development plan public facilities map shall
establish the general sequence of facility development for each development
plan area. The timing of land use and public facility decisions shall be
determined by policies and guidelines expressed in the general plan and the
special provisions of each development plan. Priority development areas shall
be identified. Where adequacy of public infrastructure is a concern, the order
and conditions set forth in the special provisions shall guide the location and
timing of land use and public facility changes. Renovation and redevelopment
projects shall be considered in the overall sequencing of development.
Priority shall be given proposals that will correct deficiencies in public
facilities or encourage development in areas designated for growth in
accordance with the following policies:
(1)   Deficiency correction. First priority shall be given in the programming
of capital improvements to those public facility projects that:
(A)   Will improve or replace existing public facilities in unsound condition;
(B)   Will correct public facility needs identified in each development plan
area;
(C)   Will not duplicate other available public or private facilities;
(D)   Will correct recognized but previously unmet facility needs; and
(E)   Will benefit low-income and moderate-income residents.
(2)   Growth facilitation. Priority shall also be given in the programming of
capital improvements to those public facility projects that:
(A)   Are consistent with the needs that will be generated by development
planned in accordance with the land use designations in each development plan;
(B)   Are consistent with the general plan pattern of population distribution
for each development plan area;
(C)   Are planned for construction in a priority area for development or
redevelopment;
(D)   Will not encourage growth in urban fringe and rural areas; and
(E)   Will not create a demand for unavailable or unplanned regional support
services.
(c)   Procedure for evaluation of public facility proposals.
(1)   Planning and permitting department. To assist the council in evaluating
the public facility proposals set forth in the CIP to be adopted by the council
by June 30 of each year, the planning and permitting department shall, by July
15 of the prior year, prepare a report setting forth sequencing guidelines for
line departments to use in preparing their public facility proposals. The
department’s report shall be submitted to the council for its information.
The planning and permitting department shall evaluate and propose a priority or
rank for each line department public facility proposal in accordance with the
sequencing policies set forth in subsection (b) and any specific development
priorities set forth in the section relating to development priorities of each
development plan’s special provisions. In determining such priority or rank for
each public facility proposal, the department may make priority adjustments for
projects within each development plan area that are interdependent. In
addition, the department shall evaluate and propose an overall ranking of line
department public facility proposals among all development plan areas. In
making this determination, the department may make adjustments in the
priorities of projects among development plan areas to reflect factors
including but not limited to:
(A)   The relative percentages of population growth projected among development
plan areas;
(B)   The improvement of public facilities within identified deficiency areas;
(C)   The extent of islandwide benefit; and
(D)   Legal, health, and safety requirements.
(2)   Council review. The council shall review the mayor’s proposed capital
budget in relation to sequencing policies, and any specific development
priorities set forth in the development plans. Pursuant to Charter § 9-104.2,
the council may, upon findings of fact relating to sequencing and other
relevant criteria, add new items to, or delete or amend any item or items in
the proposed capital budget.
(Sec. 32-1.9, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 1, §
24-1.9) (Am. Ord. 94-26)
§ 24-1.10 Social impact of development.
(a)   Purpose. A major purpose of preparing a general plan and development
plans is to recognize and state the major problems and opportunities concerning
the needs and development of the city and the social, economic, and
environmental effects of such development. In pursuit of such purpose the
general plan has identified social, economic, and environmental policies that
may be taken into consideration in making development decisions. The general
plan contains statements of objectives with respect to the distribution of
social benefits. These statements of objectives provide general guidelines for
identifying the range of potential social impacts of a proposed development
project upon residents within the local area.
(b)   Social impact factors. In evaluating any proposed development, the
general plan policies and objectives relating to the distribution of social
benefits and the mitigation of negative social impacts shall be considered. The
following factors shall be examined as they pertain to such objectives:
(1)   Demographic. Whether the development will:
(A)   Increase or decrease the residential population;
(B)   Increase or decrease the visitor population; and
(C)   Change the character or culture of the neighborhood.
(2)   Economic. Whether the development will affect:
(A)   The rate and pattern of economic growth and development;
(B)   Public costs or revenues;
(C)   The availability and diversity of jobs in the development plan area; and
(D)   The principal economic activities on Oahu.
(3)   Housing. Whether the development will affect:
(A)   The range of available housing choices;
(B)   Speculation in land and housing;
(C)   Property values of existing homes; and
(D)   The provision of housing for low to moderate income and gap group
families.
(4)   Public service. Whether the development will affect:
(A)   Medical facilities;
(B)   Educational facilities;
(C)   Recreational facilities;
(D)   Transportation facilities;
(E)   Police and fire protection; and
(F)   Public utilities facilities.
(5)   Physical; environmental. Whether the development will affect:
(A)   The natural environment;
(B)   Existing natural monuments, landmarks, and scenic views;
(C)   Open space; and
(D)   The physical attractiveness and qualities of the area.
(Sec. 32-1.10, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 1,
§ 24-1.10) (Am. Ord. 94-26)
§ 24-1.11 Certificate of compliance with the social impact factors.
   All applicants for a development plan amendment shall include, as part of
their application, a certification that the social impact factors listed above
have been given careful consideration, and shall report the conclusions of such
consideration. The consideration of social impact factors shall include an
opportunity for parties affected by a proposed project to identify alternative
ways of managing or mitigating any expected negative social impacts. The
completed application and certification shall be made a public record.
(Sec. 32-1.12, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 1,
§ 24-1.12)
§ 24-1.12 Amendment procedures.
(a)   Annual amendment review. Amendments to these common provisions and each
development plan shall be considered by the council as part of the annual
amendment review procedure established by the planning and permitting
department, unless they satisfy the requirements for independent consideration.
(b)   Independent consideration.
   The following types of amendments may be considered independent of the
annual amendment review:
(1)   Land use amendments that only involve the redesignation of lands to
preservation;
(2)   Land use map amendments within the Primary Urban Center, Ewa, or Central
Oahu DP areas, which involve an expansion of not more than 20 acres to
agricultural use, park/golf course or residential use; or 10 acres to
apartment, commercial, industrial, residential emphasis mixed, commercial
emphasis mixed, or commercial-industrial emphasis mixed use.
Amendments involving potential cumulative impacts resulting from separate
applications in the same area shall be processed in the annual amendment
review.
Land use map amendments must have the required utilities and support services
which are:
(A)   Currently available and adequate to serve the proposed use;
(B)   Designated on the public facilities map; or
(C)   Otherwise committed to be built; and are not needed to service uses
already designated on the land use map.
(3)   An amendment to the public facilities map when authorized by the city
council by resolution or initiated by the director of planning and permitting;
(4)   Amendments which correct mistakes or miscalculations not involving basic
methodology in the development plans;
(5)   All text amendments, provided that any such amendments do not change the
nature or extent of planned land uses to a greater degree than permitted in
subsection (b); and
(6)   Any amendment which proposes the development of an affordable residential
housing project or a planned community, or both, with an affordable housing
component as a principal use in which at least 60 percent of the units are
affordable to families at or below 120 percent of median income and supported
by the department of community services.
(c)   Procedure.
(1)   Amendments may be submitted for consideration by an interested party
through the filing of a completed amendment application with the planning and
permitting department. The director of planning and permitting and city council
may similarly initiate for consideration amendments they wish to have studied.
(2)   Any revision or amendment proposed by the city council shall be referred
to the director of planning and permitting and the planning commission by
resolution, which resolution shall be accompanied by supporting documentation
sufficient to satisfy the director’s usual requirements for the commencement of
processing.
The director of planning and permitting shall assist the council in proposing
revisions or amendments as permitted by §
2-24.3, by gathering and preparing the necessary supporting documentation
sufficient to satisfy the usual requirements to commence processing such an
amendment.
(3)   If the planning commission recommends disapproval of the city council’s
proposed revision or amendment or recommends a modification thereof, not
accepted by the city council, or fails to make its report within a period of
either 30 days after the close of its public hearing or 90 days after its
receipt by the commission, whichever occurs first, the council may nevertheless
adopt such revision or amendment, but only by the affirmative vote of at least
two-thirds of its entire membership.
(4)   A proposal which does not have the support of either the director of
planning and permitting or city council shall be processed as an “unendorsed
proposal.”
Any revision of or amendment to any existing development plan which has been
processed as an “unendorsed proposal” shall, in the absence of an affirmative
recommendation from the planning commission, require for its adoption the
affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the entire membership of the city
council.
(5)   Any amendment which does not satisfy the criteria of subsection (b) shall
be included in the annual amendment review and shall be processed in accordance
with the following procedures:
(A)   Completed amendment applications for the annual review filed with the
department of planning and permitting no later than January 15 of each year by
private applicants or no later than January 22 of each year by all public
agencies, including the city administration and the city council, shall be
processed in the annual amendment review for that year. Applications filed
thereafter shall be processed in the next year’s annual amendment review.
(i)   Applications may be withdrawn from annual amendment review processing
subject to the approval of the director of planning and permitting. Applicants
shall submit a written request stating the reasons for withdrawal to the
planning and permitting department no later than five working days before July
1.
(ii)   Thereafter, applicants seeking to have their applications withdrawn from
further annual amendment review consideration shall submit a written request
stating the reasons for withdrawal to the city council, with copies to the
planning commission and the planning and permitting department.
(B)   Annually, not later than February 15, the director of planning and
permitting shall submit a request in writing to pertinent agencies and
neighborhood boards for their comments and recommendations on all amendments
initiated for consideration in the annual amendment review. The agencies and
boards shall, within 60 days of receipt of the request, submit their comments
and recommendations in writing to the director of planning and permitting.
(C)   Annually, not later than July 1, the director of planning and permitting
shall submit reports to the city council on the following:
(i)   A report on all proposed amendments to the development plans with the
director of planning and permitting’s recommendations; and
(ii)   A report on all amendments in which the director of planning and
permitting has received a request for withdrawal from an applicant and where
the director of planning and permitting approves that request.
(D)   Action by planning commission. The planning commission, upon receipt of a
report from the director of planning and permitting or the council for an
amendment or amendments to a development plan, shall hold a public hearing on
the proposed amendments, and shall transmit its findings and recommendations
thereon, through the mayor, to the council for its consideration and action.
Such findings and recommendations on an annual amendment review shall be
transmitted in time to be received by the city council by October 1 of the year
covered by that annual amendment review.
(E)   City council action. All proposed amendments to the development plans
received by the city council from the planning commission by October 1 of each
year shall be considered as part of the annual amendment review for the
improvement and development of the city for that year. Amendments received
after that date may be held on file and considered in the annual amendment
review for the following year, unless they meet the requirements for
independent consideration. Amendments received after that date may also be
considered as part of the annual amendment review for this year pursuant to
subsection (c)(3).
(6)   For proposed amendments which meet the requirements for independent
consideration specified in subsection (b):
(A)   The director of planning and permitting, within 90 days, which may be
extended with applicant’s consent, of the date of filing of a completed
application, shall submit a report with the director of planning and
permitting’s recommendation to the planning commission for its consideration
and action. The 90-day period does not include any environmental assessment as
may be required under HRS Chapter 343.
(B)   The planning commission, upon receipt of a proposal for an amendment or
amendments to a development plan, shall, within 45 days, hold a public hearing
on the proposed amendments. The planning commission shall, within 30 days after
the close of the public hearing, transmit to the city council the director of
planning and permitting’s report and proposed ordinance with the planning
commission’s recommendations.
(7)   Authority. Nothing in this section shall be construed as an abridgement
or delegation of the responsibility of the director of planning and permitting,
or of the inherent legislative power of the city council, to propose amendments
of the development plans to the planning commission, pursuant to the Charter
and the above procedures, independent of any amendment application.
(8)   No application for development plan land use map amendment shall be
accepted for processing unless the applicant notifies, by mail, all owners,
lessees, sublessees, and residents of the affected property and of each
abutting parcel.
(Sec. 32-1.13, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 1,
§ 24-1.13) (Am. Ords. 90-5, 91-77, 91-78, 93-07, 93-14, 94-26)
§ 24-1.13 Development plan annual report and biennial report.
(a)   By September 1 of each year, the director of planning and permitting
shall submit to the council a development plan annual report of the status of
the development plans. Such review shall include data pertaining to the
following:
(1)   The status of implementation of previously approved amendments to the
special provisions, land use map, and public facilities map;
(2)   The population capacity and available acreage for development in each
development plan area; and
(3)   The status of all residential developments involving more than 10 acres
and 25 units which are designated for housing on the development plans but have
not been completed. The report may include the identification of zoning status,
infrastructure status, and the number of affordable and market-rate units
proposed, completed, and under construction in each development plan area.
(b)   By December 31 of alternate years, beginning in 1993, the director of
planning and permitting shall submit to the council a report on the conditions
of the city and the city’s regulatory system and capital improvement program
with respect to the policies and objectives of the general plan and development
plans. Such review shall take into account the following:
(1)   The social, economic, and environmental conditions and impacts related to
future development;
(2)   Proposed actions to improve implementation of the general plan, the
common provisions, and the development plans; and
(3)   Other studies and recommendations on matters determined by the director
of planning and permitting or requested by the city council.
(Sec. 32-1.14, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 1,
§ 24-1.14) (Am. Ords. 88-22, 94-26)
§ 24-1.14 Golf course development.
(a)   Additional application requirements. In addition to information requested
on the standard application form furnished by the director of planning and
permitting, each application for a development plan land use map amendment for
any golf courses, including expansions or reconfiguration of existing courses,
shall include information which responds to criteria related to social and
growth impacts and environmental quality impacts, the elements of which
criteria are discussed in subsection (b) and may be further detailed in the
rules of the planning and permitting department relating to development plan
amendments. The application may also include a proposal for a community
integration program to be accepted at the time of a decision to rezone a parcel
or to issue a plan review use permit authorizing a golf course in accordance
with its development plan designation; however, in evaluating a development
plan land use map amendment application and making recommendations thereon, the
director of planning and permitting is authorized to consider and analyze, in
addition to the social, growth, economic, and environmental impacts, the extent
and merits of any proposed community integration program.
(b)   Standards and criteria to be applied in the review and approval of golf
courses. The evaluation, acceptance for processing, and approval of any
application for a development plan amendment which contemplates any golf course
use shall be governed by the following standards and criteria:
(1)   Social and growth criteria.
(A)   Evaluation of applications for golf courses generated during the course
of an annual amendment review may be sensitive to such concerns as:
(i)   Whether the provision of open space, which is one of their chief assets,
is supplied in a manner that the entire community can enjoy, by the provision
or preservation of significant view planes and vistas, especially from the
vantage point of major public thoroughfares and public places;
(ii)   Whether golf courses are displacing people or important land uses, or,
alternately, whether there is an adequate compensation or relocation plan, or
both, concerning these displacements;
(iii)   Whether golf courses are located on prime agricultural lands rated “A”
or “B” by the land study bureau classification (this does not preclude the
approval of golf courses on “A” or “B” rated land, however the approval of golf
courses on such lands is discouraged);
(iv)   Whether the area contains golf courses at which residents of the area
have an opportunity to play at reasonable rates;
(v)   Whether a concentration in a particular area causes traffic problems; and
(vi)   Whether golf courses would have an impact on archaeological, cultural,
or historic resources including the preservation and the public access to such
resources.
These criteria may be used to compare the merits of individual proposals in the
course of the development plan annual amendment review.
(B)   Type. Golf courses may be carefully designed for compatibility of the
proposed golf course with both existing and planned surrounding uses. Golf
courses may be evaluated in terms of whether they provide an appropriate
buffer:
(1)   Between incompatible uses (i.e., separating residential from agricultural
uses);
(2)   Between potentially incompatible levels of intensity for similar land
uses (i.e., single family residential and medium or high density apartment
uses); or
(3)   From dangerous conditions or area (i.e., blast zones or flood prone
areas).
(2)   Economic criteria. The director of planning and permitting is authorized
to require an applicant for a development plan amendment contemplating a golf
course use to provide a forecast of the impact of the project on the value of
land in the area and to indicate the impact, if any, on real property taxes.
The material provided may be used as a basis for a comparison among various
golf course proposals in the course of the development plan annual amendment
review.
(3)   Environmental quality criteria. Golf course development which expands
recreational opportunities may not have any serious environmental consequences.
Therefore, development plan amendments which include any golf courses,
including expansions or reconfigurations of existing courses, may not be
approved unless all reasonable efforts are made by the applicant/developer in
the design and the management of the golf course to minimize the use of
pesticides, herbicides, fungicides, and fertilizers on the entire golf course
project. All pesticide, herbicide, or fungicide use on any new golf course or
on any golf course subject to an expansion or a reconfiguration must be done in
compliance with State and federal laws and regulations governing their use,
storage, and disposal. Golf course applications seeking a development plan
amendment should be evaluated on how effectively each proposal:
(A)   Establishes an integrated management plan to minimize the need for and
the use of fertilizers and biocides;
(B)   Conducts modeling studies which reflect unique site characteristics to
evaluate the risk of fertilizer or biocide leaching or runoff from the project
into water resources or wetland areas;
(C)   Establishes a groundwater monitoring plan and system in accordance with
State department of health guidelines. Such a plan may include, at a minimum,
groundwater, surface water, and, if applicable, near shore water monitoring
programs, at least one year before the commencement of construction to
establish baseline data regarding water quality. Such periodic water monitoring
may continue for at least one year after the completion of construction and
commencement of golf course operations in accordance with the requirements of
the department of health. All reports and data are to be submitted to the
department of health, to the board of water supply, and to the department of
planning and permitting;
(D)   Establishes a solid waste disposal plan, that includes lawn and landscape
trimmings disposal, emphasizing on-site use and disposal of such waste;
(E)   Promotes water conservation by using nonpotable water sources for
irrigation in the following priority:
(i)   Secondary-treated effluent from a municipal wastewater treatment plant;
(ii)   Secondary or tertiary-treated effluent from a private wastewater
treatment plant; and
(iii)   Brackish groundwater, nonpotable surface water, including the
establishment and use of runoff catchment basins, or partially desalinated
water.
All golf course water source and irrigation plans shall be subject to the
review and approval of the board of water supply, which may regulate or
prohibit introducing lower quality irrigation water above higher quality
subsurface water;
(F)   Designs the golf course to maximize the use of natural drainage, to
recharge the aquifer and to alleviate the need for stream channelization, and
other former drainage systems in nearby areas;
(G)   Protects or supports, or both, existing wetlands and fish and wildlife
habitats;
(H)   Protects streams, rivers, and coastal waters from runoff. Minimizes
runoff during the grading and construction of the golf course. Emphasizes the
concept of target golfing to minimize the need for grading and biocide use.
Protects and preserves natural vegetation to the greatest extent practicable.
Uses vegetation buffers to protect water resources. Provides landscaping with
indigenous flora appropriate to the setting and in recognition of water
conservation principles;
(I)   Provides for the employment of a golf course superintendent who shall be
responsible for sound and integrated golf course management practices.
Consideration shall be given to the level of education and training of the
superintendent including whether the superintendent is:
(i)   A certified golf course superintendent of the Golf Course Superintendents
Association of America who meets the association’s continuing education/
certificate requirements, or is actively seeking such certification within
three years from employment as a golf course superintendent; and
(ii)   Licensed or certificated to use fertilizers and pesticides on golf
courses from the State agency regulating the use and application of fertilizers
and pesticides or is actively seeking such license or certification;
Provides monitoring and reporting of the types, amounts, locations, and
application techniques of any pesticide, herbicide, or fungicide use on a golf
course. Submits quarterly biocide use reports to the department of agriculture,
the department of health, the board of water supply, and the department of
planning and permitting. Prepares contingency plans to rectify potentially
harmful occurrences due to accidents, injudicious use or other management
failures; and
(J)   Conforms to the Oahu water management plan.
(c)   Community integration program. The director of planning and permitting is
authorized to enter into preliminary discussions with the golf course developer
and the community concerning the establishment of a community integration
program. Such a program may include but is not limited to the following
elements:
(1)   An employment program to ensure that local job applicants possess the
requisite skills and are given full consideration for all employment
opportunities associated with the golf course project;
(2)   Public play on the golf course at affordable rates and at convenient
times to the golfing public;
(3)   A junior golf program;
(4)   The availability of clubhouse facilities and any other amenities for
public use;
(5)   The establishment of hiking, biking, and jogging paths around the
perimeter of the project; and
(6)   The consideration of local suppliers of obtaining developmental,
operational, and maintenance materials for the golf course development project.
A proposal to provide a community integration program by a golf course
developer is to be review and accepted by the city council at the time of a
decision to rezone or to issue a plan review use permit authorizing a golf
course in accordance with its development plan designation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 1, § 24-1.15) (Added by Ord. 91-82; Am. Ord. 94-26)
ARTICLE 2: PRIMARY URBAN CENTER
Sections
   
24-2.1   Definitions
   
24-2.2   Applicability and intent
   
24-2.3   Adoption of the Primary Urban Center development plan
   
24-2.4   Existing zoning and subdivision ordinances, approvals, and
applications
   
24-2.5   Consistency
   
24-2.6   Implementation
   
24-2.7   Zone change applications
   
24-2.8   Annual capital improvement program review
   
24-2.9   Ten-year review
   
24-2.10   Authority
   
24-2.11   Severability
   
24-2.12   Conflicting provisions
Editor’s note:
   “May 2, 2025” is substituted for “the effective date of this ordinance.”
§ 24-2.1 Definitions.
   Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions govern the
construction of this article.
Department or Department of Planning and Permitting. The department of planning
and permitting of the city.
Development. Any public improvement project, or any public or private project
requiring a zoning map amendment.
Development Plan or Sustainable Communities Plan. A plan document for a given
geographic area that consists of conceptual schemes for implementing and
accomplishing the development objectives and policies of the general plan for
the several parts of the city.
Director. The director of planning and permitting.
Environmental Assessment or EA. A written evaluation prepared in compliance
with the environmental council’s procedural rules and regulations implementing
HRS Chapter 343 to determine whether an action may have a significant
environmental effect.
Environmental Impact Statement or EIS. An informational document prepared in
compliance with the environmental council’s procedural rules and regulations
implementing HRS Chapter 343, which discloses the environmental effects of a
proposed action, effects of a proposed action on the economic and social
welfare of the community and State, effects of the economic activities arising
out of the proposed action, measures proposed to minimize adverse effects, and
alternatives to the action and their environmental effects.
Finding of No Significant Impact or FONSI. A determination based on an
environmental assessment that the subject actions will not have a significant
effect, and therefore will not require the preparation of an environmental
impact statement.
Functional Plan. The public facility and infrastructure plans prepared by
public agencies to further implement the vision, policies, and guidelines set
forth in the Primary Urban Center Development Plan.
General Plan. The general plan of the city as defined by Charter § 6-1508.
Planning Commission. The planning commission of the city.
Project Master Plan. A conceptual plan that covers all phases of a development
project. The project master plan consists of that portion of an environmental
assessment or environmental impact statement that illustrates and describes how
the project conforms to the vision for the Primary Urban Center, and the
relevant policies and guidelines for the site, the surrounding lands, and the
region.
PUC DP. The Primary Urban Center Development Plan attached hereto as Exhibit A
and made a part hereof.
Significant Zone Change. A zone change that involves at least one of the
following:
(1)   Any change in zoning of 10 or more acres of land to a low-density
apartment zoning district from a less intensive zoning district;
(2)   Any change in zoning of two or more acres of land to a medium-density or
high-density apartment zoning district from a less intensive zoning district;
(3)   Any change in zoning of five or more acres of land to the resort,
business, industrial, apartment mixed use, business mixed use, or industrial
mixed use zoning district from a less intensive zoning district; or
(4)   Any development that would have a major social, environmental, or policy
impact, or major cumulative impacts due to a series of applications in the same
area.
Special Area or Adaptation Area. A designated area within the Primary Urban
Center Development Plan area that requires detailed planning efforts beyond
what is contained in the Primary Urban Center Development Plan.
Special Area Plan. A plan for a special area or adaptation area.
Unilateral Agreement. A conditional zoning agreement made pursuant to §
21-2.80 or any predecessor or successor provision that imposes conditions on a
landowner or developer’s use of the property at the time of the enactment of an
ordinance for a zoning change.
Vision. The future outlook for the Primary Urban Center region extending out to
the year 2040 and beyond that entails the creation of a community growth
boundary; an open space network to protect and enhance the region’s
environmental, cultural and scenic resources; smart, livable, neighborhoods
with a range of housing choices; an efficient and balanced transportation
network; and provision of adequate infrastructure and community facilities to
address the anticipated impacts of climate change and to meet the Primary Urban
Center’s future needs.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.1) (Added by Ord. 25-16)
§ 24-2.2 Applicability and intent.
(a)   The Primary Urban Center Development Plan includes the coastal plain that
extends along O‘ahu’s southern shore from Wa‘alae-Kāhala in the east to Pearl
City in the west, and from the shoreline to the westerly slopes of the Ko‘olau
mountain range.
(b)   It is the intent of the Primary Urban Center Development Plan to provide
a guide for orderly and coordinated public and private sector development in a
manner that is consistent with applicable general plan provisions, including
the full development of the Primary Urban Center through higher-density
redevelopment in urban areas designated for such uses, and the concentration of
economic activity and government services.
(c)   This article and the Primary Urban Center Development Plan are not
regulatory. Rather, they are established with the explicit intent of providing
a coherent vision to guide all new public and private sector development within
the Primary Urban Center. This article guides any development for the Primary
Urban Center, public investment in infrastructure, zoning and other regulatory
procedures, and the preparation of the city’s annual capital improvement
program budget.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.2) (Added by Ord. 25-16)
§ 24-2.3 Adoption of the Primary Urban Center development plan.
(a)   This article is adopted pursuant to Charter § 6-1509 and provides a self-
contained development plan document for the Primary Urban Center. Upon May 2,
2025, all proposed developments will be evaluated against how well they fulfill
the vision for the Primary Urban Center enunciated in the Primary Urban Center
Development Plan and how closely they satisfy the policies and guidelines
selected to implement that vision.
(b)   The plan entitled, “Primary Urban Center Development Plan,” attached to
this ordinance as Exhibit A, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this article.
(c)   Chapter 24, Article 1, entitled “Development Plan Common Provisions,” in
its entirety, is no longer applicable to the Primary Urban Center Development
Plan area. This article and the Primary Urban Center Development Plan, as
adopted by reference in this article, supersedes any and all common provisions
previously applicable to the Primary Urban Center area.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.3) (Added by Ord. 25-16)
§ 24-2.4 Existing zoning and subdivision ordinances, approvals, and
applications.
(a)   All existing subdivisions and zoning approved prior to May 2, 2025 for
projects, including but not limited to those subject to unilateral agreements,
continue to remain in effect following the enactment of this ordinance.
(b)   Subdivision and zoning ordinances applicable to the Primary Urban Center
Development Plan area enacted prior to May 2, 2025 continue to regulate the use
of land within demarcated zones of the Primary Urban Center Development Plan
area until such time as the subdivision and zoning ordinances may be amended to
be consistent with the revised Primary Urban Center Development Plan.
(c)   Notwithstanding adoption of the Primary Urban Center Development Plan,
applications for subdivision actions and land use permits accepted by the
department for processing prior to May 2, 2025 continue to be subject only to
applicable ordinances and rules and regulations in effect at the time the
application is accepted as complete for processing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.4) (Added by Ord. 25-16)
§ 24-2.5 Consistency.
(a)   In the performance of their prescribed powers, duties, and functions, all
city agencies shall conform to and implement the policies and provisions of
this article and the Primary Urban Center Development Plan. Pursuant to Charter
§ 6-1511.3, public improvement projects, subdivision, and zoning ordinances
must be consistent with the Primary Urban Center Development Plan.
(b)   Any questions of interpretation regarding the consistency of a proposed
development with the provisions of the Primary Urban Center Development Plan
and the objectives and policies of the general plan will ultimately be resolved
by the council.
(c)   In determining whether a proposed development is consistent with the
Primary Urban Center Development Plan, the responsible agency shall primarily
take into consideration the extent to which the development is consistent with
the vision, goals, policies, and guidelines set forth in the Primary Urban
Center Development Plan.
(d)   Whenever there is a question regarding consistency between existing
subdivision or zoning ordinances, including any unilateral agreement, and the
Primary Urban Center Development Plan, the existing subdivision or zoning
ordinances will prevail until such time as they may be amended to be consistent
with the Primary Urban Center Development Plan.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.5) (Added by Ord. 25-16)
§ 24-2.6 Implementation.
   Implementation of this article relating to the Primary Urban Center
development plan will be accomplished by the following:
(1)   Initiating amendments to zoning maps and the Revised Ordinances of
Honolulu to achieve consistency with the vision, goals, policies, and
guidelines of the Primary Urban Center Development Plan;
(2)   Guiding public investment in infrastructure through functional plans that
support the vision of the Primary Urban Center Development Plan;
(3)   Guiding development in special areas of critical concern through the
formation of special area plans; and
(4)   Incorporating the Primary Urban Center Development Plan priorities
through the public infrastructure map, and the city’s annual budget process.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.6) (Added by Ord. 25-16)
§ 24-2.7 Zone change applications.
(a)   All zone change applications relating to land in the Primary Urban Center
Development Plan area will be reviewed by the department for consistency with
the general plan, the Primary Urban Center Development Plan, and any applicable
special area plan.
(1)   The director shall recommend either approval, approval with changes, or
denial. The director’s written review of the application will become part of
the zone change report, which will be sent to the planning commission and the
city council.
(2)   A project master plan must be part of an EA or EIS for any project
involving a significant zone change. The director shall review the project
master plan for its consistency with the Primary Urban Center Development Plan.
(3)   Any development or phase of development already covered by a project
master plan that has been fully reviewed under the provisions of this article
does not require a new project master plan; provided that the director
determines the proposed zone change is generally consistent with the existing
project master plan for the affected area.
(4)   If a final EIS has already been accepted for a development, including one
accepted prior to May 2, 2025, then a subsequent project master plan is not
required for the development.
(b)   Projects that involve a significant zone change will be required to
submit an EA to the department prior to an application for a zone change being
accepted. Any development or phase of a development that has already been
assessed under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), HRS Chapter 343
(Hawai‘i Environmental Policy Act or HEPA),
Chapter 25, or this article, and for which a FONSI has been filed or a required
EIS has been accepted, is not subject to further EA or EIS requirements under
the article, unless otherwise required by NEPA or HEPA.
(c)   The department shall review the EA, and based on review of the EA, the
director shall determine whether an EIS will be required or whether a FONSI
will be issued.
(d)   If an EIS is required, the EIS must be accepted by the director prior to
the acceptance of a zone change application.
(e)   Zone changes must be processed in accordance with this section and all
applicable requirements under
Chapter 21.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.7) (Added by Ord. 25-16)
§ 24-2.8 Annual capital improvement program review.
   Annually, the director shall work jointly with the director of budget and
fiscal services and applicable city agencies to review all projects in the
city’s capital improvement program, and budget for compliance and consistency
with the general plan, the Primary Urban Center Development Plan and other
development plans, any applicable special area plan provisions, and the
appropriate functional plans. The director shall prepare a written report of
findings to be submitted to the council in accordance with Charter § 6-1503.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.9) (Added by Ord. 25-16)
§ 24-2.9 Ten-year review.
(a)   The department shall conduct a comprehensive review of the Primary Urban
Center Development Plan, adopted by reference in §
24-2.3(b), every 10 years subsequent to May 2, 2025, and shall report its
findings and recommended revisions, if any, to the council.
(b)   The Primary Urban Center Development Plan will be evaluated to assess the
appropriateness of the plan’s regional vision, goals, policies, guidelines, and
implementing actions, as well as its consistency with the general plan.
(c)   Nothing in this section should be construed as prohibiting the processing
of a revision to the Primary Urban Center Development Plan at any time in the
event either the director or council recommends consideration of such a
revision, pursuant to the Charter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.10) (Added by Ord. 25-16)
§ 24-2.10 Authority.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed as an abridgment or delegation of
the responsibility of the director, or of the inherent legislative power of the
council, to review or revise the Primary Urban Center Development Plan pursuant
to the Charter and the procedures set forth in this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.12) (Added by Ord. 25-16)
§ 24-2.11 Severability.
   If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or
property or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity does not affect the
validity of the other provisions or applications of this article that may be
given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the
provisions of this article are declared to be severable.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.13) (Added by Ord. 25-16)
§ 24-2.12 Conflicting provisions.
   Any provision contained in this article as it pertains to land within the
Primary Urban Center Plan area, prevails should there be any conflict with the
common provisions or any other provisions under Chapter 24.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.14) (Added by Ord. 25-16)
PRIMARY URBAN CENTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN
To view Appendix A, the Primary Urban Center Development Plan, visit: https://
codelibrary.amlegal.com/preview/c/2b14d3bf-73ab-4269-aace-03bbc2107795/
25_16__plan/
ARTICLE 3: EWA
Sections
   
24-3.1   Definitions
   
24-3.2   Applicability and intent
   
24-3.3   Adoption of the Ewa development plan
   
24-3.4   Existing zoning and subdivision ordinances, approvals, and
applications
   
24-3.5   Consistency
   
24-3.6   Review of development and other applications
   
24-3.7   Zone change applications
   
24-3.8   Annual capital improvement program review
   
24-3.9   Five-year review
   
24-3.10   Authority
   
24-3.11   Severability
   
24-3.12   Conflicting provisions
§ 24-3.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Charter. The charter of the City and County of Honolulu 1973, as amended.
City. The City and County of Honolulu.
City Council or Council. The city council of the City and County of Honolulu.
County. The City and County of Honolulu.
Department or Department of Planning and Permitting. The department of planning
and permitting of the City and County of Honolulu.
Development. Any public improvement project, or any public or private project
requiring a zoning map amendment.
Development Plan or Sustainable Communities Plan. A plan document for a given
geographic area which consists of conceptual schemes for implementing and
accomplishing the development objectives and policies of the general plan for
the several parts of the City and County of Honolulu.
Director. The director of planning and permitting.
Environmental Assessment or EA. A written evaluation prepared in compliance
with the environmental council’s procedural rules implementing HRS Chapter 343
to determine whether an action may have a significant environmental effect.
Environmental Impact Statement or EIS. An informational document prepared in
compliance with the environmental council’s procedural rules implementing HRS
Chapter 343; and which discloses the environmental effects of a proposed
action, effects of a proposed action on the economic and social welfare of the
community and State, effects of the economic activities arising out of the
proposed action, measures proposed to minimize adverse effects, and
alternatives to the action and their environmental effects.
Ewa Development Plan. The Ewa Development Plan attached hereto as Exhibit A and
made a part hereof.
Finding of No Significant Impact or FONSI. A determination based on an
environmental assessment that the subject action will not have a significant
effect and, therefore, will not require the preparation of an environmental
impact statement.
Functional Plan. The public facility and infrastructure plans prepared by
public agencies to further implement the vision, policies, and guidelines set
forth in the Ewa Development Plan.
General Plan. The general plan of the City and County of Honolulu as defined by
Charter § 6-1508.
Hawaii Revised Statutes or HRS. Hawaii Revised Statutes, as amended.
Planning Commission. The planning commission of the City and County of
Honolulu.
Project Master Plan. A conceptual plan that covers all phases of a development
project. The “project master plan” also describes how the project conforms to
the vision for Ewa, and the relevant policies and guidelines for the site, the
surrounding lands, and the region.
Revised Ordinances of Honolulu or ROH. Revised Ordinances of Honolulu, as
amended.
Significant Zone Change. A zone change which involves at least one of the
following:
(1)   Changes in zoning of 25 or more acres of land to any zoning district or
combination of zoning districts, excluding preservation or agricultural zoning
districts;
(2)   Any change in zoning of more than 10 acres to a residential or country
zoning district;
(3)   Any change in zoning of more than five acres to an apartment, resort,
commercial, industrial, or mixed use zoning district; or
(4)   Any development which would have a major social, environmental, or policy
impact, or major cumulative impacts due to a series of applications in the same
area.
Special Area. A designated area within the Ewa Development Plan area that
requires more detailed planning efforts beyond what is contained in the Ewa
Development Plan.
Special Area Plan. A plan for a special area.
Unilateral Agreement. A conditional zoning agreement made pursuant to §
21-2.80 or any predecessor provision that imposes conditions on a landowner or
developer’s use of the property at the time of the enactment of an ordinance
for a zoning change.
Vision. The future outlook for the Ewa region extending out to the year 2035
and beyond that entails creation of a community growth boundary and an open
space network, development of the secondary urban center with its core at
Kapolei, building of master planned communities with pedestrian and transit
orientation, protection of historic, community and natural resources, and
provision of adequate infrastructure and community facilities to meet Ewa’s
existing and future needs.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.1) (Ord. 13-26)
§ 24-3.2 Applicability and intent.
(a)   The Ewa Development Plan area encompasses the coral plain which stretches
from the northeastern end of Kunia Road down to Waipahu and Pearl Harbor, and
around the southwestern corner of Oahu along the shoreline up to Nanakuli where
the coral plain meets the moderately steep slopes of the southerly end of the
Waianae Mountain range, which form Ewa’s mauka sector.
(b)   It is the intent of the Ewa Development Plan to provide a guide for
orderly and coordinated public and private sector development in a manner that
is consistent with applicable general plan provisions, including the
designation of Ewa as the secondary urban center for Oahu and the Ewa urban
fringe areas as one of the principal areas for residential development.
(c)   The provisions of this article and the Ewa Development Plan are not
regulatory. Rather, they are established with the explicit intent of providing
a coherent vision to guide all new public and private sector development within
Ewa. This article shall guide development for Ewa, public investment in
infrastructure, zoning and other regulatory procedures, and the preparation of
the city’s annual capital improvement program budget.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.2) (Added by Ord. 13-26)
§ 24-3.3 Adoption of the Ewa development plan.
(a)   This article is adopted pursuant to Charter § 6-1509 and provides a self-
contained development plan document for Ewa. Upon enactment of this article,
all proposed developments will be evaluated against how well they fulfill the
vision for Ewa enunciated in the Ewa Development Plan and how closely they meet
the policies and guidelines selected to implement that vision.
(b)   The plan entitled, “Ewa Development Plan,” attached as Exhibit A, is
adopted by reference and made a part of
Chapter 24, Article 3.
(c)   
Chapter 24, Article 1, entitled “Development Plan Common Provisions,” in its
entirety is no longer applicable to the Ewa Development Plan area. This article
and the Ewa Development Plan, as adopted by reference by this ordinance,
supersedes any and all common provisions previously applicable to the Ewa
Development Plan area.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.3) (Added by Ord. 13-26; Am. Ord. 20-46)
§ 24-3.4 Existing zoning and subdivision ordinances, approvals, and
applications.
(a)   All existing subdivisions and zoning approved before July 22, 2013* shall
continue to remain in effect following the enactment of this ordinance.
(b)   Subdivision and zoning ordinances applicable to the Ewa Development Plan
area enacted before July 22, 2013* shall continue to regulate the use of land
within demarcated zones of the Ewa Development Plan area until such time as the
subdivision and zoning ordinances may be amended to be consistent with the Ewa
Development Plan.
(c)   Notwithstanding adoption of the Ewa Development Plan, applications for
subdivision actions and land use permits accepted by the department for
processing before July 22, 2013* shall continue to be subject only to
applicable ordinances and rules in effect when the application is accepted for
processing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.4) (Added by Ord. 13-26)
Editor’s note:
   * “July 22, 2013” is substituted for “the effective date of this ordinance.”
§ 24-3.5 Consistency.
(a)   The performance of prescribed powers, duties, and functions by all city
agencies shall conform to and implement the policies and provisions of this
article and the Ewa Development Plan. Pursuant to Charter § 6-1511.3, public
improvement projects and subdivision and zoning ordinances shall be consistent
with the Ewa Development Plan, as adopted.
(b)   Any questions of interpretation regarding the consistency of a proposed
development with the provisions of the Ewa Development Plan and the objectives
and policies of the general plan shall ultimately be resolved by the council.
(c)   In determining whether a proposed development is consistent with the Ewa
Development Plan, the responsible agency shall primarily take into
consideration the extent to which the development is consistent with the
vision, policies, and guidelines set forth in the Ewa Development Plan.
(d)   Whenever there is a question regarding consistency between existing
subdivision or zoning ordinances, including any unilateral agreements, and the
Ewa Development Plan, the existing subdivision or zoning ordinances shall
prevail until such time as they may be amended to be consistent with the Ewa
Development Plan.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.5) (Added by Ord. 13-26)
§ 24-3.6 Review of development and other applications.
   The review of applications for zone changes and other development approvals
will be guided by the vision of the Ewa Development Plan. Decisions on all
proposed developments shall be based on the extent to which the project enabled
by the development approval supports the policies and guidelines of the Ewa
Development Plan.
   The director may review other applications for improvements to land to help
the responsible agency determine whether a proposed improvement supports the
policies and guidelines of the Ewa Development Plan.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.6) (Added by Ord. 13-26)
§ 24-3.7 Zone change applications.
(a)   All zone change applications relating to land in the Ewa Development Plan
area will be reviewed by the department for consistency with the general plan,
the Ewa Development Plan, and any applicable special area plan.
(1)   The director will recommend either approval, approval with changes, or
denial. The director’s written review of the application shall become part of
the zone change report which will be sent to the planning commission and the
city council.
(2)   A project master plan shall be part of an EA or EIS for any project
involving 25 acres or more of land. The director shall review the project
master plan for its consistency with the Ewa Development Plan.
(3)   Any development or phase of development already covered by a project
master plan which has been fully reviewed under this article shall not require
a new project master plan, provided the director determines that the proposed
zone change is generally consistent with the existing project master plan for
the affected area.
(4)   If a final EIS has already been accepted for a development, including one
accepted before July 22, 2013,* then a subsequent project master plan shall not
be required for the development.
(b)   Projects which involve a significant zone change shall be required to
submit an environmental assessment to the department of planning and permitting
before an application for a zone change being accepted. Any development or
phase of a development which has already been assessed under the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), HRS Chapter 343 (Hawai’i Environmental Policy
Act, HEPA), ROH
Chapter 25, or this article, and for which a FONSI has been filed or a required
EIS has been accepted, shall not be subject to further EA or EIS requirements
under this chapter unless otherwise required by NEPA or HEPA.
(c)   The EA shall be reviewed by the department. Based on review of the EA,
the director will determine whether an EIS will be required or whether a FONSI
may be issued.
(d)   If an EIS is required, the EIS must be accepted by the director before a
zone change application shall be initiated.
(e)   Zone changes shall be processed in accordance with this section, Section
5.4 of the Ewa Development Plan, and
Chapter 21.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.7) (Added by Ord. 13-26)
Editor’s note:
   * “July 22, 2013” is substituted for “the effective date of this ordinance.”
§ 24-3.8 Annual capital improvement program review.
   Annually, the director shall work jointly with the director of budget and
fiscal services and the city agencies to review all projects in the city’s
capital improvement program and budget for compliance and consistency with the
general plan, the Ewa Development Plan and other development plans, any
applicable special area plan provisions, and the appropriate functional plans.
The director of planning and permitting will prepare a written report of
findings to be submitted to the council in accordance with Charter § 6-1503.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.8) (Added by Ord. 13-26)
§ 24-3.9 Five-year review.
(a)   The department of planning and permitting shall conduct a comprehensive
review of the Ewa Development Plan, adopted by reference in §
24-3.3(b), every five years after the plan’s adoption and shall report its
findings and recommended revisions to the council.
(b)   The Ewa Development Plan will be evaluated to assess the appropriateness
of the plan’s regional vision, policies, guidelines, and implementing actions,
as well as its consistency with the general plan.
(c)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the processing
of a revision to the Ewa Development Plan in the event either the biennial
report of the director of planning and permitting or council recommends
consideration of such a revision, pursuant to the Charter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.9) (Added by Ord. 13-26)
§ 24-3.10 Authority.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed as an abridgement or delegation
of the responsibility of the director, or of the inherent legislative power of
the city council, to review or revise the Ewa Development Plan pursuant to the
city charter and the above procedures.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.10) (Added by Ord. 13-26)
§ 24-3.11 Severability.
   If this article or the application thereof to any person or property or
circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this article which can be given effect without
the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this
article are declared to be severable.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.11) (Added by Ord. 13-26)
§ 24-3.12 Conflicting provisions.
   This article shall prevail should there be any conflict with any other
provisions under
Chapter 24.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.12) (Added by Ord. 13-26)
‘EWA DEVELOPMENT PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9134.png]
 
PREFACE AND EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
PREFACE
The ‘Ewa Development Plan has been prepared in accordance with the Charter-
prescribed requirements for development plans and is to be accorded force and
effect as such for all Charter- and ordinance-prescribed purposes.
It is one of a set of eight community-based plans intended to guide public
policy, infrastructure investment, and land use decision-making over the next
25 years. Each plan addresses one of eight planning areas of O‘ahu, responding
to specific conditions and community values of each region. The map on the
following page illustrates these planning regions.
The plans for ‘Ewa and the Primary Urban Center, as the areas where the General
Plan says population growth and development activity is to be directed over the
next 25 years, are designated as “Development Plans.”
Plans for the remaining six areas, which are envisioned as relatively stable
regions for which public actions will focus on supporting existing populations,
have been entitled “Sustainable Communities Plans” to indicate the intent to
focus on retaining and sustaining the unique qualities and characteristics of
each of these areas.
THE DEVELOPMENT PLAN FIVE YEAR REVIEW PROCESS
This Plan is a revision of the ‘Ewa Development Plan which was adopted by the
City Council in 1997. The 1997 ‘Ewa Development Plan was the first of the eight
plans to be revised in response to a 1992 City Charter amendment which changed
the nature of the Development Plans from relatively detailed, parcel-specific
plans to conceptual, visionary plans.
As amended in 2000, the Plan is to be reviewed every five years to determine
if:
   •    The Plan vision, implementing land use and infrastructure policies, and
implementation methods are still appropriate:
   •   The purpose of the Plan’s phasing guidelines is being achieved; and
   •   The phasing priorities in the Plan should be revised.
This document is the culmination of a community-based planning effort led by
the Department of Planning and Permitting which involved public meetings and
workshops, interviews, focus groups, and numerous meetings over the past six
years.
In its final form, the Plan incorporates and responds to comments received from
public outreach to community leaders, business and labor representatives,
landowners, developers, and public and private agency staff through a variety
of formats since 2002.
The ‘Ewa Development Plan Review Report provides documentation of the comments
and suggestions received, and details the Department’s assessments of what
revisions or implementation recommendations should be made as a result.
   Exhibit ES-1
   Development Plan and Sustainable Communities Plan Areas for O‘ahu
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9136.png]
 
A SUSTAINABLE FUTURE FOR O‘AHU
There has been a recent surge in widespread community discussions, actions and
laws adopted to address sustainability. In 2005, the State Legislature convened
a statewide group to draft a Hawai‘i 2050 Plan, whose primary purpose is to
provide policy recommendations for creating a sustainable Hawaii. In 2007,
greenhouse gas emissions goals for 2020 were enacted. Public service
announcements dealing with conserving water and electricity abound. The concept
of buildings that are designed, built and occupied with environmental
considerations at the forefront largely did not exist when the current
Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans were adopted. This setting
raises the question of the role of the Development Plans and Sustainable
Communities Plans. Are they the City’s version of a sustainability plan?
The answer is that they are the land development portion of a larger blueprint
for sustainability. As discussed below, the General Plan sets long term goals
for the City and County of Honolulu, across 11 major elements. Perhaps its most
substantive chapter deals with population, and hence land development
distribution. It sets the growth management strategy for O‘ahu. The Development
Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans provide more detail on this land
management strategy, assuring that how we use the land now, and in the future,
responds to the three major elements of a Sustainable Place: economic health,
social equity, and environmental protection.
Since 1977, the City’s policy, as adopted by the City Council in the O‘ahu
General Plan, has been to “keep the Country country” by fully developing
downtown Honolulu from Pearl City to Kahala, by building O‘ahu’s Second City in
‘Ewa, and by developing surrounding suburban “urban fringe” areas in ‘Ewa and
Central O‘ahu. Millions of dollars of taxpayers’ monies have been paid for
roadways, schools, sewers, water systems, and other infrastructure to support
this pattern of development.
Our most recent projections show that O‘ahu will need over 88,000 new homes to
meet expected population growth between 2005 and 2035. The General Plan, and
the Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans adopted by the City
Council to implement the General Plan provide capacity for most new homes to be
built either in downtown Honolulu, ‘Ewa, or Central O‘ahu.
Inevitably, this requires that some prime agricultural land in ‘Ewa inside the
Community Growth Boundary be used to provide the required single and multi-
family housing (even though the ‘Ewa Development Plan does protect some 3,000
acres of prime agricultural land outside the Community Growth Boundary). The
loss of prime agricultural land in ‘Ewa is the cost of insuring that the rural
areas in Wai‘anae, North Shore, and the Windward side and along Kunia Road in
Central O‘ahu are protected against development.
The issues addressed either directly or indirectly by these regional plans
certainly overlap with other planning responsibilities of other departments,
such as water delivery and consumption, crime reduction, increasing public
health, and developing responsive transportation systems. Collectively, these
efforts comprise the strategy of developing a Sustainable Future for O‘ahu.
INTEGRATING PRINCIPLES OF SUSTAINABILITY INTO DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES
A community that can successfully manage change will flourish and prosper in
the future. For this plan, this means ensuring that planned growth and
development respects and adheres to the principles of sustainability.
These principles of sustainability are intended to promote the long-term health
of O‘ahu, its people, and its community resources for current and future
generations:
   •   Protect lands designated for agriculture, physical and biological
resources, and where appropriate, open spaces and view planes.
   •   Use resources so they are not depleted, permanently damaged or
destroyed.
   •   Encourage planning, development, and construction technologies that
minimize negative environmental impacts.
   •   Respect the cultural, social and physical resources that shape and
reinforce residents’ sense of community and quality of life.
   •   Guide the process of change. Strive to make decisions based on an
understanding of the effects such decision will have on the land and community
resources.
   •   Strive for balance between economic prosperity, social and community
well-being, and environmental stewardship.
   •   As an integral part of the planning process, consider the long-term
impact of proposed actions and prepare plans that can accommodate the needs of
future generations accordingly.
THE HONOLULU LAND USE PLANNING AND MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
The City and County of Honolulu guides and directs O‘ahu land use and
development through a three-tier system:
   •   The General Plan forms the first tier of this system. First adopted by
resolution in 1977, the General Plan is a relatively brief document, consisting
primarily of one-sentence statements of objectives and policies. It has been
amended several times, but the basic objectives and policies set forth in the
1977 plan remain intact.
   •   The second tier of the system is formed by the Development Plans and
Sustainable Communities Plans, which are adopted and revised by ordinance.
These plans address eight geographic regions of the island, including the
Primary Urban Center, ‘Ewa, Central O‘ahu, Wai‘anae, North Shore, Ko‘olau Loa,
Ko‘olau Poko, and East Honolulu.
   •   The third tier of the system is composed of implementing ordinances and
regulations, including the Land Use Ordinance (Honolulu’s zoning code), the
Subdivision Rules and Regulations, and the City’s Capital Improvement Program.
Mandated by the City Charter, these ordinances and regulations constitute the
principal means for implementing the City’s plans. These ordinances and
regulations are required to be consistent with the General Plan, the
Development Plans, and each other.
In addition, the Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans are
supplemented by two planning mechanisms that are not mentioned in the Charter:
   •   Functional plans (such as the O‘ahu Regional Transportation Plan or the
O‘ahu Water Management Plan), some of which are mandated by state or federal
regulations, provide long-range guidance for the development of public
facilities and infrastructure; and
   •   Special Area Plans (such as the Waipahū Town Plan or the Wahiawā Urban
Design Plan) give specific guidance for neighborhoods, communities or
specialized resource areas.
AUTHORITY OF THE DEVELOPMENT AND SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLANS
The authority of the Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans
(hereinafter referred to as “Development Plans” for simplicity) is derived from
the City Charter, which mandates preparation of a General Plan and Development
Plans to guide “the development and improvement of the city.”
Together with the General Plan, the Development Plans provide policies to guide
land use and budgetary actions of the City and to evaluate progress toward the
General Plan objectives.
The Charter provides that “public improvement projects and subdivision and
zoning ordinances shall be consistent with the development plan for that area.”
Although the Development Plans are not themselves regulatory and require
implementing ordinances (the “third tier” discussed in the previous section),
they provide guidance that decision makers and administrators should follow, to
the extent it is sensible, in approving project development and in revising
rules and regulations and standard policies. They are policy tools that are to
be used, in conjunction with the programs and budgets of the City, to
accomplish the objectives of the City and as guides for decisions made by the
private sector. Consistent with the Charter’s description of the Development
Plans as “conceptual schemes” and “a policy guide,” the language, maps, and
illustrations of the Development Plans should not be deemed to be regulatory.
The plans are also intended to aid decisions made in the private sector by
clearly indicating what the City’s development priorities are, where
development is appropriate, and what kinds of development are appropriate in
each location. The 1992 Charter amendments established that the purpose of the
Development Plans is to provide:
   •   “priorities ... (for the) coordination of major development activities;”
and
   •   sufficient description of the “desired urban character and the
significant natural, scenic and cultural resources ... to serve as a policy
guide for more detailed zoning maps and regulations and public and private
sector investment decisions.”
The revised plan presented in this document conforms to that mandate.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This plan is organized in five chapters and an appendix, as follows:
   •   Chapter 1: ‘Ewa’s Role in O‘ahu’s Development Pattern defines the ‘Ewa’s
role and identity within the overall framework of island wide planning and
development;
   •   Chapter 2: The Vision for ‘Ewa’s Future summarizes the community-based
vision for ‘Ewa’s future, discusses key elements of that vision, and presents
illustrative maps and tables;
   •   Chapter 3: Land Use Policies, and Guidelines provides the land use
policies needed to implement the vision for ‘Ewa described in Chapter 2;
   •   Chapter 4: Public Facilities and Infrastructure Policies and Guidelines
provides the infrastructure policies needed to implement the vision for ‘Ewa
described in Chapter 2;
   •   Chapter 5: Implementation identifies the means through which the
policies will be applied, including zone changes, and infrastructure budgeting
and development; and
   •   Appendix A includes:
      °   Four conceptual maps (Open Space, Urban Land Use, Public Facilities,
and Phasing) which illustrate the vision and policies of the Plan; and
      °   A glossary of terms used on those maps.
The following summarizes the vision, and lists the land use and infrastructure
policies of the Plan and the means of implementation.
‘EWA’S ROLE IN O‘AHU’S DEVELOPMENT PATTERN
   •   Provides a second urban center for O‘ahu with its nucleus in the City of
Kapolei and job centers in resort areas, industrial areas, and the University
of Hawaii West O‘ahu;
   •   Provides a wide range of master planned residential areas to relieve
developmental pressures on O‘ahu’s rural areas and to provide housing types not
readily provided in the Primary Urban Center (Kahala to Pearl City);
   •   Protects and promotes diversified agriculture on prime agricultural
lands along Kunia Road and in the Explosive Safety Quantity Distance arc around
the Pearl Harbor West Loch Naval Munitions Command; and
   •   Provides resort areas at Ko ‘Olina and at Ocean Pointe.
THE VISION TO 2035
   •   Population growth from 68,700 in 2000 to over 164,000;
   •   Addition of over 35,000 new homes to the 20,800 homes in ‘Ewa in 2000;
   •   Job growth from 16,400 non-construction jobs in 2000 to over 87,000;
   •   Growth of the City of Kapolei to include over 8,000 residents and
provide almost 20,000 private and public non-construction jobs;
   •   Development of the University of Hawaii West O‘ahu campus to serve 7,600
students and employ 1,040 staff and faculty by 2025; and
   •   Resort development at Ko ‘Olina and at Ocean Pointe to include over
7,200 visitor units.
ELEMENTS OF THE VISION
   •   Protect Agricultural Land and Open Space by containing all urban growth
within the existing Community Growth Boundary, and creating an open space
network within the Community Growth Boundary by linking together open space
areas with greenways;
   •   Develop the Secondary Urban Center to provide jobs at the City of
Kapolei, Ko ‘Olina Resort, the University of Hawaii West O‘ahu campus, and
industrial and commercial areas throughout ‘Ewa so an increasing share of
Leeward O‘ahu residents will not have to commute to downtown Honolulu;
   •   Build Master Planned Residential Communities that Support Walking,
Biking and Transit Use;
   •   Protect Natural, Historic, and Cultural Resources; and
   •   Provide Adequate Infrastructure to meet the needs of new and existing
development.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
Chapter Three provides land use development policies and implementing
guidelines for:
   •   Open Space Preservation and Development;
   •   Regional Parks and Recreation Complexes;
   •   Community-Based Parks;
   •   Historic and Cultural Resources;
   •   City of Kapolei;
   •   ‘Ewa Villages;
   •   Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei;
   •   Existing and Planned Residential Communities;
   •   Planned Commercial Retail Centers;
   •   Ko ‘Olina Resort;
   •   Industrial Centers;
   •   Kalaeloa;
   •   Pearl Harbor Naval Station (West Loch); and
   •   University of Hawai‘i West O‘ahu.
Chapter Four contains infrastructure policies and implementing guidelines,
including policies on:
   •   Transportation Systems;
   •   Water Allocation and System Development;
   •   Wastewater Treatment;
   •   Electrical Power Development;
   •   Solid Waste Handling and Disposal;
   •   Drainage Systems;
   •   School Facilities;
   •   Public Safety Facilities; and
   •   Other Community Facilities.
Chapter Five describes the means for implementing the ‘Ewa Development Plan
through:
   •   Focusing residential and non-residential development to areas within the
Community Growth Boundary;
   •   Guiding development within areas of critical concern with Special Area
Plans;
   •   Incorporating the Plan vision and policies in the review of zone changes
and other land use approvals and in establishing conditions for these land use
approvals which will help ensure the vision and policies are implemented;
   •   Incorporating the Plan vision and policies in the review of projects to
be added to the Public Infrastructure Map and funded through the Capital
Improvement Program budget;
   •   Evaluating progress made in fulfilling the Plan vision every two years
as part of the mandated Biennial Report; and
   •   Conducting an evaluative review of the Plan vision, policies and
implementation five years after the adoption of the revised Plan.
CHAPTER 1.   ‘EWA’S ROLE IN O‘AHU’S DEVELOPMENT PATTERN
‘Ewa plays a key role in implementing the directed growth policies of the
General Plan of the City and County of Honolulu (City). Campbell Industrial
Park opened in the early 1960’s, bringing industry and jobs to the Leeward
Coast, which previously had been predominantly a sugar economy and plantation
lifestyle. In the 1970’s, residential growth began in ‘Ewa with the development
of Makakilo and ‘Ewa Beach.
In 1977, the Honolulu City Council approved a new General Plan, which
designated ‘Ewa as the location for a Secondary Urban Center for O‘ahu to be
centered in the Kapolei area. The Secondary Urban Center was to be the focus of
major economic activity and housing development, and a center for government
services. While the General Plan promotes full development of the Primary Urban
Center (PUC), it also encourages development of the Secondary Urban Center at
Kapolei, and residential development of the urban fringe areas in ‘Ewa and
Central O‘ahu.
This revision of the ‘Ewa Development Plan reaffirms that role and amplifies
how the role can be accomplished. In support of the General Plan policies, the
‘Ewa Development Plan:
   •   Provides a secondary employment center with its nucleus in the City of
Kapolei to supplement the PUC and to divert commuter traffic from the PUC;
   •   Concentrates primary employment activities at industrial and resort
areas and at government service and higher education centers around the City of
Kapolei so that regional office and retail activities are attracted to the City
of Kapolei;
   •   Provides for significant residential development throughout ‘Ewa,
consistent with the General Plan, to meet the needs of O‘ahu’s citizens;
   •   Provides for a variety of housing types from affordable units and
starter homes to mid-size and larger multi-family and single-family units;
   •   Promotes diversified agriculture on prime agricultural lands along Kunia
Road and surrounding the West Loch Naval Magazine in accordance with the
General Plan policy to support agricultural diversification in all designated
agricultural areas on O‘ahu;
   •   Provides a secondary resort area at Ko ‘Olina;
   •   Helps relieve urban development pressures on rural and urban fringe
Sustainable Communities Plan (SCP) areas (Wai‘anae, North Shore, Ko‘olau Loa,
Ko‘olau Poko, and East Honolulu) so as to preserve the “country” lifestyle of
the rural areas and sustain the stable, low density residential character of
the urban fringe areas; and
   •   Provides, along with the PUC, a focus for directed and concentrated
public and private infrastructure investment to support growth.
   Exhibit 1.1
   Development Plan and Sustainable Communities Plan Areas for O‘ahu
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9138.png]
 
CHAPTER 2.   THE VISION FOR ‘EWA’S FUTURE
This chapter presents a statement of the vision for ‘Ewa’s future, discusses
the key elements of the vision, and presents illustrative maps and tables.
2.1   VISION STATEMENT
This vision for ‘Ewa has two horizons. The first horizon extends from the
present to the year 2035. This horizon was used to project likely socio-
economic change in ‘Ewa and to assess the infrastructure and public facility
needs that will have to be met over that period.
The Vision to 2035 - By 2035, the ‘Ewa Development Plan area shown in
Exhibit 1.1 will have experienced tremendous growth, and will have made
significant progress toward providing a Secondary Urban Center for O ‘ahu.
Population will have grown from 68,700 people in 2000 to over 164,000. Between
2000 and 2035, over 35,000 new housing units will have been built in a series
of master planned communities.
Job growth will be equally impressive, rising from 16,400 non-construction jobs
in 2000 to over 87,000 in 2035. O‘ahu residents and visitors will be attracted
to ‘Ewa by a new university campus, the Ko ‘Olina Resort, the Hoakalei Resort,
a major super regional park, and a thriving City of Kapolei which has retail
and commercial establishments and private and government offices.
Beyond 2035 - In the course of the Development Plan revision in 1995, it became
clear that there was value in looking beyond the planning horizon to identify
what ‘Ewa should look like when “fully” developed.
Such a perspective helped identify where open space should be preserved within
the urbanized area, and where to set the limits to development in ‘Ewa for the
foreseeable future. As such, this second horizon might be called the “built-
out” horizon and is probably 40 to 50 years in the future.
Protect Agricultural Lands and Open Space
Urban growth will be contained within a boundary that will protect prime
agricultural lands along Kunia Road and within the Pearl Harbor Naval Munitions
Command Explosive Safety Quantity Distance (ESQD) arc for diversified
agriculture. Preservation of prime agricultural lands mauka of H-1 and on the
Wai‘anae side of Kunia Road for use in diversified agriculture will help retain
open space and views, in addition to supporting economic diversification.
Within the Community Growth Boundary, ‘Ewa will be built around a regional
system of open space and greenways so that ‘Ewa has the feel of a network of
communities “within a garden”, as opposed to an unbroken suburban sprawl from
Ko ‘Olina to ‘Ewa Beach.
Residents of these communities will enjoy easy access to the ocean through two
major marinas, numerous beaches and a shoreline walkway from Ko ‘Olina to ‘Ewa
Beach. Those interested in boating and ocean fishing will be able to use marina
facilities and boat ramps at Ko ‘Olina, Kalaeloa, and Hoakalei.
Residents will be able to easily access beaches, swimming and surfing spots all
along the entire ‘Ewa coastline by road or a network of pedestrian paths and
bikeways. Linear shoreline access will be provided along the coast from Ko
‘Olina to ‘Ewa Beach. At its center will be a major new regional park and
recreation complex at Kalaeloa (on the former Barbers Point Naval Air Station),
which will provide access to the ocean and beaches as well as offering
significant active and passive recreation facilities.
A network of greenways will link the communities together, with landscaping
along major roads such as Kapolei Parkway, Kualaka‘i Parkway (formerly North-
South Road), and Fort Weaver Road, and pedestrian and bike paths along grassed
drainageways and utility corridors. A major pedestrian and bike path will be
provided by the Pearl Harbor Historic Trail, which extends about 18.5 miles
from the U.S.S. Arizona Visitor Center through the ‘Ewa Development Plan area
and on to Nānākuli along the OR&L Railroad right-of-way.
Open space will be preserved in parks, golf courses, and agricultural areas
that will help to protect significant public views. Wildlife habitats will be
located at Kalaeloa, Hoakalei, and West Loch.
Prime agricultural land loss. Development of jobs in the City of Kapolei and
the areas around it and creation of master planned residential communities in
the ‘Ewa Urban Fringe Areas has been a key element in the City’s growth
management strategy adopted as part of the 1977 General Plan and reinforced by
subsequent City actions approving land use plans and infrastructure investments
since 1977. It is true that the development of ‘Ewa lands within the Community
Growth Boundary has resulted in the conversion of thousands of acres of highly
productive agricultural land as the sugar plantations closed, and new homes and
job centers were developed.
However, this is the cost of protecting agricultural lands and open space in
the rural areas of O‘ahu. By focusing new job growth and residential
development in ‘Ewa, Central O‘ahu, and Honolulu’s core urban area from Pearl
City to Kahala, the vision of keeping the Country country can be achieved.
Thousands of acres of agricultural lands in the SCP areas are protected by the
Community Growth Boundaries in those plans, including 50,000 acres in the
Central O‘ahu and North Shore SCP areas and hundreds of acres in other SCP
areas including Wai‘anae, near Kahuku, in Waiāhole/Waikāne, and in Waimānalo.
Develop the Secondary Urban Center
A key component of the vision is the Secondary Urban Center, which will provide
a wide range of jobs located at visitor units and activity centers in Ko ‘Olina
and Hoakalei, in heavy and light industrial areas near the Kalaeloa Barbers
Point Deep Draft Harbor, in offices and retail centers located at the City of
Kapolei and community and neighborhood centers in residential communities, at
the University of Hawaii West O‘ahu (UHWO) campus, and in diversified
agriculture activities located along Kunia Road and around the Pearl Harbor
Naval Munitions Command.
At the heart of the Secondary Urban Center will be the City of Kapolei with an
urban mix of retail, office and residential uses. By 2035, it is projected that
the City of Kapolei will house over 8,000 residents and provide work sites for
over 17,000 private jobs and 2,400 City and State jobs (located primarily at
the City’s Civic Center and Judicial Center). The City Center will become a
regional commercial center, attracting customers from all parts of O‘ahu.
Many of the jobs in the City of Kapolei will be supported by development of the
UHWO campus, which is expected to have 7,600 students and 1,040 staff and
faculty by 2025. Continued expansion of industrial uses at Campbell Industrial
Park, Kalaeloa Barbers Point Deep Draft Harbor, and Kapolei Business Park; and
growth of the Ko ‘Olina Resort and the Hoakalei Resort to include over 7,200
visitor units by 2035 will also provide basic jobs which will support office
and retail jobs in the City of Kapolei.
Build Master Planned Residential Communities That Support Walking, Biking, and
Transit Use
Growth in ‘Ewa will mean community building, not just project development.
Substantial residential growth (over 35,500 new units between 2000 and 2035)
will occur primarily in master planned communities including the City of
Kapolei, East Kapolei (Department of Hawaiian Home Lands East Kapolei,
University of Hawaii West O‘ahu, and Ho‘opili), ‘Ewa by Gentry, ‘Ewa Villages,
Kapolei West, Ko ‘Olina, Makaīwa Hills, Makakilo, Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei, and
the Villages of Kapolei. (See
Exhibit 2.3.)
The master plans and design of new developments must demonstrate how they would
create communities that interact with neighboring communities and support the
vision for development of the entire ‘Ewa region. Such communities should be
designed with identifiable and easily accessible town and village centers or
“main street areas” and incorporate a mixture of residential and commercial
development. While not every community will have a “main street”, all should
have a community center.
These communities must be designed to meet the needs of a wide range of
families and age groups. Ample housing should be provided for families needing
affordable units and starter homes as well as for those seeking large multi-
family and single-family units. Housing for persons of all ages will be needed,
including students going to school at the UHWO campus, young families seeking
their first home, and senior citizens wanting a retirement home close to their
grandchildren. Such a desirable variety in housing types could be partially
achieved through the inclusion of “granny flats” (small, accessory apartments)
and/or “Ohana” units where infrastructure will support these additions.
Separate identities should be created for existing and planned communities by
using open space, architectural design, streetscape treatments and landscaping
which links to the regional open space and greenway network.
Communities Designed to Reduce Automobile Use - ‘Ewa will be developed with a
transportation system which reduces congestion by providing connectivity, both
within and between subdivisions, provides easy access to transit, uses traffic
calming design, and encourages people to walk and bike, reducing the need for
use of the automobile.
Where allowed by terrain, communities will be designed with multiple street/
walkway connections to adjacent communities and collector roads at approximate
1/4 mile intervals, thereby facilitating and encouraging convenient auto,
pedestrian and bikeway access to parks, schools, neighborhood shopping and
transit corridors. These connections will also reduce congestion on major
regional roads by offering multiple alternative routes and facilitate improved
neighborhood access for emergency and utility vehicles.
Medium density housing and commercial development will be built along a rail
transit corridor extending from the City of Kapolei to Waipahū and will support
efficient use of buses and other forms of mass transit along the corridor,
allowing some residents to minimize automobile use.
An elevated rail transit line will be developed on the rail transit corridor.
The first segment of the elevated rail transit line will start near the
Salvation Army Kroc Center on Kualaka‘i Parkway and continue on to Waipahū
along Kualaka‘i Parkway and Farrington Highway. Sufficient land will be
reserved to allow extension of the elevated rail transit line through Kalaeloa
to the City of Kapolei, ending near the intersection of Kapolei Parkway and the
planned extension of Hānu‘a Street. See Appendix A: Pubic Facility Map, and
Phasing Map.
Protect Natural, Historic, and Cultural Resources
The ‘Ewa Development Plan provides a vision for preservation, conservation, and
enhancement of community resources.
Natural resources will be conserved through retaining natural drainageways,
protecting valuable plant and wildlife habitats, by cleaning up contaminated
areas and by efficiently using all water supplies through conservation measures
and distribution system leak repair, by developing a dual water distribution
system with potable water for drinking and other clean water uses and non-
potable water for irrigation and industrial uses, and reclamation of non-
potable water from waste-water effluent where feasible.
Cultural and historical resources will be preserved by retaining visual
landmarks and significant views, and by preserving significant historic,
cultural, and archaeological features from ‘Ewa’s past, and by conducting
surveys to thoroughly assess the historical significance of sites and
structures affected by development projects and to identify the appropriate
measures to preserve the historic and cultural values of the resources.
Provide Adequate Infrastructure to Meet the Needs of New and Existing
Development
Public agencies will work with the community (residents, businesses,
developers, and landowners) to address current deficiencies in roads, schools,
and parks and to create adequate infrastructure to meet the needs of the
residential and working population of the area.
Completion of the first increment of the elevated rail transit line (from East
Kapolei to Ala Moana Shopping Center) is critical to the O‘ahu General Plan
policy of relieving development pressure elsewhere on O‘ahu by developing the
Second City and the Urban Fringe in ‘Ewa. It is needed to provide an effective
and reliable alternative to commuting by auto for a significant number of
commuters by 2020. Without the project, traffic delays for ‘Ewa commuters would
increase by 46% compared to today according to the Honolulu High-Capacity
Transit Corridor Project Environmental Impact Statement (p. 3-28).
Where possible and practical, construction of new development that generates
increased service demands for public schools, emergency medical services, and
roadway capacity, will be coordinated with the provision of needed
infrastructure capacity.
Public-private mechanisms for financing infrastructure such as Tax Increment
Financing (TIF) and Community Facilities Districts (CFD) should be considered
to support timely infrastructure provision.
Public agencies’ planning for infrastructure needs will be guided by the
Development Plan priorities for residential and commercial development. See the
discussion of Planned Regional Development in Section 2.2.10.
2.2   KEY ELEMENTS OF THE VISION
The vision for ‘Ewa’s future will be implemented through the following key plan
elements:
2.2.1   Community Growth Boundary
2.2.2   Retention of Agricultural Lands
2.2.3   Open Space and Greenways
2.2.4   Kalaeloa Regional Park
2.2.5   Secondary Urban Center
2.2.6   Master Planned Residential Communities
2.2.7   Communities Designed To Support Non-Automotive Travel
2.2.8   Conservation of Natural Resources
2.2.9   Preservation and Enhancement of Historic and Cultural Resources
2.2.10   Phased Development
Each of these elements is discussed in the following sections.
2.2.1   COMMUNITY GROWTH BOUNDARY
The Community Growth Boundary for ‘Ewa gives long-range protection from
urbanization for over 3,000 acres of prime agricultural land and for
preservation of open space while providing adequate land for urban development
in ‘Ewa for the foreseeable future. The Community Growth Boundary for ‘Ewa is
illustrated in
Exhibit 2.1 and shown in greater detail on the four conceptual maps in Appendix
A as described below.
   Exhibit 2.1
   Community Growth Boundary for ‘Ewa and Central O‘ahu
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9140.png]
 
Boundary Description - The mauka portion of the boundary follows the Special
Management Area boundary around Kahe Point, runs along the northern boundary of
the Makaīwa Hills project and the existing Makakilo development, and then
follows the proposed extension of Makakilo Drive to the H-1 Freeway. It then
follows the H-1 Freeway to the intersection with Kunia Road and then up Kunia
Road to the boundary between the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan and
‘Ewa Development Plan areas.
The makai portion of the boundary excludes the Explosive Safety Quantity
Distance (ESQD) zone for the Pearl Harbor Naval Munitions Command.
Protection for Prime Agricultural Land - The Community Growth Boundary protects
prime agricultural lands on the Wai‘anae side of Kunia Road and mauka of H-
1 freeway from urban development for the foreseeable future, thereby providing
an incentive for landowners to give long term leases to farmers. No proposals
for urban uses outside the Community Growth Boundary will be considered.
Open Space Network - Within the Community Growth Boundary, significant acreage
will be retained in open space in parks, wildlife habitats, golf courses, and
natural and grass-lined drainageways. (Of the estimated 23,000 acres within the
Community Growth Boundary, 5,000 acres or 22 percent of the acreage will be in
open space.)
Capacity for Growth - Even with the amount of land reserved for agriculture,
parks, and open space, there is ample capacity within the Community Growth
Boundary for residential, commercial, and industrial development extending
beyond the 20-year horizon (2035).
As shown in
Table 2.1, over 4,100 acres was available for residential development; almost
700 acres for retail and office development; and over 1,600 acres for
industrial development as of July 2009. Providing this capacity allows for
competition and promotes more affordable residential, commercial, and
industrial development.
Over 50 percent of the residential development acreage is already zoned.
Developers of these parcels can apply for subdivision, construction permit, and
building permit approvals as needed to meet market demand. However, these
projects will be subject to infrastructure capacity requirements established
through unilateral agreements and subdivision approval requirements.
An additional 19 percent of the residential development acreage is exempt from
County zoning and land use regulations. Almost 1,400 acres are controlled by
either the State Department of Hawaiian Home Lands (DHHL) or the Hawaii
Community Development Authority (HCDA) who are developing their lands under
master plans approved by the Governor. The timing and conditions of the
development of these lands are not subject to review and approval by the City
Council.
The remaining residential development acreage which is neither zoned nor exempt
will require land use approvals by the State Land Use Commission (LUC) and the
City Council before development can proceed. About 1,400 acres of the lands
indicated for development are in the State Agriculture Land Use District, and
will first have to be approved for transfer to the State Urban District by the
LUC and then have urban zoning approved by the City Council before they can be
developed.
Table 2.1 shows the projected number of housing units and the approximate gross
acreage by land use category for previously approved and proposed projects.
These represent general indicators of the land areas involved and possible
densities. In determining actual land uses and densities, project planning,
design and review of project zoning change applications should be directed by
the planning policies and guidelines provided in Chapters 3 and 4.
TABLE 2.1: ‘EWA DEVELOPMENT CAPACITY AND ENTITLEMENT STATUS
               Potential Number of Units    DEVELOPABLE LAND AREA (Gross Acres)
PROJECT AREA  Housing   which
(1)            Units     Need LUC Need ZON  Resid. Resort Retail Ind. Total
                         (2)      (3)
TABLE 2.1: ‘EWA DEVELOPMENT CAPACITY AND ENTITLEMENT STATUS
                                                        Number of      DEVELOPABLE LAND AREA (Gross
                                              Potential Units which    Acres)
PROJECT AREA (1)                             Housing   Need   Need
                                              Units     LUC    ZON     Resid. Resort Retail Ind.  Total
                                                        (2)    (3)
A   Kalaeloa Barbers Point Harbor & vicinity                                             210   210
B   City of Kapolei
      Mehana at City of Kapolei         1,130                    93            2            95
      Leihano Senior Community          714                      43                         43
      Kapolei Mixed Use (4)             4,000                                  91           91
      Kapolei Commercial (incl. Kapolei                                        91           91
Commons)
C   Ewa by Gentry (5)                      658                      94                   64    158
D   Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei                  2,095                    269    39     45     28    381
E   ‘Ewa Villages                        590                      54                         54
F   Kapolei Business Park & vicinity                                                     268   268
   Kapolei Harborside                                                                    339   339
G   Kapolei Knolls                                                                             0
H   Pālailai Residential                  350                      30            14           44
I   Kapolei Shopping Center                                                                    0
J   Ko ‘Olina Resort                     3,286                    50     42     16           108
K   Makaīwa Hills (Lower)                 2,280                    424           31           455
L   Makakilo C & D1                        422                      105                        105
M   Villages of Kapolei                    660                      28            27           55
N   Kapolei West (6)                       2,500                    234           12           246
O, R   ‘Ewa by Gentry Makai: East and Wes1,067                    172                        172
P   East Kapolei: Ho‘opili (7)           11,750    11,750 11,750  925           145    50    1,120
Q   Laulani Commercial                                                            20           20
S   Makakilo D2                            400       400    400     96                         96
T   UH West O‘ahu Campus (8)             4,040                    184           169          353
U   Makaīwa Hills (Upper)                 2,000                    484                        484
V   DHHL East Kapolei (9)                  2,513            NA      341           67           408
W   Kapolei North                          1,200     1,200  1,200   150                        150
   Kalaeloa (HCDA) (9)                     6,500            NA      267           8      685   960
TOTAL                                         48,155    13,350 13,350  4,043  81     738    1,644 6,506
   TOTAL ZONED or EXEMPT                   34,805                   2,872  81     593    1,594 5,140
      TOTAL EXEMPT FROM CITY ZONING     9,013                    608    0      75     685   1,368
NOTES:
   See
Exhibit 2.3 for location of projects. Estimated capacity and entitlements of existing projects as of
July 2009.
(1)   Parts may not sum to totals shown due to rounding.
(2)   Project needs State Land Use Commission approval of a Land Use District amendment.
(3)   Project needs City Council approval of a zone change (and may need State Land Use District
Boundary Amendment).
(4)   As of December 2008, included around 84 acres of vacant BMX-3 zoned lands which could provide
residential units as well as commercial and office space.
(5)   Industrial acreage partly zoned for industrial mixed use.
(6)   Formerly Ko ‘Olina Phase II. Thirty seven of the residential acres are for mixed use residential
development and may include 100,000 s.f. of commercial space. Twenty seven of the commercial acres
include mixed-use residential development of 300 units.
(7)   Twenty acres near Farrington/Fort Weaver intersection for community commercial center; remainder
intended for neighborhood commercial use. Some residential acreage may also support retail and office
uses in mixed use projects.
(8)   The 116 retail acres are lands zoned BMX-3 which can include both retail space and residential
units. The residential acreage includes lands set aside for student housing.
(9)   DHHL and HCDA can exempt themselves from County zoning.
 
2.2.2   RETENTION OF AGRICULTURAL LANDS
The closure of the O‘ahu Sugar Company in 1995 raised serious questions about
how thousands of acres of former sugar lands in ‘Ewa should be used in the
future. The ‘Ewa Development Plan protects the highest value prime agricultural
lands from urban development.
These high value lands are located in two areas: lands mauka of H-1 Freeway and
on the Wai‘anae side of Kunia Road, and lands in the Explosive Safety Quantity
Distance (ESQD) arc around the Pearl Harbor Naval Munitions Command. State
agencies indicated in 1996 that these prime agricultural lands should have the
highest priority for retention of all the prime agricultural lands in ‘Ewa.
These 3,000 acres of agricultural land, protected by the Community Growth
Boundary, have been rated, in the most authoritative studies, as potentially
among the most productive lands for diversified agriculture in the State.
The State Department of Agriculture’s (HDOA) November 1977 study, Agricultural
Lands of Importance to the State of Hawai‘i (Revised), indicates that the Kunia
lands and a portion of the lands within the Navy’s ESQD arc are “prime”
agricultural lands which generally produce the largest yields and the best
quality crops for the least expenditure of energy.
The University of Hawai‘i Land Study Bureau’s December 1972 bulletin, Detailed
Land Classification - Island of O‘ahu, rated productive capacity of the Kunia
lands as either A or B and the lands within the Navy’s ESQD as B or C (An A
rating was given to the highest productivity lands and E was given to the
lowest.)
These high value agricultural lands have unique advantages in weather, soil
productivity, infrastructure, and water availability from the Wai‘ahole Ditch,
and access to the local markets of Honolulu and to export markets through
Honolulu International Airport.
Successful agricultural operations are currently being pursued on the former
sugar lands in the Kunia area, including seed crops, vegetables, melons, and
other truck crops. In addition, the Hawai‘i Agriculture Research Center (HARC)
at the corner of H-1 and Kunia Road is conducting studies on vegetable crops
and forage to help diversified agricultural activities in the area.
Agricultural lands along Kunia Road and north of H-1 have recently been sold to
agricultural companies committed to maintaining those lands in agriculture. In
addition, the Navy currently leases out 1,025 acres for agriculture on its
lands surrounding the Pearl Harbor Naval Munitions Command.
However, agricultural operations on these lands are limited by military safety
restrictions and the brackish water supply.
By protecting agricultural lands from urban development, an opportunity is
created for retention and development of diversified agriculture on small farms
and agricultural parks. Public-private partnerships will be needed to solve
problems of lease terms and tenure, access to capital, research, and marketing
if this vision is to be realized.
2.2.3   OPEN SPACE AND GREENWAYS
A network of Open Space and Greenways will link the Secondary Urban Center and
associated employment centers, new master planned residential developments and
revitalized established communities, an ‘Ewa shoreline park, and a major
regional park at Kalaeloa. See the Open Space Map in Appendix A.
Table 2.2 lists the major components of the ‘Ewa Open Space and Greenways
Network.
The Open Space and Greenways Network:
   •   connects existing and planned communities through a system of linear
greenbelts, consisting of drainage, transportation, and utility corridors, and
   •   creates separate identities for existing and planned communities through
use of landscape buffers, golf courses, wildlife preserves, agricultural lands,
regional parks, and other large open spaces at the urban edges.
An important new element in the ‘Ewa Open Space and Greenways Network will be
an ‘Ewa Shoreline Park that will stretch along the ‘Ewa coastline from the
entrance to Pearl Harbor to Ko ‘Olina. It will be anchored by the Kalaeloa
Regional Park planned for Kalaeloa.
The Pearl Harbor Historic Trail, running partly along the Pearl Harbor
shoreline and across the ‘Ewa Plain on the OR&L right-of-way, will allow bikers
and pedestrians to travel as far as Nanakuli to the west. Running east, the
path will create a greenbelt linking Ko ‘Olina, Kapolei West, Kapolei
Harborside, the City of Kapolei, Kalaeloa, the Villages of Kapolei, ‘Ewa
Plantation Villages, ‘Ewa by Gentry, and West Loch to Rainbow Marina near Aloha
Stadium and to the Waipahu Cultural Garden Park.
 
TABLE 2.2: ‘EWA OPEN SPACE AND GREENWAYS NETWORK
 
Mountain and Agricultural Areas
   Wai‘anae Mountains Conservation District
      (Including the State’s Honouliuli Forest Reserve)
   Pu‘u Makakilo
   Pu‘u Pālailai
   Agricultural Lands mauka of H-1 and Wai‘anae side of Kunia Road
   Agricultural Lands in the Pearl Harbor Naval Munitions Command ESQD arc
Natural Gulches and Drainageways
   Honouliuli Stream
   Kalo‘i Gulch
   Makalapa Gulch
   Makakilo Gulch
   Awanui Gulch
   Pālailai Gulch
   Makaīwa Gulch
   Keone‘ō‘io Gulch
   Limaloa Gulch
Shoreline Areas
   ‘Ewa Shoreline Park (Lateral Public Access/Easement from Ko ‘Olina to Pearl
Harbor)
   Wetlands and Wildlife Habitats
      Honouliuli National Wildlife Refuge
      Apoka‘a Ponds
      Batis Salt Marsh at Hoakalei
   Kahe Point Beach Park
   Tracks Beach Park
   Ko ‘Olina Beach Parks (2)
   Barbers Point Beach Park
   One‘ula Beach Park
   ‘Ewa Beach Park
   Iroquois Point Beach Park (military)
   West Loch Shoreline Park
 
Regional and District Parks
   Ocean Pointe District Park
   Kalaeloa Regional Park
   ‘Ewa Mahikō District Park
   East Kapolei District Park (planned)
   Kapolei Regional Park
   Makaiwa Hills District Park (planned)
Golf Courses
   Ko ‘Olina Golf Club
   Kapolei West Golf Course (planned)
   Kapolei Golf Course
   ‘Ewa Villages Golf Course
   Coral Creek Golf Course
   Barbers Point Golf Course (military)
   Hoakalei Country Club
   Hawai‘i Prince Golf Club
   ‘Ewa Beach Golf Club
   West Loch Golf Course
Greenway Corridors
   Farrington Highway
   Kapolei Parkway
   Pearl Harbor Historic Trail / Historic OR&L Railway
   Kualaka‘i Parkway
   Fort Weaver Road
   Ali‘inui Drive (Ko ‘Olina)
   Kealanui Avenue (Villages of Kapolei)
   Kama‘aha Avenue (Villages of Kapolei)
   ‘A‘awa Drive (West Loch Fairways)
   Keone‘ula Boulevard (Ocean Pointe)
See Exhibits
3.1 and
3.2 for locations of Pu‘u, parks, wetlands and wildlife habitats.
See
Exhibit 4.3 for locations of major natural gulches and drainageways.
 
2.2.4   KALAELOA REGIONAL PARK
Kalaeloa Regional Park will provide needed open space, recreational
opportunities, and access to the beaches and ocean.
Kalaeloa Regional Park is envisioned as a major nucleus of community activity,
attracting visitors from all of O‘ahu. To be developed on surplus lands at
Kalaeloa, it will feature a regional park with sports and recreation
facilities. Taking advantage of its extensive land resources, cultural sites,
and spectacular ocean setting, it will offer extensive community-oriented
recreation facilities, and public facilities. Ocean recreation areas at
Kalaeloa will feature coastal lands providing a setting for ocean sports, beach
activities, picnicking and family camping.
2.2.5   SECONDARY URBAN CENTER
The Secondary Urban Center (See
Exhibit 1.1) will provide a wide range of employment opportunities by 2035 and
consists of:
   •   A major office, retail, and residential center at the City of Kapolei
(projected to have over 17,000 private non-construction jobs by 2035);
   •   A Secondary Civic Center with main headquarters for some State and City
agencies (projected to have 2,600 government jobs);
   •   A major resort destination area at Ko ‘Olina (projected to have 5,500
hotel and resort condominium units);
   •   A marina resort/mixed use area at Ocean Pointe (projected to have 950
visitor units);
   •   A deep draft harbor at Kalaeloa Barbers Point, a major industrial center
at Campbell Industrial Park, and civilian reuse of Kalaeloa compatible with the
rest of ‘Ewa (projected to collectively provide almost 21,000 jobs); and
   •   The UHWO (projected to have 1,040 faculty and staff and 7,600 students).
See the ‘Ewa Urban Land Use Map in Appendix A.
Almost the entire ‘Ewa Development Plan area (as shown in
Exhibit 2.2) has been approved as an Enterprise Zone by the Honolulu City
Council.
   Exhibit 2.2
   ‘Ewa Enterprise Zone
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9154.png]
 
Under enabling legislation approved by the City Council in 1995 (Resolution 95-
292) and in 2002 (Resolution 02-227), qualifying businesses receive a package
of incentives including rebates on City property taxes for two years, and
waiver of certain county fees for seven years. In addition, under State law
(Chapter 209E, Hawaii Revised Statutes), the businesses may receive exemptions
from State excise taxes for seven years, a decreasing State income tax credit
for seven years, and a State income tax credit for unemployment insurance
premiums.
2.2.6   MASTER PLANNED RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITIES
A network of master planned residential communities will provide a wide variety
of housing and accommodate the need for affordable housing. Master plans will
guide new developments in the City of Kapolei, East Kapolei (DHHL East Kapolei,
UHWO, Ho‘opili), ‘Ewa by Gentry, Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei, Ko ‘Olina, Makaīwa
Hills, Kapolei West (previously part of Ko ‘Olina), and the Villages of
Kapolei; the rehabilitation of existing structures and development of new
housing in ‘Ewa Villages; and the redevelopment of Kalaeloa. (See
Exhibit 2.3 for locations.)
These master plans will incorporate planning principles and guidelines to
preserve historic and cultural values, establish open space and greenway
networks, and create well-designed, livable communities. Such communities
should be designed with an identifiable, distinct and easily accessible main
street, town center or neighborhood center which may include a mixture of
residential and small scale community related commercial development.
   Exhibit 2.3
   Existing and New Master Planned Communities
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8476.png]
 
2.2.7   COMMUNITIES DESIGNED TO SUPPORT NONAUTOMOTIVE TRAVEL
The master planned residential communities will be designed or redeveloped to
support pedestrian and bike use within the community and transit use for trips
both within and outside of the community.
Connectivity will be established within subdivisions by use of block and street
standards and between subdivisions by establishing and implementing a 1/4 mile
collector/connector master road plan, where permitted by terrain.
The elevated rail transit line built on the east-west Rail Transit Corridor
will link Kapolei West, the City of Kapolei, the UHWO campus, Waipahū, Leeward
Community College, and the PUC. Medium density residential development will be
built along the rail transit corridor within walking distance of the rail
transit stations.
Medium density residential and commercial mixed-use development will be
developed at eight transit nodes whose general locations are indicated on the
Urban Land Use Map in Appendix A. Transit nodes are meant to be located at
activity focal points, which would serve as natural points for transferring
from one transportation mode to another. Communities are further supported by
these transit nodes as the rail transit stations are developed and the City
establishes transit-oriented development plans that encourage rail transit and
multimodal transportation.
The first segment of the elevated rail transit line will start near the Kroc
Center on Kualaka‘i Parkway and continue on to Waipahū along Kualaka‘i Parkway
and Farrington Highway. Sufficient right-of-way will be reserved for the
extension of the elevated rail transit line, which would extend through
Kalaeloa to the City of Kapolei in the west, continuing on to the PUC in the
east. Such a system will require a 28-foot to 32-foot right-of way-along the
route and a 75-foot right-of-way at the rail transit station sites.
2.2.8   CONSERVATION OF NATURAL RESOURCES
‘Ewa Natural Resources, including potable water, coastal water quality, and
wetlands and other wildlife habitat, will be conserved by:
   •   Efficiently using all water supplies through conservation measures and
distribution system leak repair;
   •   Developing a dual water distribution system with potable water for
drinking and other clean water uses and non-potable water for irrigation and
industrial use;
   •   Designing the regional drainage and wastewater treatment system to
minimize non-point source pollution of the ocean and Pearl Harbor;
   •   Protecting valuable habitats for endangered water birds located in Batis
Salt Marsh at Hoakalei and in the West Loch of Pearl Harbor and for endangered
plants located within Kalaeloa (formerly Barbers Point Naval Air Station) and
elsewhere;
   •   Protecting open space outside the Community Growth Boundary from
development;
   •   Requiring surveys to identify endangered species habitat and requiring
appropriate mitigations for adverse impacts on endangered species in new
development areas;
   •   Protecting endangered fish and invertebrates present in sinkholes such
as Ordy Pond near the east edge of Kalaeloa; and
   •   Cleaning up contaminated areas that pose hazards to soil and water
quality, especially in the Kalaeloa area.
See
Exhibit 3.2 in Chapter 3 for a mapping of key natural resources.
2.2.9   PRESERVATION AND ENHANCEMENT OF HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
‘Ewa’s Historic and Cultural Resources will be preserved and enhanced by:
   •   Preserving significant historic features from the plantation era and
earlier periods, including:
      °   The ‘Ewa Plantation Villages and other remnants of the plantation
era;
      °   The OR&L right-of-way and railway stock;
      °   The Honouliuli Internment Camp;
      °   The ‘Ewa Marine Corps Air Station;
      °   Pu‘u O Kapolei/Fort Barrette;
      °   Pu‘u Makakilo;
      °   Lanikūhonua,
      °   Native Hawaiian cultural and archaeological sites;
   •   Retaining visual landmarks and significant public views and vistas,
including:
      °   Distant vistas of the shoreline from the H-1 Freeway above the ‘Ewa
Plain;
      °   Views of the ocean from Farrington Highway between Kahe Pointand the
boundary of the Wai‘anae Development Plan Area;
      °   Views of the Wai‘anae Range from H-1 Freeway between Kunia Road and
Kalo‘i Gulch and from Kunia Road;
      °   Views of nā pu‘u at Kapolei, Pālailai, and Makakilo;
      °   Mauka and makai views;
      °   Views of central Honolulu and Diamond Head, particularly from Pu‘u O
Kapolei and Pu‘u Makakilo; and by
   •   Identifying and protecting sites that are important to Native Hawaiian
cultural practices.
2.2.10   PLANNED REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Planned development of ‘Ewa will support the City of Kapolei’s development and
conserve scarce infrastructure dollars. It will be characterized by:
   •   Increased land supply to support economic development and job creation
and to accommodate major residential growth with an emphasis on providing
affordable housing and a diversity of housing types;
   •   Moderate growth of commercial centers in Urban Fringe Areas to primarily
serve the needs of the surrounding residential communities;
   •   Approval of Residential and Commercial development that supports
development of the Secondary Urban Center (See
Table 2.1);
   •   Adequate Facilities Requirements adopted as a condition for zoning
approval to ensure that infrastructure will be adequate to meet the needs
caused by expected development;
   •   Coordinated Public-Private Infrastructure and Project Development that
supports the directed growth strategy of the General Plan. Examples of project
development include construction of the State and City offices in the Kapolei
Civic Center, the DHHL headquarters building Hale Kalaniana‘ole, and
development of the UHWO campus; and
   •   Adequate Funding for Infrastructure through methods such as Tax
Increment Financing (TIF) and Community Facilities District (CFD) which provide
funding for infrastructure concurrently with, or in advance of, residential
and/or commercial development.
Table 2.1 shows the approximate land area and projected number of housing units
of projects shown in
Exhibit 2.3 and on the Land Use Map and Phasing Map in Appendix A. The projects
are categorized by status of land use approvals (fully entitled, need zoning,
or need State Urban Land Use District designation and zoning). The estimates of
land areas involved and densities for proposed projects are based on proposals
and historic behavior. If the proposed project is approved, the actual acreages
and densities as well as project design requirements will be determined by
Council as part of the approval of the project zone change application.
The capacity for development of 48,100 units in
Table 2.1 represents only the Potential Supply of Housing Units based upon
projects previously approved or proposed. It is important to emphasize that
these projects are not necessarily expected to be completed within the next 25
years.
It is expected that housing development activities at many projects would
continue for ten years or more after the initial zoning approval. The number of
units actually produced and sold, and the timing of their production, will
depend upon market forces. Absorption of new units is projected to be almost
26,500 units between 2009 and 2035, which would use only around 55 percent of
potential supply identified in
Table 2.2.
CHAPTER 3.   LAND USE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
The vision for development of ‘Ewa described in the preceding chapter will be
implemented through application of land use general policies, and guidelines.
These policies and guidelines are not regulations, but provide guidance that
decision makers and administrators should follow, where sensible, in approving
projects and revising rules, regulations, and best practices standards.
   3.1   Open Space Preservation and Development   
   3.2   Regional Parks and Recreation Complexes   
   3.3   Community-Based Parks      
   3.4   Historic and Cultural Resources   
   3.5   Natural Resources   
   3.6   City of Kapolei   
   3.7   ‘Ewa Plantation Villages   
   3.8   Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei   
   3.9   Existing and Planned Residential Communities   
   3.10   Planned Commercial Retail Centers   
   3.11   Ko ‘Olina Resort   
   3.12   Industrial Centers   
   3.13   Kalaeloa   
   3.14   Pearl Harbor Naval Base (West Loch)   
   3.15   University of Hawai‘i West O‘ahu   
3.1   OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT
The open space system consists of areas in active use, as well as passive
areas. Active areas include parks, golf courses and agricultural fields.
Passive areas include lands in the State Conservation District, fallow land in
the State Agriculture District, drainage and utility corridors. Shoreline areas
may be either active or passive.
3.1.1   GENERAL POLICIES
Use open space to:
   •   Provide long-range protection for diversified agriculture on lands
outside the Community Growth Boundary;
   •   Protect scenic views and natural, cultural, and historic resources;
   •   Provide recreation;
   •   Define the boundaries of communities, by;
      °   Using the large expanses of open space beyond the Community Growth
Boundary to provide the basic definition of the regional urban pattern, and
      °   Using the open space system within the Community Growth Boundary to
visually distinguish and physically separate individual communities,
neighborhoods, and land use areas;
   •   Provide a fire safety buffer where developed areas border “wildlands”
either in preservation areas within the Community Growth Boundary or in the
State Conservation District;
   •   Promote the accessibility of shoreline and mountain areas (as required
by City Ordinance);
   •   Preserve natural gulches and ravines as drainageways and stormwater
retention areas; and
   •   Create major pedestrian and bikeway linkages between communities, such
as the OR&L/Pearl Harbor Historic Trail, through a network of greenways along
transportation and utility corridors and drainageways connecting major open
space areas.
3.1.2   RELATION TO OPEN SPACE MAP
The following areas shown on the Open Space Map in Appendix A are components of
the regional open space system:
   Mountain and Agricultural Areas - These are the areas outside of the
Community Growth Boundary, including areas within the State Conservation
District.
   Natural Gulches and Drainageways - Within the Community Growth Boundary, the
major gulches, including the Kalo‘i Gulch drainage channel, are shown in
preservation uses. (See the listing in
Table 2.2.)
   Shoreline Areas - The proposed lateral public easement/access along the
shoreline is indicated by a dotted line. Nearshore, coastal-dependent uses and
features such as beach parks and wetlands are indicated as parks and
preservation areas, respectively.
   Parks - Only island-wide and regional district parks are shown. Community
and neighborhood parks are part of the open space system, but they are
generally too small to display on a regional map, and their location is
determined more by community design considerations (see Section 3.3) than by
their relationship to the regional open space network.
   Golf Courses - All golf courses are shown, whether public or private-owned,
since their visual contribution to the open space system is the same.
   Greenways or Open Space Corridors - These corridors are indicated on the map
following certain public rights-of-way that are extensive enough to make a
significant contribution to the regional open space network as a linear
connector.
3.1.3   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Open Space
Preservation and Development should be implemented:
3.1.3.1   Mountain Areas
   •   Acquire and maintain a public campground and support public access to
hiking trails in the area mauka of the Community Growth Boundary on the slopes
of the Wai‘anae Range.
   •   Acquire and maintain public access, including vehicular access from
Makakilo Drive, to trail heads and public campgrounds.
   •   Provide access to mountain trails in the Pālehua Ridge area via Pālehua
Road as part of the Makaīwa Hills project.
   •   Maintain the forest at higher elevations, in the State Conservation
District. Plan utility corridors and other uses to avoid disturbance to areas
with high concentrations of native species.
   •   Identify endangered species habitats and other important ecological
zones and protect them from threats such as fire, weeds, feral animals and
human activity.
   •   Identify and protect areas that are important to Native Hawaiian
cultural practices.
3.1.3.2   Natural Gulches and Drainageways
   •   Preserve the natural gulches on the slopes of the Wai‘anae Range
foothills within the Community Growth Boundary as part of the open space
system.
   •   Integrate planned improvements to the ‘Ewa drainage systems into the
regional open space network by emphasizing the use of retention basins and
recreational access in the design approach. (See Chapter 4, Section 4.6.)
   •   View drainageways and utility corridors as opportunities to link major
open spaces with pedestrian and bike paths along open corridors in order to
create the regional open space network.
   •   Where practical, retain drainageways as natural or man-made vegetated
channels rather than concrete channels.
3.1.3.3   Shoreline Area
   •   Provide public pedestrian access to the shoreline at intervals of
approximately 1/4 mile, except where access is restricted by the military for
security reasons. To make this access usable by the public, provide adequate
parking.
   •   Where a lateral public easement along the shoreline is available or
planned, allow the distance between access points to be increased. However, the
intervals should generally not exceed one mile and vehicular parking spaces and
limited facilities for waste disposal and potable water supply should be
available at the access points.
   •   Maintain and enhance near-shore wetlands and mangroves, where necessary,
as wildlife habitats.
   •   Identify and protect areas that are important to Native Hawaiian
cultural practices.
   •   Coordinate private and public landowners’ efforts to create continuous
shoreline easements to ensure the maximum feasible degree of lateral public
access.
   •   Provide lateral shoreline access along the Hoakalei coastline and a
pathway providing continuous public access around the Hoakalei Marina.
   •   Provide, at a minimum, a 60-foot setback along the shoreline, and, where
possible, expand the setback to 150 feet where justified, based on historic or
adopted projections of shoreline erosion rates.
   •   Analyze the possible impact of sea level rise for new public and private
projects in shoreline areas and incorporate, where appropriate and feasible,
measures to reduce risks and increase resiliency to impacts of sea level rise.
3.1.3.4   Agricultural Areas
   •   Permit facilities necessary to support intensive cultivation of arable
agricultural lands.
   •   Permit facilities to support limited outdoor recreation use, such as
camping, horseback riding, and hiking, in areas where agricultural use is not
feasible.
   •   Permit residential use only to the extent that it is accessory to the
agricultural use. Where several dwellings are planned as part of an
agricultural use, they should be sited and clustered to avoid the use of more
productive agricultural lands and to reduce infrastructure costs.
   •   Design and locate buildings and other facilities that are accessory to
an agricultural operation to minimize impact on nearby urban areas, arterial
roads, and major collector streets.
3.1.3.5   Parks
   •   Develop a major regional park at Kalaeloa that provides beach-oriented
recreation and support facilities near the shoreline and active recreation
facilities in mauka areas, and preserves significant cultural resource areas
and wildlife habitats such as wetlands and endangered plant colonies. (See
Exhibit 3.1: Parks in the ‘Ewa Development Plan Area.)
   •   Locate other beach and shoreline parks throughout the ‘Ewa coastline. A
beach park at the south end of the Ko ‘Olina shoreline has been built, and it
and a shoreline park at the Kahe end of Ko ‘Olina are to be dedicated to the
City at some point in the future. One‘ula Beach Park will be expanded by 9.4
acres as part of the Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei project.
   •   Maintain prominent landforms at Pu‘u O Kapolei and Pu‘u Pālailaias
natural visual features and regional landmarks.
   Exhibit 3.1
   Parks in the ‘Ewa Development Plan Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8474.png]
 
3.1.3.6   Golf Courses
   •   Locate and design golf courses to optimize their function as drainage
retention areas.
   •   Consider the impact on existing and proposed regional trails, paths and
bike routes in designing new golf courses. Where necessary for these trails,
paths and bike routes, provide safe corridors by or through the course.
   •   Design golf courses to provide view amenities for adjacent urban areas,
including public rights-of-way.
   •   When screening is necessary for safety reasons, use landscape treatment,
setbacks, and modifications to the course layout rather than fencing or solid
barriers, where feasible.
3.1.3.7   Wildlands - Urban Fire Hazard Setbacks
   •   As determined appropriate by the Honolulu Fire Department (HFD), require
residential or commercial developments that are adjacent either to preservation
areas within the Community Growth Boundary or to lands within the State
Conservation District to provide a setback to reduce the risk of fire spreading
from the “wildlands” to the developed area. Typically, such a setback would be
20 to 30 feet wide and landscaped with low growth, low-burn plantings.
3.1.3.8   Greenways and Open Space Corridors
   •   Provide additional connectivity for bikers and pedestrians by developing
the Pearl Harbor Historic Trail, which will extend for about 18.5 miles from
Rainbow Marina near ‘Aiea to Nānākuli. The Trail, running west on the OR&L
right-of-way across the ‘Ewa plain, will allow bikers and pedestrians to
connect to the Trail from other access points including City parks, through the
addition of scenic shared use paths in ‘Ewa and Ko ‘Olina to travel as far as
Nānākuli to the west. Running east, the Trail will follow a greenbelt linking a
network of shoreline parks stretching from West Loch to Rainbow Marina near
Aloha Stadium. Establish the bikeway even in those sections where the railroad
itself is not operational.
   •   Provide sufficient easement width for the major trunk lines and
transmission and distribution lines for utility systems, when their alignment
is not within a road right-of-way, to permit the growth of landscaping within
and adjacent to the easement, consistent with all applicable operations,
maintenance, and safety requirements.
   •   When overhead or underground transmission and distribution lines are
located within or adjacent to a road right-of-way, provide sufficient width to
permit the growth of landscaping adjacent to the transmission line, consistent
with all applicable operations, maintenance, and safety requirements. The
purpose of the landscaping is to divert attention from the overhead lines and,
preferably, obscure views of the overhead lines from the travel way and
adjacent residential areas. Place new transmission lines underground where
possible under criteria specified in State law.
   •   Permit the use of utility easements for pedestrian and bicycle routes,
consistent with all applicable operations, maintenance, and safety
requirements.
   •   Design the rights-of-way for major and minor arterials as landscaped
parkways or greenways, complete with a landscaped median strip, landscaped
sidewalks, and bikeways. Major arterials should have separate bike paths, and
minor arterials should have bike lanes. Suggested width for major arterials,
including right-of-way and planting strips, is 120 feet wide and for minor
arterials is 100 feet wide.
3.2.   REGIONAL PARKS AND RECREATION COMPLEXES
The following section presents general policies, and guidelines for development
of regional parks and recreation complexes.
Regional parks and recreation complexes include the Kalaeloa Regional Park
proposed for surplus lands at the former Barbers Point Naval Air Station,
Kapolei Regional Park, various beach and shoreline parks, and public and
private golf courses.
The City and the U.S. Department of the Interior are negotiating the conveyance
of the lands for Kalaeloa Regional Park to the City. In the meantime, the
Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR) is operating a beach camping area at
Kalaeloa under a licensing agreement with the Navy. DPR also operates two
Kalaeloa baseball parks on land recently conveyed from the Navy to Ford Island
Properties, Inc. (FIP), and is negotiating an agreement with FIP to continue
operating the parks. The Navy operates the Nimitz and White Sands beach parks
at Kalaeloa which are open to the public. (The Navy intends to retain the two
beach parks.)
Existing City beach and shoreline parks are located at Tracks, Kahe Point,
Barbers Point, One‘ula, ‘Ewa Beach, and West Loch.
Two beach parks at either end of the Ko ‘Olina shoreline have been built and
will be turned over to the City at some point in the future as required by
ordinance. The larger park at the northern end of the resort provides for
picnicking and other passive recreation. A park at the southern end provides
direct access to one of the four swimming lagoons. A boat-launching ramp, which
is available for public use, is being relocated to the eastern end of the Ko
‘Olina marina.
‘Ewa has nine golf courses. In addition, one more course is planned for the
Kapolei West development. (See
Table 2.2)
The City’s courses include the West Loch and ‘Ewa Villages golf courses. The
‘Ewa Village golf course also provides flood protection and storm water
detention for ‘Ewa Villages.
Privately owned golf courses include the Hawaii Prince Golf Club, ‘Ewa Beach
Golf Club, Hoakalei Country Club, Coral Creek Golf Course, Kapolei Golf Course,
and Ko ‘Olina Golf Club. The U.S. military operates a golf course at Kalaeloa.
The Coral Creek Golf Course opened in March 1999. The Hoakalei Country Club
opened for play in 2008. An 18-hole golf course is planned as part of the
proposed Kapolei West project. Plans for golf courses at Makakilo and Makaīwa
Hills have been cancelled. Sports and recreation complexes designed to attract
visitors from throughout the region and the rest of O‘ahu have been proposed
for a number of areas in ‘Ewa.
3.2.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Consider using public-private partnerships to build, and maintain new
park and recreation complexes in order to sustain economic development.
   •   Design the built environment to avoid adverse impacts on natural
resources or processes in the coastal zone or any other environmentally
sensitive area.
   Regional Parks
   •   Develop a new Kalaeloa Regional Park which will feature a large
shoreline park with beach recreation and support facilities; a wide range of
activity areas including athletic fields in the mauka lands; and preserves for
historic and cultural resources, wildlife habitats, wetlands, and endangered
plant colonies. The Park will encompass mostly undeveloped lands, bordered by
the shoreline on the south, the airfield and developed portions of the facility
to the north and west, and the existing military golf course and the Hoakalei
Country Club golf course to the east. Key elements of the Park are as follows:
      °   The Park will include and preserve two wetland areas and an
endangered plant preserve that have been recommended for preservation by the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
      °   Proposed uses for the mauka areas include a Hawaiian cultural park,
continuation of the existing riding stable, cabin and tent camping, archery,
and various other passive and active recreation uses.
      °   The Park will also provide access to a continuous shoreline easement
extending from the Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei development to Ko ‘Olina.
   •   Complete development of Kapolei Regional Park to provide diverse active
and passive recreation within easy walking distance of both the City Center and
the Villages of Kapolei. The 73-acre park includes the Pu‘u O Kapolei and
serves as a defining limit for the northeastern edge of the City of Kapolei and
as a visual gateway to the City. The park provides diverse active and passive
recreation within easy walking distance of both the City Center and the
Villages of Kapolei.
   •   Develop Pu‘u Palailai below Makakilo as a private nature park providing
hikers excellent views of the ‘Ewa Plain and distant views of downtown Honolulu
and Diamond Head.
   Golf Courses
   •   Use golf courses, where appropriate, to provide protection for open
space, and help reduce flooding and non-point pollution by helping retain
stormwaters.
   Recreation Complexes
   •   Design recreation complexes to be compatible with surrounding land uses
and environmental features.
3.2.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Regional Parks
and Recreation Complexes should be implemented.
3.2.2.1   Appropriate Scale and Siting
   •   Use architectural elements and siting to heighten the visibility of
major recreation events areas as they are approached from principal travel
corridors.
3.2.2.2   Environmental Compatibility
   •   Locate and operate uses that generate high noise levels in a way that
keeps noise to an acceptable level in existing and planned residential areas.
   •   To retain a sense of place, incorporate natural features of the site and
use landscape materials that are indigenous to the area in the design of
recreation areas where feasible.
   •   Use xeriscaping (the use of native landscape materials with low water
demand), non-potable water for irrigation, and efficient irrigation systems
wherever possible to conserve groundwater resources.
3.2.2.3   Community Integration
   •   Although the design of recreational attractions may have a distinct
identity and entry, link these destinations with surrounding areas using
connecting roadways, bikeways, walkways, landscape features or architectural
design.
3.2.2.4   Islandwide and Regional Parks
   •   Develop a major park within Kalaeloa that provides beach-oriented
recreation and support facilities near the shoreline, other active recreation
facilities in mauka areas, and preserves for cultural and archaeological
resources and for wildlife habitats such as wetlands and endangered plant
colonies.
   •   Provide facilities for tent and cabin camping within the new park at
Kalaeloa in the major recreational area that includes a beach camping area.
   •   Develop additional beach and shoreline parks along the ‘Ewa coastline.
Two existing beach parks at either end of the Ko ‘Olina shoreline will be
dedicated to the City. One‘ula Beach Park will be expanded as part of the Ocean
Pointe/Hoakalei project.
   •   Maintain prominent landforms at Pu‘u O Kapolei and Pu‘u Pālailai as
natural visual features and regional landmarks. (See the Parks Map,
Exhibit 3.1)
3.2.2.5   Sports and Recreation Complexes
   Definition of Use Areas
   •   Separate uses that attract a high number of people for events as much as
possible from residential areas and wildlife habitats.
   •   Provide amenities and service facilities to accommodate “tailgate”
picnics, as well as nearby picnic tables and outdoor grills in parking areas
for sporting events.
   Transportation Facilities
   •   Locate bus loading areas, shelters and bicycle parking facilities as
close as possible to entry gates for special events areas.
   •   Locate bus stops at all principal activity areas.
   Views
   •   Locate and design facilities for special events to be readily visible
and identifiable from the principal transportation corridors that lead to them.
   •   Establish the visual identity of the complex through distinctive
architecture, landscaping, or natural setting.
   Landscape Treatment
   •   Minimize the visibility of perimeter fencing, loading areas, parking
lots and garages and other utilitarian elements through plantings or other
appropriate visual screens along roadway frontages.
   •   In large parking lots, use canopy trees to provide shade. Use special
paving or pavement markings to indicate pedestrian routes to destinations and
differentiate sections of the parking area.
   Natural Environment
   •   Retain, protect, and incorporate wetland and other wildlife habitat
areas as passive recreational resources.
3.2.2.6   Siting
   •   Island-wide and regional parks and golf courses are shown on the Open
Space Map and the Public Facilities Maps in Appendix A.
   •   Change in the location of an island-wide park or a golf course shall
require a City review and approval process, such as the Plan Review Use
process, which provides adequate public notice and input, complete technical
analysis of the project, and approval by the City Council. Approval of changes
in size and configuration may be done administratively.
   •   Regional sports and recreation complexes may be located in Kalaeloa on
the fringes of the City of Kapolei, and in areas designated for commercial or
park use, subject to a City review and approval process which provides public
review and complete analysis.
3.3   COMMUNITY-BASED PARKS
The following section provides general policies and guidelines for community-
based parks and recreation areas.
Community-based parks (and associated recommended size and service radius)
include mini-parks (no size specified and1/2 mile), neighborhood parks (5 acres
and 1/2 mile), community parks (10 acres and one mile), and district parks (20
acres and two miles).
3.3.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Provide adequate parks to meet residents’ recreational needs. The
Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR) standard for community based parks is
that a minimum of two acres of community-based parks should be provided per
1,000 residents, with one acre per thousand needed for district parks and one
acre needed for community parks, neighborhood parks, and mini-parks. (Even if
these standards are met, there may still be unmet park needs due to demographic
or other community conditions.) The need for community-based parks can be met
either through public parks operated by the City or private community parks and
recreation centers operated by home owner associations.
      °   Currently, ‘Ewa has significantly less district park acreage than the
DPR standard indicates is needed for its existing population. To meet the DPR
standard, ‘Ewa’s population of 101,397 in 2010 needed 203 acres with 101 acres
needed in district parks. The combined total of ‘Ewa public and private
community-based parks in 2008 was 140 acres, with only one 25-acre district
park, ‘Ewa Mahiko.
      °   ‘Ewa’s population is projected to grow to 164,500 by 2035. Based on
the DPR standards, 189 more acres of community-based parks should be added to
the existing park acreage to meet the needs of the projected 2035 ‘Ewa
population, including 140 acres at district parks.
      °   As shown in
Table 3.1, land has been set aside for development of future community-based
parks as part of master-planned communities throughout ‘Ewa. There are plans to
develop 350 acres of new parks, including 162 in district parks.
   •   Protect and expand access to recreational resources in the mountains, at
the shoreline, and in the ocean. Trails to and through natural areas of the
gulches and mountains are an important public recreational asset. Some areas
are difficult to access because of landowner restrictions.
   •   Support efforts to expand access to mountain and gulch trails in areas
where urban development will not occur.
   Table 3.1: ‘Ewa Public and Private Parks and Golf Courses
NAME AND TYPE OF PARK ACRES
NAME AND TYPE OF PARK                         ACRES
Regional Parks                                 
Kalaeloa Heritage Park (1)                    96.2
Kalaeloa Regional Park (2)                    409.5
Kapolei Regional Park (1972)                  69.4
   Regional Park Total                        575.1
Community Based Parks
District Parks
Ocean Pointe District Park (3)                20.0
‘Ewa Mahikō District Park (1998)           25.0
Ho‘opili District Park (4)                  25.0
Kalaeloa Parks (OS-10,11, & 12) (4)           70.0
Makaīwa Hills District Park (5)              20.0
   District Park Total                     160.0
Community Parks
Asing Community Park (1996)                   12.8
DHHL East Kapolei II (3)                      11.0
‘Ewa Beach Community Park (1961)            13.3
Geiger Community Park (1996)                  10.0
Kamokila Community Park (1977)                5.9
Kapolei Community Park (1999)                 12.0
Kapolei West Community Park (3)               12.3
Ko ‘Olina Community Park (3)                11.0
Laulani Community Park (3)                    16.4
Makaīwa Hills Community Park (3)             10.0
Makakilo Community Park (1977)                8.5
   Community Park Total                    123.1
Neighborhood Parks
DHHL East Kapolei II Mauka & Makai (3)        10.5
East Kapolei UH WO I & II (3)                 11.5
‘Ewa by Gentry Area 19C (3)                 9.2
Ho‘opili Mini-Neighborhood Parks (4)        35.0
Iroquois Point Neighborhood Park (3)          12.1
Kalaeloa Downtown Neighborhood Park (2)       7.0
Kapolei Neighborhood Park (3)                 6.0
Kapolei West Neighborhood Park (3)            5.0
Ko ‘Olina Neighborhood Park (3)             5.1
Makaīwa Hills Neighborhood Parks I and II (3)11.5
Makakilo Neighborhood Park (1968)             4.0
Maukalani Neighborhood Park (1976)            4.4
Pālailai Neighborhood Park (1999)            5.0
Pu‘uloa Neighborhood Park (1961)            4.3
   Neighborhood Park Total                 130.6
Private Parks and Recreation Centers
‘Ewa by Gentry (1989-2005)                  19.0
Ocean Pointe (2001-2004)                      4.3
Kroc Center (4)                               15.0
Villages of Kapolei (1995-1999)               10.3
Makakilo (1998)                               0.4
Makaīwa Hills (4)                            15.0
Kapolei West (4)                              12.0
Ko ‘Olina (2005)                            1.0
   Private Parks Total                     76.9
Community Based Parks Total                   490.6
Beach Parks
Barbers Point Beach Park (1964)               7.4
‘Ewa Beach Park (1951)                      4.9
Iroquois Point Beach Park (military)          2.0
Kahe Point Beach Park (1954)                  4.5
Ko ‘Olina Beach Park (1993) (6)             9.0
Makaīwa Beach Park (1993) (6)                18.0
Nimitz Beach Park (military)                  21.3
HCDA Nimitz Expansion Shoreline Access (7)    2.0
Kalaeloa Regional Park Nimitz Expansion (2)   4.2
One‘ula Beach Park (1969)                   30.0
Tracks Beach Park (1988)                      14.3
West Loch Shoreline Park (1991)               5.8
White Plains Beach Park (military)            15.4
   Beach Park Total                        138.7
Public & Private Parks Total                  1,204.5
Golf Courses
Barbers Point Golf Course (military)          145.0
Coral Creek Golf Course                       195.0
‘Ewa Beach Golf Club                        130.0
‘Ewa Villages Golf Course (8)               235.0
Hawai‘i Prince Golf Club                    270.0
Hoakalei Country Club (Ocean Pointe)          189.0
Kapolei Golf Course                           190.7
Kapolei West Golf Course (4)                  203.0
Ko ‘Olina Golf Club                         170.0
West Loch Golf Course (8)                     187.0
   Golf Course Total                       1,914.7
 
Parks and Golf Course Total                   3,119.2
Key:
(1)   Land conveyed or pending transfer to HCDA which is to be part of a
cultural park, endangered plant refuge and wildlife habitat.
(2)   Land proposed for conveyance to the City as part of the Barbers Point
Naval Air Station closure. As of April 2011, the land had not yet been
conveyed. Includes beach camping areas now operated by the City under license
from the Navy.
(3)   Land set aside for future parks to be developed and dedicated to the
City.
(4)   Planned.
(5)   Land set aside for a future District Park to be developed by the City.
(6)   Beachfront parks developed by Ko ‘Olina Resort. Currently, they are
owned, maintained, and managed by Ko ‘Olina Resort, but will be dedicated to
the City in the future, as required by ordinance.
(7)   Land adjacent to Nimitz Beach Park to be transferred to HCDA for
development for aquaculture and fisherman’s access.
(8)   City-owned golf courses.
 
3.3.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Community-Based
Parks should be implemented:
3.3.2.1   Development of Community-Based Parks
   •   Co-locate Neighborhood or Community Parks with elementary or
intermediate schools and coordinate design of facilities when efficiencies in
development and use of athletic, recreation, meeting, and parking facilities
can be achieved.
   •   Coordinate the development and use of athletic facilities such as
swimming pools and gymnasiums with the State Department of Education (DOE)
where such an arrangement would maximize use and reduce duplication of
function.
   •   Where feasible, site Community and Neighborhood Parks near the center of
neighborhoods, in order to maximize accessibility.
   •   Provide accessible pathways from surrounding streets to facilitate
pedestrian and bicycle access to parks.
   •   Use xeriscaping (the use of native landscape materials with low water
demand), non-potable water for irrigation, and efficient irrigation systems
wherever possible to conserve groundwater resources.
3.3.2.2   Access to Mountain Trails
   •   Support continuation of controlled access to the Wai‘anae Range mountain
trails via Pālehua Road for hiking organizations.
   •   Provide access to mountain trails in the Pālehua Ridge area via Pālehua
Road as part of the Makaīwa Hills project.
3.3.2.3   Siting
   •   Conceptual locations for district parks are shown on the Open Space Map
in Appendix A. Being conceptual, these locations may be revised without needing
to amend the Development Plan as more detailed site information and planning
analysis is available.
   •   Community and neighborhood parks are part of the open space system, but
their location is determined more by community design considerations than by
their relationship to the regional open space network. Siting of Community and
Neighborhood Parks should be reviewed and decided at the time the Project
Master Plan is submitted, prior to the granting of a zone change.
3.4   HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
‘Ewa contains several different types of historic and cultural sites, which are
representative of its history and valuable as historic records and cultural
references. In addition, public views which include views along streets and
highways, mauka-makai view corridors, panoramic and significant landmark views
from public places, views of natural features, heritage resources, and other
landmarks, and view corridors between significant landmarks, can be important
cultural resources.
This section provides policies, and guidelines for the preservation and
development of historic and cultural resources in ‘Ewa.
3.4.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Emphasize physical references to ‘Ewa’s history and cultural roots to
help define ‘Ewa’s unique sense of place.
   •   Protect existing visual landmarks, and support creation of new
culturally appropriate landmarks.
   •   Preserve significant historic features from the plantation era and
earlier periods.
   •   Vary the treatment of sites according to their characteristics and
potential value.
   •   Use in situ preservation and appropriate protection measures for
historic, cultural, or archaeological sites with high preservation value
because of their good condition or unique features, as recommended by the State
Historic Preservation Officer. In such cases, the site should be either
restored or remain intact out of respect for its inherent value.
   •   Retain significant vistas whenever possible.
   •   Where known archaeological and cultural sites have been identified and
impact mitigations approved as part of prior development approvals, assume that
the mitigations carry out the Plan vision and policies for preservation and
development of historic and cultural resources in ‘Ewa.
Exhibit 3.2 indicates the locations of a number of ‘Ewa’s significant historic
and cultural resources, which are also listed in
Table 3.1.
3.4.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Historic and
Cultural Resources should be implemented:
3.4.2.1   Sites Under Review
   •   Adaptive Reuse – Allow historic sites to be converted from their
original intended use to serve a new function if it can be done without
destroying the historic value of the site, especially if its interpretative
value is enhanced.
   •   Accessibility - Public access to an historic site can take many forms,
from direct physical contact and use to limited visual contact. Determine the
degree of access based on what would best promote the preservation of the
historic, cultural and educational value of the site, recognizing that economic
use is sometimes the only feasible way to preserve a site. In some cases,
however, it may be highly advisable to restrict access to protect the physical
integrity or sacred value of the site.
   •   Protect the Honouliuli Internment Camp site from development until
efforts to evaluate it for National Historic Register listing and for inclusion
as a satellite site in the World War II Valor in the Pacific National Monument
have established the value of the site and its appropriate treatment.
   •   Protect the ‘Ewa Marine Corps Air Field site in Kalaeloa from
development while a study is done to establish the condition of the site and
the appropriate treatment of historic resources at the site.
   Exhibit 3.2
   Natural, Historic & Scenic Resources in the ‘Ewa Development Plan Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8472.png]
 
 
TABLE 3.2: SIGNIFICANT ‘EWA HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC FEATURES AND LANDMARKS
‘Ewa Plantation Villages                               OR&L Historic Railway & Railway Stock
‘Ewa Marine Corps Air Field                            Pearl Harbor National Historic
Honouliuli Internment Camp                               Landmark
Lanikūhonua                                             Pu‘u Makakilo
                                                         Pu‘u O Kapolei/Fort Barrette
NATIVE HAWAIIAN CULTURAL AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES
Barbers Point Archaeological District                    ‘Oki‘okiolepe Pond
‘Ewa Beach Midden Site                 One‘ula Archaeological District
SIGNIFICANT VIEWS AND VISTAS
•   Distant vistas of the shoreline from the H-1 Freeway above the ‘Ewa Plain;
•   Views of the ocean from Farrington Highway between Kahe Point and the boundary of the
Wai‘anae Development Plan Area;
•   Views of the Wai‘anae Range from H-1 Freeway between Kunia Road and Kalo‘i Gulch and from
Kunia Road;
•   Views of Nā Pu‘u at Kapolei, Pālailai, and Makakilo;
•   Mauka and makai views; and
•   Views of central Honolulu and Diamond Head, particularly from Pu‘u O Kapolei, Pu‘u
Pālailai, and Pu‘u Makakilo.
 
3.4.2.2   Impacts of Development on Historic and Cultural Resources
   •   Compatible Setting - The context of an historic site is usually a
significant part of its value. Plan and design adjacent uses to avoid conflicts
or abrupt contrasts that detract from or destroy the physical integrity and
historic or cultural value of the site. The appropriate treatment should be
determined by the particular qualities of the site and its relationship to its
physical surroundings.
   •   Public Views - Design and site all structures, where feasible, to
reflect the need to maintain and enhance available views of significant
landmarks and vistas. Whenever possible, relocate or place underground overhead
utility lines and poles that significantly obstruct public views, under
criteria specified in State law.
3.4.2.3   OR&L Historic Railway
   Method of Preservation
   •   Maintain or repair the existing track to the extent feasible in order to
permit its use for historic and educational rides.
   •   Extend the route from ‘Ewa Villages to Nānākuli.
   •   To allow connectivity within the region, accommodate cross-traffic at
appropriate intervals along the right-of-way, and at sufficient distances from
one another to prevent impeding normal locomotive operations.
   Adaptive Reuse
   •   Encourage use of the railroad to promote the history and culture of the
area.
   •   Develop a parallel paved pedestrian path/bikeway along the length of the
rail route, either within or adjacent to the right-of-way as part of the Pearl
Harbor Historic Trail, even in those sections where the railroad itself is not
operational. The pedestrian path/bikeway should be designed so as not to
interfere with historic railway operations.
   Adjacent Uses
   •   Design structures and elements related to the Pearl Harbor Historic
Trail to reflect the historic nature of the railway and its surroundings.
   •   Set back new development a minimum of 50 feet on either side of the OR&L
right-of-way, unless it is either directly related to the operation of the
railroad, or reconstruction of an historic use, or is consistent with the use
of the right-of-way for open space and shared pedestrian path/bikeway purposes
in stretches where railroad operation is not feasible, or is otherwise
specified in existing land use approvals.
   •   Provide landscaping along the adjacent shared pedestrian path/bikeway,
with occasional rest stops with seating and other amenities.
   •   Permit railroad station platforms, maintenance and equipment buildings,
kiosks and other accessory structures with a historic architectural theme (late
19th Century – early 20th Century), as well as parking and loading areas in the
railroad right-of-way and setback area.
   •   Roadway and transit facilities should be designed to have minimal impact
on historic railway operations.
   Public Access
   •   Encourage public use by continuing and expanding the historic railway
operations, providing a parallel shared pedestrian path/bikeway, and by
providing greater connectivity by connecting the Trail to City parks and other
access points through the addition of scenic shared use paths in ‘Ewa and Ko
‘Olina.
   •   Post interpretative signs along the route to explain the historic
significance of the railroad and note points of interest.
3.4.2.4   Lanikūhonua
   Method of Preservation
   •   Maintain the appearance of the house and grounds as closely as possible
to its present condition.
   •   Maintain the landscaped character of the grounds and their physical and
visual relationship to the shoreline environment.
   •   Perpetuate the sense of place by using the site for Hawaiian cultural
events.
   Adaptive Reuse
   •   Focus use of the site on the landscaped grounds as a location for
outdoor events, particularly those with a Hawaiian cultural theme.
   •   Limit commercial use of the site to be occasional rather than intensive,
and events to low-key entertainment.
   Architectural Character
   •   Require modifications to the existing structures to respect the
architectural style of the original dwelling and be limited to repairs,
rehabilitation or minor expansions.
   •   Require coconut palms to be the dominant tree on the grounds, with other
complementary coastal vegetation, preferably native species such as hala and
‘ilima.
   •   Maintain the visual relationship between the grounds and the shoreline,
particularly the natural cove.
   Adjacent Uses
   •   Maintain a dense growth of landscaping to visually separate Lanikūhonua
from the surrounding Ko ‘Olina resort to retain the quiet ambiance and
appearance of a remote tropical retreat.
   •   Maintain the visual identity of Lanikūhonua as a unique site apart from
Ko ‘Olina by retaining the dense growth of tall palm trees.
   •   Provide public access along the shoreline fronting Lanikūhonua, but not
in as formal a manner as Ko ‘Olina.
   Public Access
   •   Maintain Lanikūhonua as a private facility with limited public access
for scheduled community and cultural events and private parties.
3.4.2.5   Native Hawaiian Cultural and Archaeological Sites
   Method of Preservation
   •   Require preservation in situ for those features that the State Historic
Preservation Officer has recommended for such treatment.
   •   Determine the preservation method, ranging from restoration to “as is”
condition, on a site-by-site basis, in consultation with the State Historic
Preservation Officer.
   Adjacent Uses
   •   Determine appropriate delineation of site boundaries and setbacks and
restrictions for adjacent uses on a site-by-site basis in consultation with the
State Historic Preservation Officer.
   •   Include the sight lines that are significant to the original purpose and
value of the site as criteria for adjacent use restrictions.
   Public Access
   •   Determine the appropriateness of public access on a site-by-site basis
in consultation with the State Historic Preservation Officer, Hawaiian cultural
organizations and the owner of the land on which the site is located.
3.5   NATURAL RESOURCES
This section describes the general policies, and guidelines that are to be
applied to protect ‘Ewa natural resources.
3.5.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Conserve potable water.
   •   Protect valuable habitat for waterbirds and other endangered animals and
plants.
   •   Protect endangered fish and invertebrates in sinkholes.
   •   Clean up contaminated areas that pose hazards to soil and water quality,
especially in Kalaeloa.
   •   Require surveys for proposed new development areas to identify
endangered species habitat, and require appropriate mitigations for adverse
impacts on endangered species due to new development.
   •   Reduce light pollution’s adverse impact on wildlife and human health and
its unnecessary consumption of energy by using, where sensible, fully shielded
lighting fixtures using lower wattage.
3.6   CITY OF KAPOLEI
This section describes the general policies and guidelines that are to be
applied to development of the City of Kapolei.
This section incorporates key policies and guidelines for the City of Kapolei
from the amended The City of Kapolei Urban Design Plan approved by the City
Council by resolution in 2008, and the Unilateral Agreements adopted as part of
zoning ordinances in 1990 and 2004.
The original Unilateral Agreement required revisions and updates to the Urban
Design Plan be submitted for review and approval by the City Council every two
years. However, in June 1998, the City Council passed a resolution (No. 98-227)
which approved revisions to The City of Kapolei Urban Design Plan and stated
that no further amendments or revisions to the Urban Design Plan should be made
unless they are first recommended by the Kapolei Design Advisory Board,
endorsed by Campbell Estate and approved by a City Council resolution.
(Note: The Urban Design Plan applies to Campbell Estate’s properties covered by
the 1990 Unilateral Agreement and to adjacent areas also covered by unilateral
agreements adopted as part of subsequent zone changes.)
Future revisions to The City of Kapolei Urban Design Plan, when adopted by the
City Council, should take precedence over the following policies, and
guidelines in the case of a conflict and should not require an amendment to the
Development Plan.
3.6.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Develop the City of Kapolei as the urban core, or the “downtown” for the
Secondary Urban Center. It should accommodate a major share of the new
employment in the Secondary Urban Center.
   •   Allow the City of Kapolei to have a balanced mix of business and
residential areas, complemented by the recreational, social and cultural
activities of a city. Mixed use should be permitted and encouraged throughout
most of the City area, in order to achieve the diversity and intensity of uses
that characterize a city.
   •   Develop the City of Kapolei as a true city, encompassing a full range of
urban land uses, and laid out in small blocks connected by a grid system of
public streets.
Exhibit 3.3 illustrates the street pattern and the planned land uses by
district.
   Exhibit 3.3
   City of Kapolei Land Use Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8470.png]
 
3.6.1.1   Districts
The City of Kapolei should be composed of six different districts that should
accommodate the full array of business, commercial, residential, cultural and
public uses that characterize a city center. The six districts are described
below:
   •   The City Center should be the high-density core of the city. Larger
office towers should be the predominant form of development in this district,
with shopping and restaurants at ground level. The inclusion of apartments
within some of the towers should also be encouraged to establish a more dynamic
mix of uses and help to maintain an active urban environment in the area.
   •   The Commercial District should accommodate commercial uses, which
require a large lot area for all related activities and convenient off-street
parking, with most, if not all spaces, located at ground level. Building spaces
should generally cover a relatively small portion of the lot (e.g., 25 percent
or less).
      °   Examples of possible uses include shopping centers, power centers,
theaters, auto dealerships, discount retail outlets, furniture stores, and home
improvement centers.
   •   The Civic Center should feature City and State offices in an urban park
setting where people and activities are highlighted. The Civic Center should be
much like a university campus in the heart of a city, with a balance between
built forms and usable landscaped spaces, and between both active and passive
uses.
   •   The Mixed Use Districts should be of medium density, with buildings
limited to 120 feet next to the City Center, dropping to 90 feet, and then 60
feet farthest from the City Center. Commercial development should be emphasized
in the area adjoining City Center, along Kapolei Parkway, and adjoining the
Hānu‘a Street extension, while residential use should be emphasized makai of
Kapolei Regional Park and near Fort Barrette Road.
      °   In the commercial emphasis mixed-use areas, retail development
(shopping, restaurants, services, etc.) should be encouraged to locate along
the street front, with required parking located behind the building or above
the ground floor. Offices may also be located on the ground floor, as well as
on upper floors. Housing, when provided, should be located above the ground
floor. A business hotel to provide short term inexpensive accommodations for
business travelers and others who are not seeking resort accommodations could
also be allowed.
      °   In residential emphasis mixed use areas, the primary use should be
multi-family dwellings. Commercial uses to meet the shopping and service needs
of the neighborhood’s residents should be encouraged to locate at ground level.
   •   The Village Center District should be the vibrant, pedestrian friendly
local shopping dining and entertainment center for residents living in the
Mehana District makai of the Kapolei Parkway, as well as people living and
working in the Mixed Use District on the mauka side of the Parkway.
   •   The Mehana District, located makai of Kapolei Parkway, should feature
multi-family and single-family housing units in a series of distinct
neighborhoods tied together by a network of pedestrian and bicycle paths.
3.6.1.2   Key Open Space Elements
Four key open space elements should link together and unify Kapolei’s districts
into a distinctive, vibrant city. Each of these important spaces is described
below:
   •   Kapolei Regional Park should be the major park for both the City of
Kapolei and the surrounding region. It should also function as both the mauka
edge and as a visual gateway to the City of Kapolei. As a strong activity node
with a variety of recreational opportunities, it should reinforce the image of
Kapolei as a place where people can lead an active, healthy lifestyle.
      °   The park should provide opportunities to participate in a diversity
of recreational activities. Facilities should be included to allow users to
bike, walk, hike and jog, and to play volleyball, soccer, football, baseball,
and tennis. Multi-use open space should also be available for picnicking,
sunbathing and relaxing.
      °   Facilities for public concerts and gatherings, such as an
amphitheater and pavilions, as well as amenities for broader use and enjoyment,
such as a formal garden, restaurants and water features, should also be
included to help generate both day and evening activity in and around the park.
      °   The makai edges of the park adjacent to the City of Kapolei’s
downtown should be designed to ensure a strong relationship between City and
park. The various structures in this area and elsewhere in the park should be
designed to ensure compatibility and integration with adjacent commercial uses.
   •   Ala Kahawai Street should function as a “Main Street” and major open
space axis and amenity within the most central and highest density area of the
City. Ala Kahawai Street connects the Regional Park and Civic Center and
comprises the central spine for the City Center district.
      °   The corridor should be wide enough to provide a genuine sense of open
space, yet not so wide as to disconnect developments on opposite sides from
each other. Slow moving vehicular traffic should be allowed from Manawai Street
to Ulu‘ōhi‘a Street to allow previewing of the opportunities for shopping,
dining and entertainment along the corridor.
      °   Canopy shade trees, ample landscaping, seating and water features
should be prominent elements of the design in order to create a comfortable
atmosphere and promote the idea of Kapolei as a garden city.
   •   Pālailai Mall should provide an open space cross axis to Ala Kahawai
Street, extending mauka-makai and connecting the City of Kapolei’s residential
sector to the heart of its business district.
      °   Canopy shade trees and benches, etc. should be provided as
appropriate to establish the mail’s character as a pleasant landscaped path for
pedestrian circulation.
      °   Extensive interaction between pedestrians and the activities in
adjoining buildings, and the establishment of a “shopping promenade” character,
should be fostered by encouraging the location of kiosks, sidewalk cafes,
retail shops, and other people-oriented activities within and along the edges
of the mall.
   •   Village Walk should provide an informal pedestrian spine for the City of
Kapolei’s residential area, with connections to the Civic Center, the makai end
of Pālailai Mall, and Mehana Elementary School.
      °   Landscaping, seating, and other furniture should be provided and
arranged in a manner which establishes a pleasant atmosphere for informal
gatherings of neighbors, as well as for movement through the area.
      °   Both pedestrians and bicyclists should be accommodated in a manner
that minimizes conflicts.
3.6.2   MAJOR THEMES
Seven major themes define key characteristics of the City of Kapolei used in
the planning and design of developments in the City of Kapolei.
   •   A Hawai‘i Garden City - A city within a garden, in the style of long
established Hawaii communities, is to be created. The garden is distinguished
by major parks and boulevards with trees, flowers and abundant ground cover.
   •   Healthy Living - The garden city is to provide the setting for and
encourage a healthy, outdoor, and active lifestyle through the interlacing of
recreational facilities within the fabric of the entire city. These are to be
connected by bike and walking paths.
   •   Complete Community Services - The theme of healthy living is to be
supported by medical/health/fitness services and facilities. The City of
Kapolei is also to serve the surrounding region with entertainment, cultural,
educational and religious facilities, State and City government offices, and
other city activities.
   •   Easy Access - Within the garden city, attractive paths for walking and
biking should allow for convenient access between homes, jobs and recreational
areas.
   •   Design Reflecting the Past but Adaptable to the Needs of the Present and
Future - Building design in the City of Kapolei should reflect both the charm
and more intimate human scale that characterizes the business districts of
traditional Hawai‘i towns such as Hilo, and the market forces and functional
needs that shape the architecture of present-day and future business centers.
   •   Environmental Sensitivity - Resource conservation should be emphasized
in the design of both the overall city center and its individual parts. The
network of bike and walking paths, combined with the concentration of uses that
make urban life convenient, should encourage people to leave their cars at
home. Landscaping should be abundant and make extensive use of drought tolerant
and native plant materials (xeriscaping) to the extent possible.
   •   Transit Access and Orientation - A transit node should be located near
the Civic Center and City Center, and medium density residential uses should be
encouraged within a five minute walking distance (about 1,300 feet) of the
node. Uses adjoining the node should be designed so that they face toward the
node, encouraging pedestrian traffic to flow to and from the node.
      °   As part of the Development Plan vision for a transit corridor linking
the City of Kapolei, Waipahū, and the PUC, higher density residential and
commercial development should be encouraged around the City of Kapolei transit
node and the transit corridor on Kapolei Parkway.
3.6.3   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for the City of
Kapolei should be implemented:
3.6.3.1   Urban Form
   •   Keep block lengths relatively short (300 to 400 feet) in order to
provide for flexible, interesting and reasonably direct pedestrian routes
between work places, restaurants and shops. Short blocks will encourage people
to walk for these trips.
   •   Permit heights for each of the City of Kapolei districts as specified in
the City of Kapolei Urban Design Plan (2008) and shown in
Table 3.3.
TABLE 3.3 HEIGHT GUIDELINES FOR THE CITY OF KAPOLEI
DISTRICT HEIGHT
TABLE 3.3 HEIGHT GUIDELINES FOR THE CITY OF KAPOLEI
DISTRICT                HEIGHT
City Center             150 feet
Civic Center            150 feet mauka of Kapolei Parkway
                        90 feet makai of Kapolei Parkway
Mixed Use Districts     120 to 60 feet
Commercial Districts    60 feet
Village Center District 60 feet
Mehana District         60 to 25 feet
 
Source: The City of Kapolei Urban Design Plan (November 2007) adopted by Res.
07-372 (January 2008).
3.6.3.2   Natural Environment and Landscaping
   •   Use non-potable water features and automated irrigation systems wherever
possible.
   •   Use xeriscaping (the use of native landscape materials with low water
demand), non-potable water for irrigation, and efficient irrigation systems
wherever possible to conserve groundwater resources.
   •   Use landscaping consistent with the City of Kapolei’s image as a green
and shaded garden city to provide privacy, screening, shade, and comfort.
   •   Use landscaping to enhance and complement the City’s urban form, provide
continuity between the various districts, and enhance and preserve view
corridors wherever possible.
3.6.3.3   Public Access and Circulation
   •   Design the City of Kapolei to provide safe, easy, and efficient access
for pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular movement between each of the districts,
the open space areas, and recreational amenities.
   •   Establish a clear pattern of arterials and local streets to facilitate
travel through the City of Kapolei, to and from individual properties. The
streets should form a modified grid pattern, providing a variety of routes for
circulation. Major streets include Kamokila Boulevard, Kapolei Parkway,
Kama‘aha Avenue, and Wākea Street, with Fort Barrette Road and Kalaeloa
Boulevard bounding the City of Kapolei on the east and west.
   •   Vary cross-section design and landscaping schemes with function and to
establish distinctive urban images for each type of street.
   •   Provide for bus pullouts and shelters along major traffic arterials.
   •   Provide sufficient width in the median of Kapolei Parkway to accommodate
a future elevated rail transit line.
   •   Permit on-street parking along all streets until traffic levels
necessitate the use of the entire roadway for vehicular movement. Such parking
will be convenient for shoppers, provide a buffer between traffic on the street
and pedestrians on the sidewalk, and contribute to the activity level along the
City of Kapolei’s streets.
   •   Provide exclusive bike lanes along major roadways within the City of
Kapolei which are connected to the region’s bikeway system. Where automobiles
and bicycles share the same roadway, lane widths should be generous to allow
safe usage by both.
3.7   ‘EWA PLANTATION VILLAGES
This section incorporates key elements for ‘Ewa Plantation Villages from the
former ‘Ewa Development Plan and the ‘Ewa Villages Master Plan (Department of
Housing and Community Development, 1992) to provide guidance in the event that
changes are proposed for the Master Plan or zoning in the future. The ‘Ewa
Villages Master Plan is scheduled for updating and revision in the near future.
When approved, the updated Master Plan policies and guidelines will take
precedence over the following in the event of a conflict and should not require
an amendment to the Development Plan.
The City acquired the 600 acres surrounding and including Tenney, Renton and
Varona Villages in 1993. Subsequently, the City did extensive rehabilitation of
housing and community facilities, a City golf course was developed to provide
storage for storm waters, and ‘Ewa Mahikō District Park was built to provide a
needed community-based recreation area. The Villages have been on the Hawai‘i
Register of Historic Places since 1996.
3.7.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Preserve and enhance the existing rural form and historic character of
the remaining ‘Ewa Villages.
   •   Ensure continued tenancy and ownership opportunities for current
residents.
   •   Use the Master Plan as a vehicle for preservation efforts within the
existing villages.
   •   Rehabilitate or adapt existing village structures in the ‘Ewa Villages
for reuse.
   •   Develop related affordable and market housing to create a total of 1,900
units, including the existing housing.
   •   Develop additional neighborhood parks/open space, and a small shopping
center; and make infrastructure improvements.
   •   Re-establish ‘Ewa Villages as a thriving and identifiable community, and
a living example of Hawai‘i’s plantation heritage through the preservation of
existing schools and churches, the expansion of parks and public open space
areas, and the establishment of community facilities and a market place for
local businesses.
3.7.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for ‘Ewa Villages
should be implemented.
   Retention of Historic Buildings
   •   Preserve and maintain existing buildings of historical, cultural and/or
architectural significance through rehabilitation programs and adaptive reuse.
   Urban Form
   •   Develop vacant areas in a style that is characteristic of the historic
core.
   •   Maintain the current grid development pattern in the existing villages
and replicate it in new infill developments.
   •   Require lot sizes for new infill homes in the existing villages to be
similar to the existing house lots.
   •   Rehabilitate existing structures to the extent possible, in a manner
that will not change their exterior appearance.
   •   Design new structures on vacant lots in the existing villages to
complement the exterior design of adjacent homes.
   •   Physically separate new infill “villages” from Tenney, Renton, and
Varona Villages. The design, appearance, and placement of structures within
them should reflect and complement the existing village’s character. (See
Exhibit 3.4.)
   •   Re-establish a neighborhood and commercial services core within the ‘Ewa
Plantation Villages in order to retain both a focal point of community
activities and promote village identity.
   Exhibit 3.4:
   ‘Ewa Plantation Villages Location
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8468.png]
 
   Circulation
   •   Prohibit establishment of standard subdivision street hierarchy within
the village and maintain the existing grid pattern and extend it into new
infill development.
   •   Locate any new required collector streets outside the existing villages.
   •   Maintain narrower than standard street widths without sidewalks (in the
residential portions) of the existing villages, and establish similar widths
within new villages, in order to minimize the impacts on existing yards and
structures, and visually maintain a rural village character.
   •   In keeping with its Historic Register site designation, restrict traffic
on Renton Road to two lanes of traffic in each direction during peak hours and
one lane of traffic and one lane of restricted parking during non-peak hours.
   Open Space/Views
   •   Where possible, provide open space buffers between the existing villages
and new housing development in order to preserve and enhance the integrity and
historic character.
   •   Preserve and expand existing village greens and open promenades, etc.,
where possible. Preserve and maintain existing landscaping within Renton,
Tenney, and Varona Villages, especially existing stands of mature palm, mango,
banyan, and monkey pod trees. Where trees have been removed, provide
appropriate replacements.
   •   Provide appropriate canopy trees along all street frontages.
   •   Maintain principal entry roads to and through the villages as tree-lined
boulevards. Highlight entries with additional landscape features.
   •   Landscape and maintain yards and other open spaces in a manner that
preserves and enhances the open space appearance of the villages.
3.8   OCEAN POINTE/HOAKALEI
Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei’s development is guided by the Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei
Urban Design Plan approved by the Department of Planning and Permitting (DPP)
in August 2008 and by land use, environmental, and design requirements included
in the Special Management Area Use Permit and in the Unilateral Agreements
attached to the zone change ordinances (1985, 1993, 2002, 2004, and 2007).
Development of Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei can proceed under the existing zoning and
Unilateral Agreement. This section incorporates key policies and guidelines
from the former Development Plan as well as from the Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei
Urban Design Plan, the Special Management Area Use Permit, and the Unilateral
Agreements in order to provide guidance as changes are proposed for the Urban
Design Plan or the zoning.
3.8.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Develop Hoakalei as the region’s principal recreational marina
destination for local residents and visitors. With over 1,100 acres located
between ‘Ewa Beach and Kalaeloa, the Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei community should be
centered around a marina that should serve as a major recreational resource and
visual amenity for the community. The marina should provide recreational
boating opportunities, supported by boat slips, marine haul-out and other
repair facilities, and a public boat ramp. The marina could also serve as a
terminal for a commuter ferry to downtown Honolulu if such service is found to
be feasible and if financing can be found for the improvements needed to serve
such a ferry.
   •   A recreational waterfront project (consisting of a lagoon) may be
developed where the marina is shown on the map (
Exhibit 3.5). Such a waterfront development would similarly serve as a major
recreational resource, visual amenity, and economic generator for the
community, and is a compatible use that would not preclude eventual development
of a marina.
   •   Develop Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei in ways that ensure environmental
compatibility of uses.
   •   Provide substantial public areas at Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei through
shoreline and waterfront access, expansion of One‘ula Beach Park, and
dedication of a District Park on Fort Weaver Road.
   •   Develop the public waterfront promenade at Hoakalei with a hard edge and
a focus on recreational water activities. Provide shoreline parks linked by
pedestrian ways for public use along the entire waterway.
   •   Develop the golf course to provide a major open space and visual amenity
while also providing detention basins to receive run-off from light storms.
   •   On the west, develop a mix of activities around the basin, including a
Waterfront Mixed Use area with resort and commercial development, a Medium
Density Residential area, and a Light Industrial Mixed Use Support area.
Hoakalei is planned to have about 950 visitor units to support its waterfront-
oriented activities.
3.8.2   OCEAN POINTE/HOAKALEI LAND USE MAP
The Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei Land Use Map,
Exhibit 3.5, illustrates conceptual land uses described above and provides a
schematic view of the roadway system within Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei.
The boundaries between the golf course and the Waterfront Mixed-Use and Low- to
Medium-Density Residential areas are intended to be flexible. Integration of
urban uses with the golf course area is encouraged, as long as the golf course
area remains effective in retaining storm water drainage.
   Exhibit 3.5
   Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei Land Use Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8466.png]
 
3.8.3   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Ocean Pointe/
Hoakalei should be implemented:
   Appropriate Scale and Siting
   •   Minimize the visibility of large building volumes and elements from
waterfront and residential areas through building envelope restrictions, site
planning and landscaping.
   Environmental Compatibility
   •   Do not develop residential and apartment units in areas that would
expose residents to excessive aircraft noise.
   •   Since airport operations have continued at Kalaeloa, ensure land uses at
Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei are compatible with airport operations and respect
restrictions on development within airport approach and clear zones.
   •   Locate and operate uses that generate high noise levels in a way that
keeps noise to an acceptable level in existing and planned residential areas.
   •   Design and develop the built environment to avoid adverse impacts on
natural resources or processes in the coastal zone.
   •   To retain a sense of place, incorporate natural features of the site and
utilize landscape materials that are indigenous to the area in the design of
hotel and recreation areas, where feasible.
   Community Integration
   •   Although the design of Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei may have a distinct
identity and entry, link Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei with surrounding areas, such as
‘Ewa Beach and Kalaeloa by using connecting roadways, walkways, landscape and
architectural design.
   Urban Form
   •   Waterfront Light Industrial Mixed Use - Develop a light industrial mixed
use support area adjacent to the basin providing facilities such as repair and
storage. Building heights should generally not exceed 60 feet in this area.
   •   Waterfront Mixed Use - Develop a waterfront commercial center with
associated visitor units adjacent to the waterfront, featuring a wide public
promenade with retail attractions. Hotel and apartment buildings in this area
should generally not exceed 90 feet and all other buildings should generally
not exceed 60 feet. Buildings with frontage on the interior basin should be
limited to 40 feet. Buildings taller than 40 feet should be set back from the
basin frontage.
   •   Medium Density Residential Area - Develop a medium density residential
area adjacent to the Waterfront Mixed Use area to provide a transition between
the mixed uses of the Waterfront Mixed Use area and the Single Family and Low
Density Residential area to the east. Building heights in this area should
generally not exceed 60 feet.
      °   In order to minimize the visual impacts of the Medium Density
Residential areas adjacent to One‘ula Beach Park, the developer should:
            Maximize mauka-makai and other view corridors in the area by
orienting the narrow dimension of buildings parallel to the shoreline or
predominant view;
            Maximize open space by minimizing building bulk and using
extensive landscaping to create a park-like setting; and
            Provide greater setbacks and/or terraced building setback from the
edge of the basin for buildings exceeding 25 feet in height.
   •   Single Family and Low Density Residential Area - Develop a residential
community characterized by low-rise apartments and single-family homes in this
area. Building heights should generally not exceed 30 feet.
      °   There should be a minimum building setback of about 40 feet along the
basin’s edge to accommodate a public waterfront promenade. Lesser setbacks may
be permitted upon design review and approval by the DPP.
   •   Allow a small portion of the setback area to be covered by low-rise
buildings to allow for boat servicing, appropriate commercial uses, storage and
clubhouses. The maximum building height at the setback line in these areas
should be around 40 feet, rising one foot for each additional foot of setback
to a maximum of around 60 feet in the Medium Density Residential area and
around 90 feet in the Waterfront Mixed Use area.
   •   Set back all structures a minimum distance of 150 feet from the
shoreline. Lesser setbacks may be permitted upon design review and approval by
the DPP. The maximum building height at the setback line along the shoreline
should be 40 feet, rising one foot for each additional foot of setback up to
the appropriate height limit.
   Natural Environment
   •   Retain, enhance, and protect wetlands and other wildlife habitats.
   •   Design the golf course to accommodate storm water runoff in a manner
that maintains coastal water quality and avoids the use of concrete channels
for diversion drainage. Design the waterway to accommodate the runoff of
collected storm waters generated by a potential 100-year storm. Channel design
should use the most effective means to provide natural flushing of its waters.
Develop silting ponds mauka of the site to preserve water quality so that use
of the near-shore waters for recreational purposes and aesthetic enjoyment is
not limited in anyway.
   •   Avoid the use of breakwaters or jetties at the marina entrance, in order
to preserve surf sites.
   Public Access
   •   Provide a continuous pedestrian pathway open to the public along the
shoreline and along most of the basin, with the exception of sections where
private residential lots directly front the basin.
   •   Provide access to the entire waterway and ocean shorelines to the public
through the internal and peripheral pedestrian pathways.
   •   Provide public parking, restrooms, and shower facilities at regular
intervals for all sandy beach areas.
   Views and Vistas
   •   Preserve and enhance views from public streets and thoroughfares to the
mountains and sea wherever possible. In particular, distant views of the
Wai‘anae Range and the south coast of O‘ahu toward Honolulu and Diamond Head
from the public promenade near the marina entrance channel should be preserved.
   •   Orient hotel and apartment facilities in relationship to the waterfront
so as to preserve and maximize both mauka and makai views.
   Circulation
   •   Design the street network to provide for a reasonably direct route
through Kalaeloa to connect Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei to the City of Kapolei and
Kualaka‘i Parkway.
   •   Design all major roadway corridors to provide for bus pullouts and bus
shelters, bike paths, and sidewalks that are separated from the vehicular
travel way by a landscape buffer.
   Landscape Treatment
   •   Provide generous landscaping and vegetation throughout the development
to promote tropical beauty and provide visual relief and a feeling of
spaciousness.
   •   Design landscaping to provide continuity between residential, resort,
waterfront uses, commercial areas, the shoreline, golf course, and parks.
   •   Design landscaping to provide privacy, screening, shade, and temperature
control.
3.9   EXISTING AND PLANNED RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITIES
This section provides general policies and guidelines for the development of
new communities and the expansion or renovation of existing communities.
Guidelines are provided for three types of residential uses: Residential, Low
Density Apartment, and Medium Density Apartment.
   •   Residential areas consist of one and two-story single-family attached
and/or detached dwellings with individual entries.
   •   Low Density Apartment areas consist of two- and three-story townhouse or
low-rise apartment buildings. Dwelling units may have common entries, but
buildings are typically non-elevator structures.
   •   Medium Density Apartment developments take the form of multi-story
apartment buildings. They may be located in mixed-use zones, with the ground
floor or lower floors occupied by retail and service commercial uses.
3.9.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Overall Density - To achieve the desired compactness and character of
development in planned residential communities, develop with the housing
density of the aggregate area zoned for residential use (including the streets)
in the range of 10 to 15 units per acre. (This average does not include areas
zoned for commercial or industrial use.)
   •   Higher Density Housing Along the Transit Corridor - To promote use of
the elevated rail transit line, develop higher-density residential use along
the rail transit corridor linking Kapolei with Waipahū and PUC communities to
the east. Apartment and Commercial uses should be developed at greater
densities at the eight transit nodes. Each transit node will generally cover
areas influenced by a rail transit station. See the Urban Land Use Map in
Appendix A for the location of the eight transit nodes.
   •   Affordable Housing - Addressing affordable housing needs continues to be
a high priority given the persistent shortage. Require that 30 percent of the
housing units in new residential developments on lands within existing
Unilateral Agreements (UAs) be affordable to low and low-moderate income
households. Residential development that occurs on lands without existing UAs
may be subject to affordable housing requirements established by the City.
   •   Community Benefits Bonus (CBB) - To further achieve the desired urban
form and character of development in the Secondary Urban Center, developments
proposed in transit nodes subject to City-established transit-oriented
development plans may exceed the baseline level of floor area ratio (FAR) and/
or building height in exchange for providing commensurate community benefits.
CBBs for developments proposed in such transit nodes must be in alignment with
the vision and general policies and guidelines contained in this Plan.
   •   Physical Definition of Neighborhoods - Make the boundaries of
neighborhoods evident through the use of natural features, street patterns,
landscaping, building form, and siting. The focus of neighborhood activity
should be on the local street or a common pedestrian right-of-way or recreation
area.
   •   Community Centers - In the Master Plan for each new residential
community, identify where its village center, town center or “Main Street” area
is and how that center or Main Street will be established and supported by any
existing or planned commercial development.
   •   Compatible Mix of Building Forms - Use a variety of housing types and
densities to avoid visual monotony and accommodate a variety of housing needs,
but avoid sharp contrasts between the exterior appearance of adjacent housing
areas.
   •   Transit-Oriented Streets - Design street patterns and rights-of-way to
accommodate mass transit service and make it convenient to access for as many
households as possible.
   •   Connectivity - Minimize dead end streets, provide for intersections at
regular intervals, and connect with adjacent development. Allow roadway cross-
sections within new residential developments to be reduced from current
standards where higher capacity is provided by multiple alternative routes.
   •   Pedestrian and Bicycle Travel - Encourage pedestrian and bicycle travel,
particularly to reach neighborhood destinations such as schools, parks, and
convenience stores. At a minimum, provide pedestrian and bikeway connectivity,
where roadway connectivity is deemed not feasible, to allow direct travel
through the community and to neighborhood districts.
   •   Integration of Linear Corridors - Encourage physical and visual
connections between communities through the creative design of transportation
and utility corridors and drainage systems.
   •   Provision of Community Facilities - Provide land for community
facilities including churches; community centers, and elderly and child care
centers.
Table 3.4 gives an overview of the density and height guidelines for planned
and existing residential developments.
 
TABLE 3.4: DENSITY AND HEIGHT GUIDELINES BY RESIDENTIAL DENSITY CATEGORY
Residential Category     Density (Housing Units) Building Height
Residential              5-12/acre               not over two stories
Low Density Apartment    10-30/acre              not over three stories
Medium Density Apartment 25-90/acre              not over 90 ft 1
1 Building heights up to 150 feet allowed in City of Kapolei and Ko ‘Olina.
 
Conceptual locations for residential, low-density apartment, and medium-density
apartment development are shown on the Urban Land Use Map in Appendix A and in
maps of specific developments in Exhibits
3.3,
3.5, and
3.6. See Section 3.9.3 for further discussion of the Urban Land Use Map.
3.9.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Existing and
Planned Residential Communities should be implemented.
Residential
   Density
   •   Develop at densities of 5 to 12 units per acre, encouraging more
compact, innovative, environmentally sensitive design and alternative layouts.
   Building Height
   •   In general, limit buildings to not exceed two stories, although the
height may vary according to required flood elevation, slope, and roof form.
   Site Design
   •   Use features such as varied building setbacks and shared driveways to
avoid monotonous rows of garages and driveways along neighborhood street
frontages.
   Building Form
   •   Use varied roof forms, exterior colors and finishes, building
orientation, floor plans, and architectural details to provide visual interest
and individual identity.
Low Density Apartment
   Density
   •   Develop at densities of 10 to 30 units per acre.
   Height
   •   In general, limit buildings to not exceed three stories above grade.
Maximum building heights should allow for pitched roof forms.
   Building Form
   •   Use building form, orientation, location of entries and landscape
screening to maintain a sense of residential scale and provide greater privacy
and individual identity for housing units.
   Compatibility
   •   Ensure that building scale, roof form, and the quality of materials are
compatible with those of adjacent low-density residential areas.
Medium Density Apartment
   Location
   •   In general, locate medium-density apartment buildings in large planned
residential communities, adjacent to major collector streets, commercial or
civic centers.
   •   Develop medium-density apartment as the predominant form of housing in
and near the City of Kapolei and around transit nodes on the rail transit
corridor between Waipahū and Kapolei.
   Density
   •   Allow building density of 25 to 90 units per acre
   Height
   •   Limit building heights to not exceed 150 feet in the City of Kapolei and
the Ko ‘Olina Resort, up to 120 feet in transit nodes subject to City-
established transit-oriented development plans with the provision of community
benefits, and 90 feet elsewhere. Taller building heights are intended to allow
higher densities, create variation in the cityscape, give a visual sign of
transit nodes, and identify the City of Kapolei’s importance as a regional
center.
   Architectural Character
   •   Allow building scale, roof form and the quality of materials to reflect
an urban character.
   Height Setbacks
   •   Employ building height setbacks and landscaping to reduce the direct
visibility of taller buildings from lower density residential areas and from
the street front. Allow lower building elements to directly abut the street
front.
Circulation System
Master-planned projects should each have a circulation plan or “circulation
element” in their Project Master Plan (see Chapter 5).
Connectivity
   •   Use the circulation plan to define the hierarchy of streets within the
project and its relationship to the surrounding transportation network.
   •   Use a modified grid street pattern (modified as necessary to fit the
topography or other limitations) with block lengths of 300 feet by 500 feet or
any combination of two sides summing to 800 feet. (See
Exhibit 4.2 Street Network Guidelines.)
   •   Provide pedestrian pass-throughs or mid-block cross walks where blocks
exceed 500 feet on a side.
   •   Connect new residential development to adjacent subdivisions to allow
creation of an east-west and mauka-makai roadway network at approximately 1/
4 mile intervals.
Transit Routes and Facilities
   •   Show existing and proposed bus routes and specific measures to
accommodate efficient bus transit service for as many households as possible on
the circulation plan.
   •   Design the rights-of-way along existing or potential bus transit routes
to make provisions for bus shelters, bus pull-outs, and, if applicable, park-
and-ride facilities and/or future rail transit stations in accordance with
Department of Transportation Services (DTS) design standards.
   •   Require street patterns showing the alignment of proposed or potential
bus transit routes to be submitted to the DTS as part of the subdivision
roadway master plan review process.
   •   Design the circulation plan so that at least 85 percent of all
residences will be within a five-minute (or 1/4 mile) walking distance of an
existing or potential bus route or rail transit station, unless localized
topographic conditions make such a requirement impractical.
   •   Design the circulation plan so that all commercial development with more
than 1,000 square feet and all employment sites with more than ten employees
are within 1/8 mile of an existing or potential bus stop or rail transit
station.
   •   Design the circulation plan so that all development is within 1/2 mile
of an existing or potential bus or rail transit station, unless localized
topographic conditions make such a requirement impractical.
   •   Design the circulation plan so that potential bus transit routes have
two different access points into the proposed development. The route alignment
should seek to achieve optimal operational efficiency between the two access
points.
Pedestrian and Bicycle Routes and Facilities
   •   Design the circulation plan to indicate any principal pedestrian and
bicycle paths that are physically separated from roadways.
   •   Design street intersections along these separated paths to have a narrow
curb radius and include special signage, and paving to encourage safe and
convenient pedestrian and bicycle crossings.
   •   Allow interior mid-block pedestrian/bicycle routes to be provided as an
alternative to paved sidewalks along local streets.
Landscape Treatment
   •   Include conceptual street tree plans in the circulation plan.
   •   Identify entries to the community with special landscape treatment.
   •   Design the rights-of-way for major and minor arterials as landscaped
parkways, complete with a landscaped median strip, landscaped sidewalk, and
bikeways. Major arterials should have separate bike paths, and minor arterials
should have bike lanes. Suggested width for major arterials, including right-
of-way and planting strips, is 120 feet wide and for minor arterials is 100
feet wide.
   •   Plant canopy trees to shade the sidewalk/bike path areas.
   •   Install landscape treatment along the edges of the project that is
appropriate for the natural setting and designed to provide continuity and
transition from adjacent developed areas.
   •   Use xeriscaping (the use of native landscape materials with low water
demand), non-potable water for irrigation, and efficient irrigation systems
wherever possible to conserve groundwater resources.
3.9.3   RELATION TO URBAN LAND USE MAP
Residential areas are shown on the ‘Ewa Urban Land Use Map in Appendix A as
follows:
Residential and Low Density Apartment - Areas with this designation should be
zoned to allow residential or low density apartment uses, subject to
appropriate siting considerations and the General Policy for “Overall Density”
provided in Section 3.9.1.
Medium Density Apartment - Areas with this designation should be zoned
predominantly for medium density apartment use. Mixed use, with retail
activities at the ground level, is encouraged.
City of Kapolei – Areas within the City of Kapolei should be zoned for medium
density apartment use. Mixed use with retail and office activities at the
ground level and second floor should be encouraged.
The following uses are not specifically designated on the Urban Land Use Map,
but are allowed in all residential areas:
   •   Neighborhood commercial centers;
   •   Elementary schools;
   •   Parks;
   •   Churches;
   •   Community centers;
   •   Elderly care centers;
   •   Child care centers;
   •   Fire stations; and
   •   Other public facility and utility uses serving the area.
All residential developments should be compatible with Aircraft Approach and
Clearance Zones for Honolulu International Airport and Kalaeloa Airport.
3.9.4   RELATION TO ZONING
Table 3.5 provides guidelines for the zoning that may be appropriate to each of
the land use designations indicated in the revised Development Plan.
It is intended for use as a reference, which would permit modification or
creation of Land Use Ordinance zoning categories and land use regulations in
response to changing conditions without needing to amend the Development Plan.
TABLE 3.5: GUIDELINES FOR APPROPRIATE ZONING
Land Use Designation Appropriate Zoning Districts
TABLE 3.5: GUIDELINES FOR APPROPRIATE ZONING
Land Use            Appropriate Zoning Districts
Designation
Park, Golf Course,
Preservation/       P-2 if in State Urban or Agriculture District
Conservation        P-1 if in State Conservation District; otherwise P-2
Military Training   F-1
Area
                    AG-1 for all areas except where there is a predominant
Agriculture         pattern of lots under 5 acres in size
                    AG-2 for areas where lots are under 5 acres in size
                    R-5, R-7.5, R-10 for conventional single-family
                    subdivisions
                    R-3.5 if identified by Project Master Plan for innovative
Residential and Low small lot site design
Density Apartment   A-1 for low-rise flats, apartments, and townhouses
                    A-2 if identified by Project Master Plan for medium density
                    apartment development
                    AMX-1, AMX-2 if within 1/4 mile of a transit node
Medium Density      A-2, A-3
Apartment           AMX-2, AMX-3 if within 1/4 mile of a transit node
                    B-2 with limits on floor area for office use for all types
                    of centers except Neighborhood Commercial Centers
Commercial Centers  B-1 for Neighborhood Commercial Centers (not shown on Urban
                    Land Use Map)
                    B2, BMX-3, Resort for the Ko ‘Olina Marina Mixed Use area
                    B-2, BMX-3
Town Center         A-1, A-2
                    I-1, IMX-1 in fringe areas where present use is
                    predominantly service industrial
Resort              Resort
                    New zoning category designed specifically for this use; for
Technology Park     interim, retain the existing IMX-1 and B-2 zoning with use
                    limitations as specified in the UA.
                    I-2 for heavy industrial areas in Barbers Point Industrial
                    Area
Industrial          I-1, IMX-1 for service industrial areas near City of
                    Kapolei and master-planned communities
                    I-3 in vicinity of Barbers Point Deep Draft Harbor and of
                    Hoakalei Marina
 
3.10   PLANNED COMMERCIAL RETAIL CENTERS
This section provides general policies and guidelines for the development of
commercial retail centers in ‘Ewa.
These planned commercial centers differ from commercial areas within towns such
as Waipahū or the City of Kapolei because they are typically managed as a unit
with shared parking and centralized management.
Definitions - Four types of commercial centers can be defined based on size and
function:
   •   Neighborhood Commercial Center - (5-10 acres or less, typically located
within or adjacent to residential area, up to 100,000 square feet [sq. ft.] of
floor area).
      °   Neighborhood Commercial Centers have frontage on at least one
collector street, and may have up to 100,000 sq. ft. of floor area, which is
leased to tenants such as grocery stores, sundries stores and other services
and shops catering to common household needs.
      °   Single commercial establishments, such as convenience stores or “Mom
and Pop” stores, or groupings of stores smaller than five acres in size also
fall within this category, provided that they are appropriately located and
will not contribute to the evolution of a commercial strip.
   •   Community Commercial Center - (10-30 acres, typically located on an
arterial highway or at the intersection of two major collector streets, up to
250,000 sq. ft. of floor area).
      °   This type of center principally serves the community in which it is
located, providing for basic shopping and service needs on a larger scale than
the neighborhood center.
      °   Community Commercial Centers may contain up to 250,000 sq. ft. of
floor area, and major attractions typically include a large grocery store, a
drug store, and/or a department store. The other, smaller tenants in the center
are largely dependent on the effectiveness of the major tenants to draw
customers.
      °   The Kapolei Shopping Center is an example of this type of commercial
center.
   •   Major Community Commercial Center - (up to 50 acres, located in
communities which are not near an urban center, up to 500,000 sq. ft. of floor
area); and
   •   Regional Commercial Center - (more than 50 acres, located with frontage
on a major arterial highway and access from freeway interchange, more than
500,000 sq. ft. of floor area).
      °   This type of center is typically “anchored” by several major stores
and features a wide variety of other tenants, often including entertainment and
community facilities.
      °   The regional center serves a broad arc of surrounding communities but
also attracts business from throughout the island.
      °   Examples include Waikele, Pearlridge, and Kāhala Mall.
3.10.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Develop planned commercial centers, outside of the City of Kapolei, to
provide retail shopping and services for the ‘Ewa residential communities in
which they are located.
   •   Develop commercial centers outside of the City of Kapolei by
concentrating commercial uses in central locations instead of in continuous
commercial strips along arterial roads.
   •   Emphasize pedestrian and transit access to and within the centers.
   •   Permit multi-family residential use above the first floor and include it
wherever possible in commercial centers.
   •   Wherever possible, design new commercial centers to help create and/or
support pedestrian-friendly village centers, town centers, or “Main Street”
areas for their communities.
      °   Such centers or Main Streets provide a place where people from the
surrounding neighborhoods gather, shop, dine, or play and are a key element
that defines a community’s identity.
   •   Limit development of Major Community Commercial Centers or Regional
Commercial Centers to the City of Kapolei since the City of Kapolei is intended
to provide for most regional shopping needs.
   [Note: The DHHL has notified the DPP that it has exempted itself from City
and County planning and zoning to develop a 1.6 million square foot Regional
Shopping Center on 67 acres near the intersection of Kualaka‘i Parkway and
Kapolei Parkway. Included in the project are two hotels with 300 rooms and two
office towers with 100,000 square feet of office space.]
   •   Allow Neighborhood Commercial Centers to be located within any
residential community, and to be reviewed and approved as part of development
of master planned residential communities or redevelopment of existing
communities.
   •   Allow Community Commercial Centers at ‘Ewa Beach, Laulani, Ho‘opili
(near the intersection of Farrington Highway and Kunia Road), East Kapolei
(near the intersection of Farrington Highway and the Kualaka‘i Parkway and near
the intersection of Kapolei Parkway and the Kualaka‘i Parkway), the Villages of
Kapolei, Makaīwa Hills, and Ko ‘Olina Marina as shown on the Urban Land Use Map
in Appendix A.
   •   Allow medium density mixed use commercial development within a quarter-
mile radius of proposed transit stations on the rail transit corridor linking
Waipahū with the City of Kapolei/Kapolei West.
   •   Restrict office uses as a principal use in ‘Ewa Community Commercial
Centers. Offices that provide services to the local community may be included
in the centers, but the emphasis should be on retail uses. Offices providing
support to functions of the University of Hawaii West O‘ahu may be included in
the Transit Oriented Development areas around the two transit stations closest
to the campus. Locate developments primarily oriented to office uses in the
City of Kapolei.
3.10.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Planned
Commercial Retail Centers should be implemented.
All Commercial Centers
   Orientation to “Main Street” or the Town/Village Center
   •   Structures in the commercial center should be located and oriented to
the street up to the “build to” line along the designated “Main Street” or
Town/Village Center frontage.
   •   Most parking for commercial structures fronting “Main Street” or the
Town/Village center should be located behind the structures in joint
development parking lots or structures although some on-street parking can be
provided on the Main Street or Town/Village Center frontage.
   •   The main entrance to commercial structures fronting the “Main Street” or
Town/Village Center should be located on that street frontage with secondary
entrances from parking areas.
   •   Sidewalks in front of retail uses fronting the “Main Street” or Town/
Village Center should be wide enough (12 to 16 feet) to allow window shopping
or outdoor dining.
   Mix of Uses
   •   Plan commercial centers primarily for retail uses and for office uses
that provide services to the surrounding community. Residential uses may also
be incorporated in such commercial centers.
   Appropriate Scale
   •   Design the building mass of the commercial center to be in keeping with
its urban and natural setting.
   Compatible Style
   •   Design the architectural character of commercial centers to respect the
surrounding urban and natural features, particularly when located adjacent to a
residential area or significant natural or historic feature. Neighborhood
commercial centers should reflect a residential architectural character.
   Accessibility
   •   Incorporate site design and facilities to promote pedestrian, bicycle
and transit access in commercial centers. Pedestrian and bicycle access is more
important for smaller, neighborhood centers, while transit access is more
significant for community centers. Apply these designs and facilities to the
expansion or renovation of existing commercial centers, as well as to new
centers.
Neighborhood Commercial Centers
   Architectural Character
   •   Design the project architecture to respect the character of adjacent
residential uses.
   •   Use gable and hip-form roofs to create breaks in the roofline to reduce
the apparent scale of large roof plates.
   •   Use exterior materials and colors that are typically found in
neighborhood houses.
   Building Siting
   •   Orient buildings to the pedestrian.
   •   Orient storefronts to face the street and to the extent possible, be
sited close to the sidewalk.
   •   Place parking and service areas behind the buildings or otherwise
visually screened from streets and residential areas.
   Building Height and Density
   •   Design buildings at a residential scale.
   •   Allow building height limits which allow for gable and hip-form roof
elements.
   •   Limit total floor area for a lot or contiguous lots with common parking
to no more than 100,000 sq. ft.
   Vehicular Access
   •   Provide access to the parking and loading areas from a collector street.
   •   Permit access to a local residential street only if it is for emergency
or secondary access and would not encourage through traffic along the local
street.
   Pedestrian and Bicycle Facilities
   •   Provide at least one pedestrian access from the public sidewalk or other
off-site pedestrian pathway to the entrances of establishments in the
commercial center that does not require crossing a traffic lane or parking lot
aisle or driveway.
   •   Design bicycle racks for security, convenience, and visibility from the
street entry.
   •   Provide appropriate signage to indicate the availability and location of
bicycle racks.
   Visual Screening, Lighting and Signage
   •   Screen parking and service areas from the street and adjacent
residential lots by planting a landscape screen of trees and hedges along
street frontages and property lines and by planting shade trees throughout the
parking lot.
   •   Use xeriscaping (the use of native landscape materials with low water
demand), non-potable water for irrigation, and efficient irrigation systems
wherever possible to conserve groundwater resources.
   •   Use only low-level or indirect lighting in parking lots.
   •   Require all signage to either be non-illuminated or indirectly
illuminated.
Community Commercial Centers
   Architectural Character
   •   Allow varied architectural character, depending on the context.
   •   Require commercial center buildings that are visible from adjacent
residential areas to reflect a residential character while allowing other
facades to have a character more typical of a commercial building.
   •   Avoid disruptive contrasts between facades and extended blank walls that
are visible simultaneously from public areas.
   Building Bulk and Massing
   •   Provide a transition in scale from larger building elements of the
commercial center to finer elements near the adjacent use when the building is
adjacent to a residential area or a building of historic value.
   •   Avoid blank facades on portions of buildings visible from a street by
using texture, articulation, color, and fenestration to create visual interest.
   •   Require facades that are close to the public right-of-way to be composed
of display windows and pedestrian entrances.
   Building Height and Density
   •   Limit building heights to generally not exceed 45 feet.
   •   Limit total floor area to no more than 250,000 sq. ft. for a standard
Community Commercial Center.
   Pedestrian, Bicycle, and Transit Facilities
   •   Provide street frontage improvements for bus stops, including a bus
shelter and a pull-out off a traffic lane, along all abutting streets that have
bus routes.
   •   Provide a pedestrian pathway from the bus stop to an entrance to the
main building of the commercial center. The pathway should be clearly indicated
with special paving or markings and covered to provide weather protection, if
the commercial center building is not directly connected to the bus shelter.
   •   Design bicycle racks to provide security and be visible from the street
entry to the commercial center.
   •   Provide appropriate signage to indicate the availability and location of
bicycle racks.
   Visual Screening
   •   Minimize the visibility of parking and service areas from the street and
adjacent residential areas through screening.
   •   Plant a landscape screen, consisting of trees and hedges, along the
street fronting the parking lot or garage.
   •   Plant shade trees throughout all parking lots.
   •   Use xeriscaping (the use of native landscape materials with low water
demand), non-potable water for irrigation, and efficient irrigation systems
wherever possible to conserve groundwater resources.
   •   Provide landscape planters along the facade of each parking level for
parking garages close to and readily visible from a street.
   •   Visually screen service areas from public and residential areas.
   Signage
   •   Indirectly illuminate signage visible from residential areas.
Regional Commercial Centers
   Architectural Character
   •   Use architectural elements to establish a visual identity and design
theme, especially when the theme reflects a cultural, historical, or
geographical feature of the area.
   •   Include public areas to provide for performances and cultural events.
   Building Bulk and Massing
   •   Use varied elevations and building axes to visually differentiate
building volumes.
   •   Avoid blank facades on portions of buildings visible from a street by
using texture, articulation, color, and fenestration to create visual interest.
   •   Require facades that are close to the public right-of-way to be composed
of display windows and pedestrian entrances.
   •   Site buildings to physically define separate sections for parking areas
to provide visual relief and easily identifiable references for customers
returning to parked vehicles.
   Building Height and Density
   •   Limit building heights to generally not exceed 60 feet, but permit
heights up to 90 feet for architectural features expressing a design theme.
   •   Limit the floor area ratio to no more than 2.0.
   Use Allocation
   •   Limit office and entertainment uses. Office uses should not exceed five
percent and entertainment/recreation uses should not exceed 15 percent of gross
leasable area.
   Pedestrian, Bicycle, and Transit Facilities
   •   Locate public bus facilities on the grounds of the center, but allow
reduction in the number of parking spaces to offset the cost of providing the
easement and improvements on-site.
   •   Directly connect the bus stops to the commercial center’s main structure
via a covered pedestrian walkway.
   •   Include well-defined walkways at regular intervals in parking lots to
minimize conflicts between pedestrians and moving vehicles.
   •   Provide appropriate signage to indicate the availability and location of
bicycle racks.
   Visual Screening
   •   Plant a landscape screen, consisting of trees and hedges, along parking
lot street frontages.
   •   Plant shade trees throughout all parking lots.
   •   Provide landscape planters along the facade of each parking level for
parking garages close to and readily visible from a public right-of-way.
   •   Use xeriscaping (the use of native landscape materials with low water
demand), non-potable water for irrigation, and efficient irrigation systems
wherever possible to conserve groundwater resources.
   •   Locate or screen loading and other service areas so that they are not
visible off-site.
3.11    KO ‘OLINA RESORT
The ‘Ewa Development Plan prior to 1997 included specific development
objectives, planning principles, and standards for Ko Olina Resort, under its
former name of West Beach. The Unilateral Agreement to the 1986 zoning
ordinance for the Resort includes detailed conditions regarding the master plan
of the resort, building design, design of the public shoreline area, and public
access to the shoreline.
Development of the Resort can proceed based on the existing zoning and
Unilateral Agreement. This section incorporates key elements for Ko ‘Olina from
the former Development Plan and the Unilateral Agreement.
Ko ‘Olina Resort is designated in the General Plan as one of four “secondary”
resort destinations, which are part of an overall strategy to relieve growth
pressure on Waikīkī. The resort is located on 640 acres between Kahe Point
Beach Park and the Kalaeloa Barbers Point Deep Draft Harbor. When developed, Ko
‘Olina Resort should be a water-oriented residential and resort community with
at least 4,000 visitor units in hotels and resort condominiums and 5,200
residential units.
Ko ‘Olina is master-planned to incorporate recreational features in addition to
visitor accommodations. Recreational facilities include a golf course, a small
boat marina, and four man-made swimming lagoons. Development of the golf course
and the swimming lagoons, and installation of roads and utilities are
completed.
The first hotel opened in 1993 with almost 400 rooms. The first phase of a 750
unit time-share resort began construction in 2001, and by September 2009, over
500 units had been completed. Construction of a third 800 unit hotel/time-share
project began in 2008. In addition, over 1,100 homes, second homes, and resort
condominiums have been built and sold in recent years.
3.11.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Develop Ko ‘Olina Resort as an integral part of the Secondary Urban
Center.
   •   Develop Ko ‘Olina to provide substantial waterfront areas for public
use. The entire shoreline should be natural open space, softened by
landscaping, and should focus on the beach and swimming lagoons.
   •   Design the built environment to avoid adverse impacts on natural
resources or processes in the coastal zone.
3.11.2   KO ‘OLINA LAND USE MAP
The Ko ‘Olina Land Use Map,
Exhibit 3.6, shows land uses and a schematic view of the roadway system within
the Ko ‘Olina Resort. Land uses include the following:
   •   Resort - Resort sites are located along the shoreline and should have
hotels, apartments, and accessory commercial and recreational facilities for
resort use. The Lanikūhonua Cultural Center, located at the northern end of the
resort area, should be principally open space with accessory structures as
needed to support the cultural center use. The Paradise Cove site, located
between Lanikūhonua and the park, should be used for resort commercial
purposes.
   •   Medium Density Apartment - Medium density apartment uses are located
along the shoreline between Mauloa Place and Waipahē Place and near the Marina
Activity Center.
   •   Marina Mixed Use - The Marina Activity Center is located in this area
and should have a mix of commercial and high-density residential uses with
Business Mixed Use (BMX) or Resort zoning.
   •   Residential and Low Density Apartment - Two residential and low density
apartment areas are located within and adjacent to the golf course.
   Exhibit 3.6
   Ko ‘Olina Land Use Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8464.png]
 
3.11.3   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Ko ‘Olina Resort
should be implemented:
   Urban Form
   •   Appropriate Scale and Siting - Minimize the visibility of large building
volumes and elements from waterfront and residential areas through building
envelope restrictions, site planning, and landscaping.
   •   Marina Activity Center - Establish a higher density, centrally located
hub adjacent to the marina to serve as the activity center for the community
and as an attraction that enhances Ko ‘Olina’s role as a secondary resort
destination area for O‘ahu.
      °   Permit commercial mixed use development in the area generally bounded
by the park at the fourth lagoon, Waipahē Street, Ali‘inui Drive, Kekai Place
and the marina. This area should consist of marina frontage with public
promenade, commercial mall, and low and medium density apartment developments.
      °   Limit marina frontage generally to a height limit of 40 feet.
      °   Require buildings taller than 40 feet to be set back from the marina
frontage.
      °   Allow variations in the amount of setback to add visual interest.
      °   Limit medium density apartment buildings and commercial buildings in
this area to generally not exceed 150 feet.
   •   Medium Density Apartment Area - Two additional medium density apartment
areas are located on Kekai Place and on Ali‘inui Drive. Limit building heights
in these areas to generally not exceed 150 feet.
   •   Resort Center - Allow development of a resort destination area
containing at least 4,000 visitor units in the area designated for Resort use
on
Exhibit 3.6. Limit hotel and apartment buildings in this area to generally not
exceed 150 feet.
   •   Limit building heights at Lanikūhonua and Paradise Cove to no more than
40 feet in height.
   •   Encourage compatibility of uses and design integration at the boundaries
separating different use areas.
   •   Prohibit designation of land within 1/2 mile of the centers of petroleum
and explosives terminals at the Kalaeloa Barbers Point Deep Draft Harbor for
Resort, Apartment, Residential, or Commercial use.
   Natural Environment
   •   Locate and operate uses that generate high noise levels in a way that
keeps noise to an acceptable level in existing and planned residential areas.
   •   To retain a sense of place, design the resort and recreation areas to
incorporate natural features of the site and utilize landscape materials that
are indigenous to the area where feasible.
   •   Set back all structures a minimum distance of 300 feet from the
shoreline. Lesser (or greater) setbacks may be permitted upon design review and
approval by the DPP.
   •   Protect the existing coastal environment against potential negative
impacts associated with increased recreational use and public access to the
shoreline.
   •   Discourage further modification to the shoreline, including the man-made
lagoons, unless required either to meet the conditions of existing approvals or
to address demonstrated deterioration to the quality of coastal resources.
   Shoreline Access
   •   Provide a continuous public walkway along the entire shoreline fronting
the resort, anchored at either end by public beach parks. Public access should
be provided along the shoreline fronting Lanikūhonua and Paradise Cove, but not
in as formal a manner as that provided on the shoreline frontage of the
adjacent hotel, apartment, and commercial Ko ‘Olina resort sites.
   •   In addition to the public parks at each end of the resort, provide a
series of privately-owned and maintained parks encompassing a minimum of 20
acres of land along the shoreline. These private parks should be open to use by
the general public and accessible from the continuous shoreline public walkway.
   •   Provide a public access easement, parking lot, restrooms, and showers at
each of the four swimming lagoons.
   Views and Vistas
   •   Although the design of Ko ‘Olina may have a distinct identity and entry
link Ko ‘Olina with surrounding areas through the use of connecting roadways,
walkways, landscape, or architectural design.
   •   Preserve and enhance views from public streets and thoroughfares to the
mountains and sea wherever possible.
   •   Orient hotel, commercial, and apartment buildings perpendicular to the
shoreline to maximize mauka and makai views.
   •   Protect important views of landforms along the Wai‘anae Coast, the
ridgeline of the Wai‘anae Range, and the ocean, including but not limited to
the following:
      °   Makai view from Farrington Highway at the entrance to Ko ‘Olina,
      °   Makai view from Ko ‘Olina coastal roadways makai of Farrington
Highway,
      °   Views of the Wai ‘anae Coast from the shoreline at Ko ‘Olina, and
      °   Mauka and lateral views of Ko ‘Olina from the Small Boat Harbor and
the Deep Draft Harbor.
   •   Allow variation in building heights near the shoreline and along the
marina frontage, particularly to preserve long views and minimize the
perception of building bulk from the shoreline, beach, and marina frontage.
   Circulation System and Transportation Facilities
   •   Establish an integrated bikeway and pedestrian circulation network
throughout the resort, with bicycle lanes and routes and sidewalks along major
roadways, lined with shade trees.
   •   Reserve the OR&L right-of-way for a bikeway and historic railroad train
service for historic and educational rides between Nānākuli, Ko ‘Olina,
Kapolei, and ‘Ewa Villages, and for a bikeway continuing on from ‘Ewa Villages
to Waipahū and ‘Aiea as part of the Pear Harbor Historic Trail.
   Landscape Treatment
   •   Provide generous landscaped open spaces throughout the resort area to
promote tropical beauty and provide visual relief and a feel of spaciousness.
   •   Use landscaping to provide continuity between residential, resort,
marina, and commercial areas and the recreational areas at the shoreline,
parks, and golf courses.
   •   Use landscaping to enhance and preserve view corridors and provide
privacy, screening, shade, and comfort.
   •   Use xeriscaping (the use of native landscape materials with low water
demand), non-potable water for irrigation, and efficient irrigation systems
wherever possible to conserve groundwater resources.
3.12   INDUSTRIAL CENTERS
This section provides general policies and guidelines for development of
industrial centers and industrial uses in ‘Ewa.
Industrial centers in ‘Ewa include the Barbers Point Industrial Area, Kalaeloa,
Honouliuli Industrial Area, Kahe Valley, and an area near the Hoakalei marina.
Barbers Point Industrial Area includes Campbell Industrial Park, Kalaeloa
Barbers Point Deep Draft Harbor, Kenai Industrial Park, Kapolei Harborside, and
Kapolei Business Park. It is the site of the State’s largest heavy industrial
area (Campbell Industrial Park) and an important industrial harbor and fuel
transfer point.
The Barbers Point Redevelopment Commission approved continuation of the airport
at Kalaeloa to provide a reliever airport for Honolulu International Airport,
and a site for general aviation operations. As a result, the Pacific Aerospace
Training Center, a program of the Honolulu Community College, was established
to provide flight training for Hawai‘i, Mainland, and international students. A
number of opportunities for aviation-oriented industrial and training
developments associated with the Center have been identified.
In 2002, the State Legislature transferred redevelopment responsibility for
Kalaeloa to the HCDA. The HCDA prepared a Master Plan for redevelopment of
Kalaeloa. The Master Plan (approved in 2006) identifies lands capable of
providing over two million square feet of light industrial floor space.
Honouliuli includes 44 acres of land zoned industrial/commercial mixed use in
the ‘Ewa by Gentry project, the 49-acre Honouliuli Wastewater Treatment Plant,
and the 72-acre ‘Ewa Industrial Park zoned for intensive industrial uses.
3.12.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Maintain industrial activity at Barbers Point Industrial Area, Kalaeloa,
Honouliuli Industrial Area, and Kahe Valley and permit industrial activity at
other dispersed industrial areas, as noted below.
   •   If a major film studio is developed within industrial areas in ‘Ewa,
allow accessory uses, such as film production offices, a “back lot” area with
commercial uses, and visitor attractions. Overnight accommodations for film
crews are allowable as an accessory use to a major film studio.
   •   Industrial uses will be prioritized in industrial areas within transit
nodes before consideration will be given to residential and commercial uses.
   Barbers Point Industrial Area/Kalaeloa
   •   Maintain the Barbers Point Industrial Area as one of O‘ahu’s and the
State’s most important industrial areas.
   •   Allow construction of an additional electrical power generating plant at
the Barbers Point Industrial Area, possibly taking advantage of cogeneration
opportunities with other industrial activities. The 138 kilovolt transmission
corridor running from the Barbers Point Industrial Area to Waiau could
accommodate additional load on the existing poles.
   •   Develop the northern parts of Kapolei Business Park, Kapolei Harborside,
and any Kalaeloa lands designated for industrial use for light industrial uses
or compatible commercial uses as a transition between heavy industry at
Campbell Industrial Park and the City of Kapolei.
   Honouliuli Industrial Area
   •   Develop Honouliuli as a smaller industrial area, used for wastewater
treatment and for light industrial and industrial-commercial mixed uses to
serve the surrounding communities.
   •   Allow a power generation facility to be included if it is dependent on
wastewater treatment operations and can be designed so that it is generally not
visible from nearby major public rights-of-way, residential areas, and
commercial areas.
   •   Expand the Honouliuli Wastewater Treatment Plant to accommodate
additional growth in the region as well as to provide additional facilities for
higher levels of wastewater treatment.
   Other Industrial Areas
   •   Allow service-oriented industrial uses throughout the region as noted
below. Uses requiring larger lots should be located in Campbell Industrial
Park. Small-lot uses, including automobile repair shops, contractor’s yards,
and businesses serving residential and commercial areas, should be allowed to
locate near the City of Kapolei in the Kapolei Business Park and on any
industrial lands which may be designated within Kalaeloa.
   •   The Hawaiian Electric Company generating plant in Kahe Valley is and
should remain the largest source of electrical power on O‘ahu. Allow the plant
to be expanded to take advantage of available land area, cooling system
capacity, and power transmission lines, if needed.
   •   Allow development of the industrial area planned for the western edge of
Ocean Pointe to accommodate marine haul-out facilities, repair shops, and
related small boat industrial uses.
3.12.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Industrial
Centers should be implemented.
All Industrial Areas
   Appropriate Scale
   •   Minimize the visibility of large building volumes and tall building or
machinery elements from resort areas, residential areas, commercial and civic
districts, and parks through site planning and landscaping.
   Environmental Compatibility
   •   Locate industries and utilities that discharge air or water pollutants,
even when treated, in areas where they would impose the least potential harm on
the natural environment in case the treatment process fails to perform
adequately.
   •   Locate and operate uses that generate high noise levels in a way that
will keep noise to an acceptable level in existing and planned residential
areas.
   •   Use xeriscaping (the use of native landscape materials with low water
demand), non-potable water for irrigation, and efficient irrigation systems
wherever possible to conserve groundwater resources.
Barbers Point Industrial Area
   Coastal Environment
   •   Set back all buildings a minimum of 60 feet from the shoreline and 150
feet where possible if justified based on historic and projected shoreline
erosion data.
   •   Provide a lateral public access easement along the entire shoreline from
the Kalaeloa/Barbers Point Deep Draft Harbor to Kalaeloa.
   •   Continue to provide the major entry point to the shoreline easement at
the Barbers Point beach park and lighthouse area.
   •   Provide at least one additional minor access, similar to the one at
Kenai Industrial Park, at the drainage channel next to Kalaeloa.
   •   Provide access at other points where public parking on the street is
available.
   Building Height and Mass
   •   Limit building heights generally not to exceed 60 feet when they consist
of large mass.
   •   Allow taller, vertical structures when required as part of an industrial
operation, but require a view plane study to be conducted for structures over
100 feet in height to determine if they can be sited or designed to minimize
visibility from residential, resort and commercial areas, public rights-of-way,
and the shoreline.
   Use Allocation
   •   Allow small lots to be provided within the Kapolei Business Park and
Kapolei Harborside as sites for small business service uses.
   Landscape Treatment
   •   Require the planting of a landscape screen, consisting of trees and
hedges, along street frontages to minimize the visibility of parking, storage,
industrial equipment, and operations areas from the street.
   •   Require special landscape treatment for streets leading to the shoreline
access points.
Honouliuli Industrial Area
   Building Height and Mass
   •   Limit building heights to generally not exceed 60 feet, especially for
buildings of large mass.
   •   Allow taller, vertical structures when required as part of an industrial
operation, but require a view plane study to be conducted for structures over
100 feet in height to determine if they can be sited or designed to minimize
visibility from residential, resort and commercial areas, major public
thoroughfares, and the shoreline.
   Roadway Setbacks
   •   Require wastewater treatment structures to be at least 300 feet from the
proposed alignments of the Kapolei Parkway, and the Kualaka‘i Parkway. Setbacks
for other industrial uses should be as given in the zoning standards.
   Landscape Treatment
   •   Require the planting of a landscape screen, consisting of trees and
hedges, along street frontages to minimize the visibility of parking, storage,
industrial equipment, and operations areas from the street.
Other Industrial Areas
   Building Height and Mass
   •   Limit building heights to generally not exceed 60 feet, especially for
buildings of large mass. Developments within transit nodes, subject to City-
established transit-oriented development plans, may exceed the baseline FAR
and/or building height up to the maximum bonus height with the provision of
commensurate community benefits through CBBs.
   •   Allow taller, vertical structures when required as part of an industrial
operation and when commensurate community benefits are provided, but require a
view plane study to be conducted for structures over 100 feet in height to
determine if they could be sited or designed to minimize visibility from
residential areas, resort and commercial areas, major public thoroughfares, and
the shoreline.
   Separation of Use Areas
   •   Allow small industrial lots (10,000 sq. ft. or less) for repair services
and “incubator” businesses to be located near the commercial core of the City
of Kapolei, but not on the principal commercial streets.
   •   Locate warehousing and other industrial uses requiring larger lots in
industrial parks.
   Landscape Treatment
   •   Require use of privacy walls and buildings, with minimal use of
landscaping to visually screen small-lot industrial areas, outdoor work and
storage areas for vehicles, equipment and supplies from the street and adjacent
lots.
   •   Require use primarily of landscaped setbacks and street trees to provide
visual screening in large-lot industrial subdivisions.
3.12.3   RELATION TO URBAN LAND USE MAP
Industrial zoning should generally be limited to those areas shown as
“Industrial” on the Urban Land Use Map in Appendix A, provided that industrial
zoning may be granted for an individual activity which, because it is a public
transportation or utility use or because of its unique characteristics, is
unable to locate in a planned industrial area.
Heavy industrial uses should be located at Campbell Industrial Park,
transitioning to lighter industrial uses closer to the City of Kapolei.
3.13   KALAELOA
Kalaeloa (formerly Barbers Point Naval Air Station) is designated as a Special
Area within the ‘Ewa Development Plan Area because of the need to provide
strategies for the redevelopment of the area, to coordinate the activities of
the many private, City, State, and Federal agencies involved in the area, and
to coordinate redevelopment of Kalaeloa with the development of the rest of
‘Ewa.
In 1999, the Barbers Point Naval Air Station was closed, and the process of
transferring the Navy lands to civilian control for public benefit began.
Approximately 1,050 acres was retained by the Navy, and 457 acres were
transferred for use by various other Federal Agencies. The balance of 2,180
acres were declared surplus and made available for transfer to various State
and City agencies for public use.
Table 3.6 lists the acreage retained by Federal agencies, acreage under
negotiation for conveyance, and the acreage which has been transferred to City
and State agencies.
The Kalaeloa Redevelopment Plan was prepared for Kalaeloa in December 2000 by
the Barbers Point Naval Air Station Redevelopment Commission and accepted as
the Kalaeloa Special Area Plan by the City Council (Res. 01-86, April 2001).
In July 2002, the State Legislature transferred responsibility for Kalaeloa to
the HCDA. HCDA prepared a Kalaeloa Master Plan for redevelopment of Kalaeloa
that was approved by the HCDA Board and the Governor in 2006. The Master Plan
identifies the need to upgrade all major infrastructure systems (roads,
drainage, water supply and wastewater) to City standards in order to support
the substantial residential, retail, office and industrial development
envisioned in the Master Plan. The Master Plan should be submitted for
acceptance by the City Council as the Special Area Plan for Kalaeloa, replacing
the 2000 Kalaeloa Redevelopment Plan.
TABLE 3.6: KALAELOA LAND CONVEYANCE STATUS (in acres)
                    ACREAGE
AGENCY PROPOSED USE retained conveyed pending
TABLE 3.6: KALAELOA LAND CONVEYANCE STATUS (in acres)
                                                     ACREAGE
AGENCY                  PROPOSED USE                 retained conveyed pending
                        Golf Course, Horse Stables,
                        two beach parks, Landfill,
U.S. Navy               Public Works Center, and     437      0        0
                        Defense Reutilization and
                        Marketing Office
Ford Island Properties  Lands brokered for Ford      0        492      0
                        Island Development
U.S. Coast Guard        Air Wing Headquarters        0        44       14
U.S. Federal Aviation   Navigational Aid Beacon      0        18       0
Agency
U.S. Fish & Wildlife    Pearl Harbor National        0        37       0
                        Wildlife Refuge
U.S. Veterans Affairs   Homeless Assistance and      0        7        0
                        Social Services
U.S. Postal Service     Existing Post Office         0        1        0
Hawai‘i National GuardConsolidated Headquarters &  0        148      0
                        Operations
State DOE               Barbers Point Elementary     0        14       0
                        School
State DHHL              Leases for commercial and    0        556      0
                        industrial purposes
State HCDA              Kalaeloa Heritage Park       0        77       19
State HHFDC             Holo Loa‘a Shelter         0        12       0
State DOT               Kalaeloa (John Rodgers)      0        752      53
                        Airport
State DOT               Various Roads                0        91       0
UH Honolulu CC          Pacific Aerospace Training   0        6        0
                        Center
City BWS                Reverse Osmosis Facility     0        20       0
City DTS                Various Roads                0        66       0
                        Kalaeloa Regional Park,
City Parks & Recreation Kalaeloa Downtown            0        0        421
                        Neighborhood Park
Ford Island Housing LLC On-Station Housing           0        53       0
Carmel Partners         Orion, Makai, and Orion Park 0        73       0
                        Housing
State HCDA              Unallocated(1) Parcels       0        0        259
Unallocated(1)          Roads and Easements          0        0        26
TOTAL                                               437      2,467    792
Notes:
(1) Lands originally assigned to agencies that subsequently withdrew their
interest in receiving the lands.
SOURCE: Hawai‘i Community Development Authority, “Table 2-1: Kalaeloa Land
Conveyance Status,” Kalaeloa Master Plan (March 1, 2006) and agency updates as
of May 2011.
 
3.13.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Use Kalaeloa’s redevelopment as an opportunity to integrate the
circulation system and land use pattern of the ‘Ewa Plain.
   •   Develop a major new regional public park, and provide continuous lateral
public access along the shoreline at Kalaeloa.
   •   Create a continuous pedestrian route along most of the ‘Ewa Coast by
reserving the entire shoreline of Kalaeloa for public access and recreation,
and linking to adjacent pathways in Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei and Campbell
Industrial Park.
   •   Require building setbacks from the shoreline.
   •   Integrate the road network within Kalaeloa with the regional circulation
system for all of ‘Ewa to provide additional ways for residents and workers to
cross ‘Ewa from east to west and north to south.
   •   Provide ample lands within Kalaeloa devoted to uses that will create
long-term jobs for ‘Ewa’s residents.
3.13.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Kalaeloa should
be implemented:
   •   Develop a major regional park at Kalaeloa that provides beach recreation
and support facilities near the shoreline, other active recreation facilities
in mauka areas, and preserves for archaeological and cultural resources,
wildlife habitat, wetlands, and endangered plant colonies.
   Coastal Environment
   •   Require a minimum building setback of 60 feet and a lateral public
access easement along the entire shoreline, with the entry point at the former
military beach recreation center. Where possible, the setback should be
expanded to 150 feet where justified by historic or adopted projections of
shoreline erosion rates.
   •   Connect the Kalaeloa shoreline access easement to shoreline access
easements at the Barbers Point Industrial Area to the west and to public
pedestrian pathways at Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei to the east.
   Separation of Use Areas
   •   Design the road pattern and use landscape buffers to separate and
distinguish military support housing, airport/industrial facilities, and
recreation/wildlife areas from one another.
   Appropriate Scale
   •   Use site planning and landscaping to minimize the visibility of large
building volumes and elements from residential areas, commercial and civic
districts, and public rights-of-way and parks.
   Circulation System and Transportation Facilities
   •   Design the circulation system to include major roadways connecting the
City of Kapolei to the shoreline recreation center and Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei.
   •   Upgrade the road system to allow bus stop facilities to be provided at
the airport, military housing area, and shoreline recreation area.
   Landscape Treatment
   •   The visibility of parking, storage, and airport/industrial operations
from the street should be minimized through the planting of a landscape screen,
consisting of trees and hedges, along street frontages.
   •   Require streets connecting the City of Kapolei to Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei
and the shoreline recreation areas to receive special landscape treatment.
   •   Use xeriscaping (the use of native landscape materials with low water
demand), non-potable water for irrigation, and efficient irrigation systems
wherever possible to conserve groundwater resources.
3.14   PEARL HARBOR NAVAL BASE (WEST LOCH)
The West Loch Annex of the Pearl Harbor Naval Munitions Command is proposed to
be the principal site where U.S. Department of Defense ordnance handling and
storage for O‘ahu is consolidated. The existing Explosive Safety Quantity
Distance (ESQD) arc at West Loch will remain, but would not need to be
enlarged. City general policies for these areas are:
   •   Expand limited public access to the shoreline waters of West Loch beyond
the West Loch Shoreline Park.
   •   Retain and enhance wetland wildlife habitat areas along the Pearl Harbor
shoreline.
3.15   UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I WEST O‘AHU
This section contains general policies and guidelines for development of the
University of Hawai‘i West O‘ahu.
In 1997 at the time when the revised ‘Ewa Development Plan was adopted, the
University of Hawai‘i West O‘ahu campus was planned to be developed on a 991-
acre site mauka of the H-1 Freeway. In 2004, the Board of Regents decided to
move the site of the initial UHWO campus back to a 500 acre parcel at the
makai-Wai‘anae corner of the Kualakal Parkway - Farrington Highway
intersection. A large portion of the makai campus lies within the Kalo‘i Gulch
watershed.
The City Council approved a zone change allowing development of a campus and a
mixed use community within the 500-acre makai site in 2008. The 2010 State
Legislature approved $48 million in bond financing, allowing construction of
the first phase of the campus to begin in the fall of 2010 with first classes
on the new campus planned for the Fall of 2012. The University is currently
evaluating options for the development of the adjacent residential and
residential-commercial mixed use lands, and plans to sell 15 acres to finance a
portion of the first phase construction.
The mauka site still remains part of the UHWO lands and could be used in the
future for university and university-related uses.
Projected size is 4,600 students by 2019, and 7,600 students by 2025. The
projected 2025 faculty and staff is 1,040.
3.15.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Develop the campus to be environmentally and culturally sensitive to the
site and reflective of the Hawaiian culture and of the heritage of ‘Ewa.
   •   Develop the campus in combination with an adjacent University Village to
evoke a unique sense of place that distinguishes it as an important civic and
cultural institution in ‘Ewa.
   •   Provide direct vehicle access to the campus from both Farrington Highway
and Kualaka‘i Parkway.
   •   Orient the campus to support pedestrian access to and transit usage from
two rail transit stations, one located near the corner of Farrington Highway
and Kualaka‘i Parkway, and a second located on the Kualaka‘i Parkway midway
between Farrington and Kapolei Parkway.
   •   Design the campus to use open space areas for flood detention and
retention as part of the Kalo‘i Gulch watershed master plan.
3.15.2   GUIDELINES
   Place Making
   •   Establish a clear identity and “sense of place” for the main campus
through attentive design and careful integration with the adjacent mixed-use
commercial area referred to as “University Village”. Major campus buildings
surrounding the Great Lawn should serve as one anchor for the University
Village “main street” commercial/residential area anchored at the other end by
a major transit station near the mauka entry from Kualaka‘i Parkway (in the
vicinity of the Farrington/Kualaka‘i Parkway intersection).
   Regional Integration
   •   Design the campus and surrounding mixed-use/residential community to
function as a fully integrated community within the context of the broader
regional community. The campus and surrounding community should include
housing, support services, community and business facilities, in addition to
the required academic facilities.
   Community Orientation and Service
   •   Design the campus to be community-oriented and to serve the Kapolei area
and West O‘ahu as an urban park and cultural center, providing community
services, and cultural opportunities.
   Functional and Accessible Design
   •   Design the campus to reflect appropriate functional relationships,
internal compactness, and accessibility between academic functions and
supporting facilities, providing a pleasant and efficient study environment.
   Drainage Impacts
   •   Incorporate flood detention and retention capability in the campus open
space system in order to reduce the downstream impact of major storm events.
For example, sports playing fields could be designed to act as flood detention
basins during major storm events.
   •   Design the drainage plans for the campus so as to not increase storm
water flows or velocity above the design levels used in designing the water
retention areas of the ‘Ewa Villages Golf Course and the drainage systems for
earlier developments in the Kalo‘i Gulch watershed.
   Architectural Forms
   •   Site and design specific activity areas and structures to accommodate
required internal academic or support relationships. This would include siting
of buildings or facilities to promote academic continuity, provide spatial
definition to public areas, and allow easy access to needed support areas
(housing, business/food services, recreation, and parking).
   •   Design buildings and structures to reflect sensitivity to the local
environmental conditions, as well as to Hawaiian regional styles.
   •   Avoid use of structures which visually dominate the site unless required
to carry out the building’s function. Rather, low-rise academic structures with
more emphasis on regional architectural forms and human scale should prevail.
   Landscape Forms
   •   Use trees and other landscape materials throughout the campus to provide
welcome shade and visual relief.
   •   Use street trees and accent plantings to feature gateways, define
circulation corridors, or enhance special activity areas. The intensity or
selection of landscape treatments should be used to further define, identify,
or buffer various campus land uses.
   •   Use landscape materials which reflect climate conditions, limited water
resources, and maintenance issues.
   •   Use native/indigenous species in landscape treatments to the greatest
extent possible.
   Circulation
   •   Design circulation patterns to provide for easily accessed routes to,
within, and around the campus. Minimize conflicts between cars, bikes, and
pedestrians.
   •   Highlight the hierarchy of roadway, bikeway, and pedestrian circulation
patterns by use of a distinctive design treatment for each element of the
system or other appropriate method.
   •   Use appropriate site design and placement to minimize visual impacts
from vehicle corridors and parking lots.
   •   Make provisions for public transportation with ties to the regional
system and transit corridor an integral part of the campus plan.
   Open Space/Views
   •   Integrate and blend open space components throughout the campus in the
form of passive landscape areas, courtyards, mall spaces, and multi-purpose
recreation fields or community spaces.
   •   Link the internal campus open space system with the adjoining regional
open space systems of the adjacent developments.
   •   Develop campus gateways and enhance internal view corridors as an
integral part of the open space elements within the campus.
   •   Preserve and enhance mauka-makai views within major open spaces and
through building siting.
   •   Use landscape treatments or building design to visually buffer between
conflicting or unsightly functions.
CHAPTER 4.   PUBLIC FACILITIES AND INFRASTRUCTURE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
This chapter sets forth policies and guidelines to guide planning and
construction of proposed public and private public facility projects and
infrastructure systems to carry out the vision for future development of ‘Ewa,
as described in Chapter 2. These policies and guidelines are not regulations,
but provide guidance that decision makers and administrators should follow,
where sensible, in approving projects and revising rules, regulations, and best
practices standards.
Information on timing and phasing of both planned and proposed infrastructure
and public facility projects, which was available during the plan revision
period, is also included. However, each project proposal is only identified and
presented conceptually; not on a site-specific basis. More detailed information
on the specific need, route alignment, site boundaries, capacity, and other
specifications for each project, as applicable, will be prepared at the master
planning stage required before a specific project can be approved. As noted in
Chapter 5, existing Unilateral Agreements, Zoning and Urban Design Plans will
continue to guide development in the area.
Policies and principles are provided for the following public facilities and
infrastructure systems:
   4.1   Transportation Systems   
   4.2   Water Allocation and System Development   
   4.3   Wastewater Treatment   
   4.4   Electrical Power Development   
   4.5   Solid Waste Handling and Disposal   
   4.6   Drainage Systems   
   4.7   School Facilities   
   4.8   Public Safety Facilities   
   4.9   Other Community Facilities   
4.1   TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
This section describes the existing conditions, plans, and proposals for
development of ‘Ewa’s roadways, transit system, and bikeways. (See the Public
Facilities Map in Appendix A and the Planned and Proposed ‘Ewa Roadway Network
Improvements listing in
Table 4.1.) The section concludes with general policies and guidelines to guide
future transportation system development in ‘Ewa.
The planned and proposed roadway elements and other transportation system
features which are listed as potentially being needed to meet the projected
development in ‘Ewa were identified through the regional planning and
transportation analysis done for the initial ‘Ewa Development Plan Revision
Program from 1994 to 1997, subsequent revisions of the O‘ahu Regional
Transportation Plan (ORTP), the ‘Ewa Highway Master Plan and the 2009 ‘Ewa
Roadway Connectivity Study.
Because of its generally even, gradually sloping terrain, ‘Ewa offers decided
advantages for transportation.
   •   It provides an opportunity to create multiple linkages and routes
between the various parts of the region. This advantage was enhanced by the
closing of the Barbers Point Naval Air Station, which has allowed for increased
road linkages to and across Kalaeloa.
   •   The terrain allows for relatively less expensive development of a
dedicated transit right-of-way. The flat terrain also increases the feasibility
of constructing a rail transit system within that right-of-way.
   •   Both the terrain and the sunny, low rainfall climate enhance bicycling
and walking as alternative forms of transportation, as well as for recreation.
An improved environment for bicycling and walking also improves the potential
for high transit ridership. (See the discussion of the Kapolei Area Bikeway
Plan in Section 4.1.5.)
Act 54 (May 2009), requires State and County transportation departments to
adopt and implement a complete streets policy and establishes a task force to
determine necessary standards and guidelines. The intent of a complete streets
policy is to create and configure a connected street system that provides for
all users; including, but not limited to, pedestrians, bicyclists and transit
passengers of all ages and abilities.
Table 4.1: Planned and Proposed ‘Ewa Roadway Network Improvements
 ‘Ewa Hwy      ORTP 2035           ORTP 2035
 Master Plan (2) Project Numbers (3) Phasing (3)
Table 4.1: Planned and Proposed ‘Ewa Roadway Network Improvements
                                                                                   ORTP
                                                                        ‘Ewa Hwy 2035    ORTP 2035
                                                                        Master     Project Phasing (3)
                                                                        Plan (2)   Numbers
                                                                                   (3)
Planned Extensions (1)
   Existing Roads Improvements
      Widen Farrington Hwy (4 lanes, Ft. Weaver to Golf Course Roa2020       20C     2011-2020
      Widen Farrington Hwy (Kalaeloa Blvd to Kamokila)
      Widen Ft. Barrette Rd
      []   (4 lanes, Farrington to FDR Avenue)                 2010/2020  21S     2011-2020
      []   (4 lanes, FDR Avenue to Saratoga Avenue)                       56C     2011-2020
      Widen Kunia Road/Ft. Weaver Road
      []   (4 lanes, Anonui Street to Kupuna Loop)                        71S     (Illustrative)
      []   (6 lanes, Kupuna Loop to Farrington Hwy.)                      71S     (Illustrative)
      []   (6 lanes, Geiger Road to North Road)                2010
      Widen Kalaeloa Boulevard Phase II (Lauwiliwili St. to Olai St.)        17C     2011-2020
      Extend Hānu‘a Street to Farrington Hwy.                  2020       16S     2011-2020
      Widen Farrington Hwy (6 lanes, Kaleloa Blvd. to Hakimo Rd.             54S     2021-2035
[Nānākuli])
      H-1 contraflow lane
      Extend Kamokila Boulevard from Roosevelt Avenue to Saratoga            55C     2021-2035
Avenue
   New Roads
      Kapolei Parkway
      []   Aliinui Dr. [Ko ‘Olina] to Kalaeloa Blvd          2010, 2020 18C     2011-2020
      []   Kamokila Blvd to Kamaaha Ave.                       2010, 2020 19C     2011-2020
      Kalaeloa East-West Spine Road                                          S57     2021-2035
      Kualaka‘i Pkwy (North-South Road)
      []   Widen to 6 lanes from H-1 to Kapolei Pkwy                      22S     2011-2020
      []   Extend from Kapolei Pkwy to Keoneula Blvd.          2020       23S     2011-2020
      Makakilo Drive extension                                               35C     2011-2020
      Makakilo Mauka Frontage Road, Makakilo Dr. to Kalaeloa Blvd            58S     2021-2035
   Interchange Improvements
      H-1 Kunia Interchange (Add eastbound lane)                             71S     (Illustrative)
      H-1 Pālailai Interchange                                   2020       16S     2011-2020
   New Interchanges
      H-1 Kapolei Interchange                                     2010, 2020 15S     2011-2020
      Makaīwa Hills
Additional Proposed Elements (4)
      Develop additional north-south and east-west roads near the City of Kapolei
      Develop an additional north-south road in East Kapolei
      Develop an additional east-west road in East Kapolei connecting between Farrington Highway,
Kualaka‘i Pkwy, and Fort Weaver Road
Notes:
  (1)   Some projects listed in previous editions of the O‘ahu Regional Transportation Plan (ORTP) were
not listed in the ORTP 2035 adopted in April 2011. If no number appears, the project was not included in
the ORTP 2035.
  (2)   2010: Project identified in the ‘Ewa Highway Master Plan (2002) as needed by 2010. 2020: Project
identified in the ‘Ewa Transportation Impact
  (3)   The ORTP 2035 was approved in April 2011. Project Numbers from Table 8 of the ORTP 2035. C
indicates a City project; S is a State Project. Phasing indicates the period when funding and
construction is anticipated for the project. Illustrative projects could be added if additional funding
is available.
  (4)   A number of additional north-south and east-west connections needed to provide connectivity as
‘Ewa develops are identified on the public facilities map in Appendix A.
 
4.1.1   EXISTING ROADWAY NETWORK
The major east-west arterials of the ‘Ewa roadway system includes:
   •   The H-1 Freeway, which is the major arterial road connecting ‘Ewa with
the Primary Urban Center,
   •   Farrington Highway, which, past Kapolei, is the sole arterial highway
connecting the Wai‘anae Coast with ‘Ewa, and, between Kapolei and Waipahū, is a
secondary east-west route; and
   •   Kapolei Parkway, which links ‘Ewa Beach in the east with the City of
Kapolei in the west, and eventually will extend to Ko ‘Olina.
North-south roads distribute traffic onto and off the east-west arterials at
several locations. They include:
   •   Fort Weaver Road which links West Loch, ‘Ewa Villages, ‘Ewa by Gentry,
Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei, and ‘Ewa Beach with Farrington Highway and H-1,
   •   Kunia Road, which connects ‘Ewa with Central O‘ahu’s Schofield Barracks
and Wahiawā,
   •   Kualaka‘i Parkway which links Kapolei Parkway with Farrington Highway
and the H-1 Freeway;
   •   Fort Barrette Road, which extends south from the City of Kapolei to
Kalaeloa,
   •   Makakilo Drive, which continues up the hillside from the Makakilo
Interchange of the H-1 Freeway, providing the only access to Makakilo, and
   •   Kalaeloa Boulevard, which provides access to Campbell Industrial Park
and Kalaeloa Barbers Point Harbor via the H-Ts Palailai Interchange.
According to the O‘ahu Regional Transportation Plan 2035, the number of people
traveling on H-1, Farrington Highway, and Fort Weaver Road just before the
Kunia Interchange is projected to increase from 183,600 trips per day in 2007
to 276,600 in 2035, an increase of 51 percent. Traffic congestion on east-west
and north-south collector and connector roadways in ‘Ewa is also increasing,
even outside the peak commuting hours.
As noted in Section 4.1.6, the substantial development of Secondary Urban
Center jobs (from 19,900 jobs in 2000 to over 103,000 jobs by 2035) is expected
to increase the number of ‘Ewa residents who work in the area. However, even
with this substantial job growth, it is projected that the number of commuters
traveling to the PUC from ‘Ewa and Central O‘ahu will still increase, although
at a lower rate than would occur if development of the Secondary Urban Center
was not supported.
4.1.2   PLANNED EXTENSIONS OF THE ROADWAY NETWORK
Planning and development of major roadways is the shared responsibility of the
State Department of Transportation (DOT) and the DTS and use of federal
transportation funds is coordinated through the O‘ahu Metropolitan Planning
Organization (OMPO), a joint City- State agency.
A consortium of landowners and developers working with the DOT and the DTS
funded the ‘Ewa Highway Master Plan which identified major roadway improvements
needed to meet projected development in ‘Ewa through 2025.
Based on the ‘Ewa Highway Master Plan, the City Council, in 2002, adopted
Ordinance 02-52 establishing the ‘Ewa Highway Impact Fee which is added to all
building permits in ‘Ewa and in the Royal Kunia and Village Park areas of
Central O‘ahu. Funds collected from the fees are to be used to provide the
local contribution for seven major ‘Ewa roadway projects needed by 2010 to meet
projected growth. (See
Table 4.1 for details.)
The 2002 ‘Ewa Highway Master Plan was recently updated as part of an update to
the ‘Ewa Highway Impact Fee program. The updated Plan identifies eight roadway
and intersection projects needed to meet growth in ‘Ewa traffic by 2020.
The O‘ahu Regional Transportation Plan (ORTP) 2035 was adopted in April 2011.
It is the State and County plan for what transportation projects are needed
through 2035 for O‘ahu. In order to receive Federal funding, projects need to
be listed in the ORTP. See
Table 4.1 for listings of the ‘Ewa roadway projects in the ORTP 2035 and the
2002 and 2011 versions of the ‘Ewa Highway Master Plan.
The ‘Ewa Highway Master Plan and the ORTP 2035 show major elements of the
future ‘Ewa roadway network. These major improvements include:
   •   Widening of Fort Weaver Road;
   •   Widening of Farrington Highway;
   •   Completion of Kapolei Parkway, which is planned as a major east-west
corridor, connecting the eastern parts of ‘Ewa with the City of Kapolei and
employment areas to the west;
   •   Connection of Kualaka‘i Parkway mauka of the H-1 Freeway interchange
with the extension of Makakilo Drive;
   •   Widening of Fort Barrette Road;
   •   Extension of the Kualaka‘i Parkway south of Kapolei Parkway into
Kalaeloa to provide a direct access to the Regional Park for East Kapolei
residents and UH-West O‘ahu campus staff and students;
   •   Extension of Keoneula Boulevard to link Ocean Pointe\Hoakalei with the
Kalaeloa Regional Park and the extension of Kualaka‘i Parkway;
   •   Extension of Kamokila Boulevard to Saratoga Avenue to further improve
this route between Kalaeloa and the City of Kapolei;
   •   Extension of Geiger Road to connect with Saratoga Road and provide a
direct link between Kalaeloa Boulevard, Kamokila Boulevard, Fort Barrette Road
and the Kualaka‘i Parkway;
   •   Improvements to existing H-1 Freeway interchanges at Pālailai, and
Kunia;
   •   Construction of a new H-1 Freeway interchange at Kapolei;
   •   Widening of Kalaeloa Boulevard;
   •   Extension of Hanū‘a Street parallel to Kalaeloa Boulevard to enhance
truck access between Farrington Highway and Barbers Point Industrial Area/
Kalaeloa Barbers Point Deep Draft Harbor; and
   •   Development of a mauka frontage road to connect Makakilo Drive with
Kalaeloa Boulevard.
Recognition in this Plan of these major improvements to future roadway networks
for ‘Ewa in no way implies City Council approval of these projects. Any
projects requiring City funding will have to be approved through the Capital
Improvements Program process.
4.1.3   ADDITIONAL ELEMENTS OF THE ROADWAY NETWORK
The planned development of East Kapolei and redevelopment of Kalaeloa will
eventually open additional areas for use and increase transportation needs
beyond the levels planned for the ‘Ewa Highway Master Plan and the ORTP 2035.
Additional east-west and north-south roadways will be needed to enhance
movement between the various parts of the ‘Ewa region and to provide improved
access to activity centers such as Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei and the Kalaeloa
Regional Park, including:
   •   Development of an east-west collector-connector roadway system, which
connects developments on both sides of Kualaka‘i Parkway in an efficient
circulation pattern;
   •   Development of additional north-south roads to improve circulation
between the City of Kapolei and the freeway, Makakilo and Makaīwa Hills;
   •   Construction of a new H-1 Freeway interchange at Makaīwa Hills;
   •   Extension of Keaunui Road to connect with Renton Road;
   •   Development of an additional east-west arterial between East Kapolei and
Fort Weaver Road; and
   •   Development of at least one additional north-south road between East
Kapolei and Farrington Highway, east of the Kualaka‘i Parkway.
The need for these roads has been established only at the conceptual stage, and
further study, planning, and approvals will be required to establish need,
appropriate route, capacity, and other characteristics.
DPP has completed a road connectivity study for the ‘Ewa region to identify
where east-west and mauka-makai connector roads should be located to link
adjacent subdivisions. Results of the study are used by the Department in the
approval of subdivision layouts.
4.1.4   TRANSIT
With population growth, the City should increase transit service in ‘Ewa in
order to enhance circulation among ‘Ewa communities and between ‘Ewa and the
adjacent Wai‘anae and Central O‘ahu areas, and to provide suitable service for
peak-hour commuting.
4.1.4.1   Bus Service
Bus service is provided through the DTS, which currently contracts with O‘ahu
Transit Services (OTS) for operation of TheBus and Handi-Van system.
The Comprehensive Bus Facility and Equipment Requirements Study, published in
1994 by the Honolulu Public Transit Authority, examined bus system expansion
and financing needs for the period 1994 - 2006. This study has not been
updated. Currently, there are no plans to expand the bus fleet beyond the
current 531 buses. For the fleet to expand its service, public review and
Council approval will be necessary.
The DTS has identified and proposed for development two park-and-ride
facilities in ‘Ewa, one near the Kualaka‘i Parkway/Kapolei Parkway
intersection, and another near the corner of Kualaka‘i Parkway and Farrington
Highway. An alternatives analysis will be conducted for a third facility near
the civic center area of the City of Kapolei.
Policies, planning principles, and guidelines in this Development Plan support
the establishment of transit service throughout ‘Ewa and creation of linkages
feeding into transit nodes along the rail transit corridor (see Section
4.1.4.2).
4.1.4.2   Planned Rapid Transit Corridor
In 2006, the DTS completed a planning Alternatives Analysis to evaluate
alternatives that would provide high-capacity transit for the rail transit
corridor between the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa, downtown Honolulu, and the
fast growing ‘Ewa region. On December 22, 2006, the City Council selected, as
the Locally Preferred Alternative, a fixed-guideway transit system, now known
as the elevated rail transit line, extending from the City of Kapolei to the
University of Hawaii Manoa with a connection to Waikīkī. This initial phase
will begin in East Kapolei near the Salvation Army Kroc Center and the DHHL
headquarters, and will end at the Ala Moana Shopping Center.
As shown on the Phasing Map in Appendix A, a rail transit corridor is planned
to connect the City of Kapolei with Waipahū, and onward to the PUC. Service on
the rail transit corridor could provide a shuttle service between Kapolei West,
the City of Kapolei, Kalaeloa, East Kapolei (DHHL East Kapolei, UHWO,
Ho‘opili), and Waipahū, and an express commuter service to and from the PUC. In
peak-hour commuting, the elevated rail transit line will provide high-speed
dedicated transit service.
By connecting to the PUC to Kapolei via Waipahū, the rail transit corridor will
provide for a future high-speed connection between UHWO, Leeward Community
College, Honolulu Community College, and the University of Hawai‘i at Manoa.
The ‘Ewa portion of the elevated rail transit line is being constructed from
Waipahū through Ho‘opili, turning south to run along Kualaka‘i Parkway to
extend into Kalaeloa where it turns west and runs along Saratoga Road until it
turns north and enters the City of Kapolei on Wakea Street, turning west on
Kapolei Parkway until reaching its terminus near the Kapolei Commons shopping
center.
Developments along the rail transit corridor should set aside appropriate sized
right-of-way and space for pedestrian-station interface areas for the
establishment, when needed in the future, of an elevated rail transit line.
Such a system will require a 28-foot to 32-foot right-of-way along the route
and a 75-foot right-of-way for rail transit stations.
Land has been set aside for a rail transit right-of-way in the median of
Kapolei Parkway and along the east side of the Kualaka‘i Parkway corridor.
DR Horton, Schuler Division, has purchased the former Campbell Estate lands
along Farrington Highway between Kualaka‘i Parkway and Fort Weaver Road. They
have made a commitment to provide a rail transit corridor right-of-way between
Kualaka‘i Parkway and Fort Weaver Road.
Land has been set aside in the City of Kapolei for a transit station/bus
terminal/park-and-ride facility, and provisions should be made for transit
stations/park-and-ride facilities at each of the transit nodes along the rail
transit corridor.
Medium density apartment and commercial development should be developed at
greater densities within transit nodes. These transit nodes should be designed
to give priority to pedestrians and areas intended for pedestrian access and
circulation. The objective is to create a land use pattern that would allow
residents to minimize use of the private automobile and encourage use of
transit for longer trips and walking or biking for short trips.
4.1.4.3   Commuter Ferry System
TheBoat, a high-speed commuter ferry system, operated between September 2007
and June 2009, and provided an alternative way to commute to the PUC from ‘Ewa
and West O‘ahu. The ferry ran between Kalaeloa Barbers Point Harbor and the
Aloha Tower.
Renewal of the service may be possible if an ‘Ewa terminus in the ‘Ewa Beach
area could be obtained.
4.1.5   BIKEWAY SYSTEM
The Kapolei Area Bikeway Plan (KABP), published by Campbell Estate in 1991,
establishes a comprehensive bikeway network to serve the ‘Ewa Plain. The
network would include 56 miles of bikeway facilities, including bike paths
(separated from the roadway), bike lanes (four- to six-foot lanes) and bike
routes (shared curbside vehicle lane, with minimum 12-foot width).
The Kapolei Area Bikeway Plan is part of the City of Kapolei Urban Design Plan,
which was updated and adopted by the City Council in 2008. The KABP covers all
of ‘Ewa except for military bases in the area. Elements of the KABP have been
adopted by the State Department of Transportation as part of the State bikeway
plan, Bike Plan Hawaii (2003), and have been included in draft O‘ahu Bike Plan
maps for ‘Ewa which are being reviewed as part of a City update to the 1999
Honolulu Bicycle Master Plan.
In addition, the DPP has completed the ‘Ewa Roadway Connectivity Study (May
2009) which provides a proposed bikeway facility plan for ‘Ewa to be used in
evaluating roadway master plans submitted as part of subdivision applications.
The ‘Ewa Development Plan includes all the projects found either in the KABP,
in the State’s Bike Plan Hawai‘i, or the ‘Ewa Roadway Connectivity Study. As
shown in
Exhibit 4.1, major bike paths should run along the OR&L right-of-way, Kapolei
Parkway, the Kualaka‘i Parkway, and Fort Weaver Road. Bikeways should also be
incorporated into other major roadways, and there should be an extensive
network of bike lanes within the City of Kapolei and the Villages of Kapolei.
   Exhibit 4.1
   ‘Ewa Bikeway System
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8462.png]
 
4.1.6   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Transportation System Functions - To support ‘Ewa’s role as the site for
the Secondary Urban Center and a major growth area for new residential and
employment development, its transportation system should:
      °   Provide adequate access between residences and jobs, shopping, and
recreation centers in ‘Ewa as development occurs;
      °   Provide improved access to and from adjacent areas, especially
Central O‘ahu; and
      °   Provide adequate capacity for major peak-hour commuting to work in
the Primary Urban Center. (Although the share of residents who will both live
and work in ‘Ewa is projected to increase from 17 percent in 1990 to 46 percent
by 2030, a majority of residents will still commute to jobs outside the
region.)
   •   Transportation Development Priorities - Meet demand for peak-hour
transportation in ‘Ewa by:
      °   Increased use of transit; and
      °   Transportation demand management through:
            Provision of improved service on High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV)
facilities;
            Provision of park-and-ride facilities; and
            Use of other programs which encourage reduced use of the single
occupant private automobile.
   Comprehensive Roadway Network
   •   Design and develop the roadway system to provide multiple routes for
traveling among the various residential communities and activity centers of
‘Ewa, thereby lending variety to travel within the region and promoting
communication among its communities. Network designs for communities should
take on more of a grid pattern, providing intersections between collector or
connector streets at approximately quarter-mile intervals.
   •   Design and develop the roadway system to increase connections between
parallel major collectors and arterials - e.g., between Kualaka‘i Parkway and
Fort Weaver Road - rather than relying primarily upon loop roads to feed the
major roadways. Planning for East Kapolei and for Kalaeloa are important
opportunities for creating such connections.
   Land Use Planning Anticipating Rapid Transit
   •   Reserve land sufficient for the right-of-way for the Council-identified
rail transit corridor prior to development and plan for medium density, high-
traffic land uses along the corridor. This strategy will contribute to the
feasibility of developing a high-speed transit line and will result in a more
mobile, less automobile-dependent community.
   •   Plan all the communities along the proposed transit corridor on
Farrington Highway, on Kualaka‘i Parkway, through Kalaeloa, and on Kapolei
Parkway to reflect the desire to establish a rail transit corridor with medium
density residential and commercial nodes located at regular intervals.
   Transit-Oriented Community Street Systems
   •   Design circulation systems within residential communities and commercial
centers to emphasize connections between north-south and east-west streets and
accessibility from residential streets to bus routes, parks, schools, and
commercial centers.
   •   Design circulation systems to facilitate bicycle and pedestrian travel,
to increase transit use, and to reduce dependence on automobile travel (see
Chapter 3, Sections 3.9 and 3.10, for more detailed planning principles and
guidelines for circulation in residential communities and commercial centers).
   •   Adequate Access and Services - Before zoning approval is given by the
City Council for new residential and commercial development in ‘Ewa, the
Department of Transportation Services, DPP, and State Department of
Transportation, as appropriate, should:
      °   Report if adequate transportation access and services can be provided
with existing facilities and systems; and
      °   If adequate capacity cannot be provided by existing facilities,
recommend conditions that should be included as part of the zone change
approval in order to assure adequacy, including timing of any necessary
improvements.
   •   Reduction in Automobile Use - Reduce reliance on the private passenger
vehicle by:
      °   Providing circulation systems with separated pedestrian and bicycle
paths and convenient routes for public transit service;
      °   Designing street systems in new development areas which reduce the
length of dead end streets and provide for smaller blocks in order to
facilitate bus routes, provide better access for emergency and utility vehicles
and encourage walking and biking;
      °   Providing supporting facilities and amenities for pedestrian,
bicycle, and public transit use, including the use of bike trails, and the
provision of bicycle racks at commercial centers, bicycle storage facilities at
employment centers and bus shelters at bus stops; and
      °   Allowing and encouraging medium-density and high-traffic land uses
along the Council-identified rail transit corridor, especially within a
quarter-mile of centers of the transit nodes.
   Roadways
   •   Develop the roads listed in the ‘Ewa Highway Master Plan and the O‘ahu
Regional Transportation Plan to meet the development anticipated by 2035.
   •   Develop additional east-west and north-south roadways to enhance
movement between the various parts of the ‘Ewa region and to provide improved
access to activity centers such as the proposed Kalaeloa Regional Park and the
Hoakalei marina.
   •   Design the extension of the Kualaka‘i Parkway south of Kapolei Parkway
into Kalaeloa to minimize adverse impacts on historic railway operations and
historic resources at the ‘Ewa Marine Corps Air Field.
   Transit
   •   Increase transit service in ‘Ewa to enhance circulation within ‘Ewa and
between ‘Ewa and the adjacent Wai‘anae and Central O‘ahu areas and to provide
suitable service for peak-hour commuting.
   •   Provide sites for transportation centers and park-and-ride facilities as
new communities are developed.
   •   Develop a rail transit corridor connecting the City of Kapolei with the
Primary Urban Center to provide both a shuttle service between Kapolei West,
the City of Kapolei, Kalaeloa, DHHLEast Kapolei, the UHWO campus, Ho‘opili, and
Waipahu, and an express commuter service to and from the Primary Urban Center.
   •   Set aside land in the City of Kapolei and along the rail transit
corridor for rail transit stations and park-and-ride facilities.
   •   Establish a commuter ferry service to downtown Honolulu from Hoakalei
Marina if such service is found to be feasible and if sufficient financing can
be obtained to construct improvements needed to provide such service from the
Marina.
   Bikeway System
   •   Develop major bike paths along the OR&L right-of-way, Kapolei Parkway,
the Kualaka‘i Parkway, and Fort Weaver Road.
   •   Incorporate bikeways into other major roadways.
   •   Develop an extensive network of bike lanes within the City of Kapolei
and the Villages of Kapolei.
4.1.7   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for transportation
system development in ‘Ewa should be implemented.
   •   Community-Level Street Standards - Revise standards for public streets
within residential communities and commercial centers to support and improve
pedestrian and bicycle travel and on-street parking. While average motor
vehicle speed may be reduced, safety and enjoyment for pedestrians and
bicyclists would be increased and greater efficiency in land use, reduced
constructions costs, and improved street function may also be achieved.
   •   Design the street network to provide multiple options for reaching major
amenities such as the Main Street/Village Center shops, schools, parks and
community facilities, without needing to access an arterial boulevard.
   •   Consider view corridors to the mountains, open space, and other local
and regional landmarks in the arrangement of streets, commercial centers, and
shared spaces within both residential and mixed use districts.
   •   Provide a circulation network master plan for ‘Ewa that is comprised of
a loose “grid” of arterials at 1/2-1 mile intervals, collector streets at 1/
4 mile intervals and connectors roads between individual developments at
regular internals between collectors, where permitted by terrain. See
Exhibit 4.2.
   •   Connect existing adjacent neighborhoods to new streets, bikeways, paths,
and trails.
   •   Use traffic calming measures to slow traffic making short cuts and
support a desirable living environment.
   •   Use multiple connecting streets within and between residential
neighborhoods to knit neighborhoods together, not form barriers.
   •   Use streets, bikeways, and walkways to create a unifying circulation
network that provides convenient routes throughout the community.
   •   Establish specific connectivity standards (minimum intersection
frequency, maximum dead end length, number of dwellings or buildings on a cul-
de-sac, and minimum street spacing) for each zoning district.
   Exhibit 4.2
   Street Network
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8460.png]
 
4.2   WATER ALLOCATION AND SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT
In 1987, the State enacted the State Water Code in order to protect, control,
and regulate the use of the State’s water resources for the benefits of its
people. Under the Code, the City is responsible for preparing the water use and
development plan for the City and County of Honolulu.
This plan, called the O‘ahu Water Management Plan (OWMP), is prepared by the
Board of Water Supply with the assistance of the State Commission on Water
Resource Management and the DPP, and approved by the City Council following
extensive public review and comment. The goal of the OWMP is to provide
guidance for the sustainable management and use of O‘ahu’s valuable and finite
surface and ground water resources in meeting demands consistent with the City
land use plan. The current OWMP was adopted by the State Commission on Water
Resources and the City Council in 1990.
The Board of Water Supply (BWS) has begun the development of eight district-
wide Watershed Management Plans for each of the eight Development Plan and
Sustainable Communities Plan areas. The Wai‘anae Watershed Management Plan, and
Ko‘olau Loa Watershed Management Plan are the first two plans to be prepared.
They will be followed by plans for the North Shore and Ko‘olau Poko, and then
‘Ewa, Central O‘ahu, the Primary Urban Center, and East Honolulu. When
completed, the eight Watershed Management Plans will be used to update the
O‘ahu Water Management Plan.
Water Reclamation - Under the City’s agreement through a Consent Decree with
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the State Department of Health,
the City established a water reclamation facility at Honouliuli Wastewater
Treatment Plant (WTP) to recover nonpotable water for beneficial uses such as
irrigating parks and golf courses, providing water for industrial cleaning, and
for making steam used in oil processing.
Construction of the secondary treatment unit at the Honouliuli WTP was
completed in 1996. The facility is capable of providing 13 million gallons per
day (mgd) of nondisinfected secondary treated reclaimed water (R-3 quality).
The R-3 quality water receives further treatment known as tertiary treatment at
the Honouliuli Water Recycling Facility (WRF) which produces two grades of
recycled water: R-1 for irrigation and RO (Reverse Osmosis) demineralized water
for industrial uses. The WRF can process up to 12 mgd which is distributed to
customers throughout ‘Ewa through separate lines for each grade of water. The
Board of Water Supply is planning expansion of the distribution system, in
conjunction with expansion of both the Honouliuli WTP and WRF, to provide over
26 mgd of nonpotable water for use in ‘Ewa.
Desalination Project - Following the success of a small State of Hawai‘i
sponsored pilot project, the Board of Water Supply is planning to construct an
initial 5 mgd desalination plant on a 20-acre parcel at Kalaeloa. Capacity of
the plant could be increased to 15 mgd in future phases. The plant is expected
to have an operational life of 30 to 50 years.
The Board of Water Supply evaluated the water development needs of the existing
and new residential and commercial (including retail, office, resort,
recreational, and industrial) development likely by 2035, as a result of
implementation of the ‘Ewa Development Plan.
   •   The Board of Water Supply forecasts that 27 mgd of potable (or
drinkable) water will be needed in ‘Ewa by 2035 to meet projected growth in
residential and commercial demand from the 14.9 mgd needed in 2000.
   •   In addition, long-term demand for nonpotable water for
      °   Existing and new urban irrigation and other urban purposes is
estimated to be approximately 21 mgd; and
       °    The 3,000 acres of agricultural land in ‘Ewa protected from
development by this plan could be as much as 10 mgd (based on estimates from
the State Agricultural Water Use and Development Plan).
Potable water system infrastructure has been master planned by the Board of
Water Supply to accommodate ‘Ewa’s planned growth. Ultimately, potable water
demands of the remaining lands within the Community Growth Boundary should be
met by desalination or additional groundwater sources in Central O‘ahu if
sustainable yield is determined available.
The demand for nonpotable water for urban irrigation and other urban purposes
and for agricultural irrigation for lands over the ‘Ewa Plain nonpotable
aquifer; will be met with a combination of recycled water, brackish caprock
water, and brackish basal water. Infrastructure providing R-1 recycled water
connects the Campbell Industrial Park with Fort Weaver Road, and brackish water
systems exist in several developments. Demineralized recycled water is also
provided by the Board of Water Supply to refineries and power plants in
Campbell Industrial Park for industrial purposes. The demand for nonpotable
water for agricultural irrigation of lands over the Pearl Harbor potable water
aquifer should be met with low chloride irrigation water such as the Wai‘ahole
Ditch or freshwater wells.
As shown in
Table 4.2, the Board of Water Supply has identified potential sources of
potable and nonpotable water to meet the projected demand in ‘Ewa through 2035.
These sources will be pursued as part of the Board’s development and operation
of a diversified and integrated island-wide water system.
Strategies in the Watershed Management Plan promote on-going groundwater source
development coupled with efforts to increase water delivery efficiency, water
conservation, and continued development of alternative sources of water, such
as recycled and brackish water and desalination.
The remainder of the section provides general policies and guidelines for water
allocation and water system development in ‘Ewa.
TABLE 4.2: POTENTIAL SOURCES OF POTABLE AND NONPOTABLE WATER FOR ‘EWA
TABLE 4.2: POTENTIAL SOURCES OF POTABLE AND NONPOTABLE WATER FOR ‘EWA
POTABLE GROUNDWATER RESOURCES                    
                                               Estimated Source
GROUND WATER SOURCE                             Yield (mgd)
1.   Kunia Wells III (1)                     3.00
2.   Waipahū Wells IV (1)                   3.00
3.   Honouliuli Wells (2)                    1.62
4.   ‘Ewa Shaft                            10.00
5.   Additional Central O‘ahu Wells 3)
   Total                                     17.62
                                                
ALTERNATIVE WATER RESOURCES                      
                                       Available Resource (mgd)
SOURCE                                  Minimum  Maximum
POTABLE                                 Estimate Estimate
1.   Kalaeloa Seawater Desalination  5.00     15.00
Plant
2.   Kapolei Brackish Desalination   0.20     0.50
Plant
   Total Potable                     5.20     15.50
NONPOTABLE
3.   ‘Ewa Caprock (4)              8.70     9.00
4.   Brackish Basal Water (5)        4.00     5.00
5.   Recycled Water (6)              12.00    12.00
6.   Waiāhole Ditch (‘Ewa only) (74.73     6.00
   Total Nonpotable                  29.43    32.00
NOTES:      
   mgd = million gallons per day mg/l = milligram per liter      
  (1)   Portion of the source will supply water for Wai‘anae’s growth.   
  (2)   Of the 6.72 mgd permitted use, 1.62 mgd remains available for new
development.   
  (3)   Unpermitted sustainable yield is available but hydro-geologic analysis
must be conducted.
  (4)   Minimum is existing use July 2005. Maximum was 1996 proposed sustainable
yield. ‘Ewa caprock is now managed by a chloride limit of 1,000 mg/l.
  (5)   Based on existing brackish basal sources, EP-2 (1 mgd), EP-5&6 (2 mgd),
EP-10 (1-2 mgd).
  (6)   Expansion of recycled water supply beyond 12 mgd is possible but not
planned at this time.
  (7)   Minimum estimate is Campbell Estate 3.98 mgd and Pu‘u Makakilo 0.75 mgd
allocation. Max adds possible unpermitted water.
Allocation of groundwater sources require the approval of the State Commission on
Water Resource Management (CWRM).
  Source:
   Honolulu Board of Water Supply, 2008. Watershed Management Plan
   CWRM Database 2005
 
4.2.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   Adequacy of Water Supply
   Before zoning approval is given for new residential or commercial
development in ‘Ewa, the Board of Water Supply should:
   •   Report if adequate potable and nonpotable water is available; and
   •   If adequate potable and nonpotable water is not available, recommend
conditions that should be included as part of the zone change approval in order
to assure adequacy.
   •   Confirm adequacy of existing capacity at the time of land subdivision or
building permit applications for existing lots.
   Water Use Efficiency and Conservation
   •   Require developments to conserve water resources by implementing water
conservation measures, such as low flow plumbing fixtures, drought tolerant
landscaping, sub-metering and efficient irrigation systems with soil moisture
sensors. Such requirements shall be determined during review of building permit
applications. Encourage owners of existing plumbing systems to conduct regular
water audits and effect repairs to reduce water loss.
   •   Dual Water Lines - Require developments with large landscaped areas
(such as golf courses, parks, or schools), roadway landscaping, and industrial
processes to have dual water lines to allow conservation of potable water and
use of nonpotable water for irrigation and other appropriate uses. Such
requirements shall be determined during review of project water master plans
for new developments and approval of zoning applications and construction
plans.
   •   Development and Allocation of Potable and Nonpotable Water - The State
Commission on Water Resource Management has authority in all matters regarding
administration of the State Water Code. By City Charter, the Board of Water
Supply has the authority to manage, control and operate the water systems of
the City, and therefore should coordinate the development and allocation of
potable and nonpotable water sources and systems intended for municipal use on
O‘ahu as guided by the City’s land use plans and the OWMP.
   Use of Nonpotable Water
   •   Develop an adequate supply of nonpotable water for irrigation and other
suitable uses on the ‘Ewa Plain in order to conserve the supply of potable
water and to take advantage of dual water systems constructed by ‘Ewa
developers.
      °   The Pearl Harbor aquifer is the most cost effective and accessible
water resource of potable quality on O‘ahu, and it is needed to support the
existing and future domestic potable water uses described in the development
plans.
      °   To minimize the risk of impacts to our precious potable water
sources, the use of recycled water reclaimed from wastewater effluent and
brackish waters as nonpotable irrigation sources in the coastal caprock area
such as the ‘Ewa Plain should be given high priority.
      °   Significant demand exists for nonpotable water for golf courses,
landscape irrigation, and industrial uses on the ‘Ewa Plain.
      °   In addition to the compatibility of the source to the demand in the
area, the infrastructure to distribute the recycled water in that area is being
planned and developed by the Board of Water Supply.
      °   Recycled water from the Honouliuli Water Recycling Facility and
brackish water should, therefore, be used to meet demand in the ‘Ewa Plain
where there are no adverse consequences to the drinking water resources.
   •   Require nonpotable water used for irrigation above Pearl Harbor aquifer
to be low in chlorides and total dissolved solids to protect the quality of
drinking water withdrawn from wells located down-gradient of the application.
Experiences with increasing chloride, nitrate, and pesticide contamination of
groundwater indicate that activities on the surface of the land can have a
detrimental effect on the quality of drinking water.
   •   Use of Wai‘ahole Ditch Water - Request that the State Commission on
Water Resource Management consider all sources of water in making allocations.
A sufficient amount of water is needed to meet the diversified agricultural
needs for ‘Ewa and Central O‘ahu along with providing for high quality recharge
of the Pearl Harbor aquifer. A number of potential sources are identified in
Table 4.2, including: caprock, surface water, spring waters, Wai‘ahole Ditch
Water, and recycled water recovered from wastewater effluent. The amount of
water available and the potential use of each of these sources vary according
to location.
   Alternative Water Supplies
   •   Where practical, develop alternative water supplies using new
technologies in water reclamation, membrane and distillation desalination and
deep ocean water applications to ensure adequate supply for planned uses.
   •   Encourage use of technologies conserving water and using renewable
energy that could support alternative water supplies, such as seawater air
conditioning, photovoltaics, efficient plumbing and lighting fixtures, wave
energy, and bio-fuels.
4.3   WASTEWATER TREATMENT
The City’s West Māmala Bay Wastewater Facilities Plan (2001) provides estimates
that treatment/disposal capacity at the Honouliuli WTP will need to be
increased from existing capacity for primary treatment of 38 mgd to almost 51
mgd by 2020 to meet projected population and economic growth in ‘Ewa and
Central O‘ahu resulting from implementation of the Development Plans. In
addition, the capacity of specific sewer lines and pump stations will need to
be increased.
As noted above, the City is meeting its commitment to the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency and the State Department of Health to reclaim and use,
islandwide, up to 10 mgd of recycled water recovered from wastewater effluent.
The remainder of the section provides general policies for wastewater system
development in ‘Ewa.
4.3.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Require all wastewater produced by new developments in ‘Ewa to be
connected to a regional or municipal sewer service system.
   •   Where feasible, use recycled water recovered from wastewater effluent
for irrigation and other uses below the Underground Injection Control (UIC)
line of the State Department of Health and the “No-Pass” Line of the Board of
Water Supply.
   •   Locate wastewater treatment plants in areas shown as planned for
industrial use and away from residential areas shown on the Urban Land Use Map
in Appendix A. Existing treatment plants are shown on the Urban Land Use Map
and the Public Facilities Map in Appendix A.
   •   Use a City review and approval process, which provides adequate public
notice and input, complete technical analysis of the project by the DPP, and
approval by the City Council, for any major new private wastewater treatment
plant. Other system elements, such as pump stations and mains, should not
require such comprehensive review and policy approval.
4.4   ELECTRICAL POWER DEVELOPMENT
The Hawaiian Electric Company (HECO) forecasts that increased demand, the need
for different types of generation to help reliably integrate additional
renewable energy from intermittent sources, and the possible retirement of the
Honolulu Power Plant from service will create a need for additional island-wide
power generation capacity by 2025. Potential sites in ‘Ewa for additional
generating units include Campbell Industrial Park and Kahe Point.
In May 2007, the State Public Utilities Commission approved HECO’s proposal to
build a 110-megawatt generating plant adjacent to the company’s Barber’s Point
Tank Farm in Campbell Industrial Park. The new generator is planned to come on
line in 2009.
HECO has a number of renewable energy initiatives and activities including
rebates to help homeowners install rooftop solar water heating systems, funding
for biofuels crop research, and support for installations of photovoltaic
systems with net energy metering. (Net energy metering allows the owner of the
photovoltaic system to receive credit for the export of surplus energy into the
island-wide grid.)
The remainder of the section provides general policies for electrical power
development in ‘Ewa.
4.4.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Analyze and approve system improvements -- such as development of a new
power generating plant and/or major new transmission lines -- based on
islandwide studies and siting evaluations.
   •   Give strong consideration to placing any new transmission lines
underground where possible under criteria specified in State law.
   •   Locate electrical power plants in areas shown as planned for Industrial
use and away from residential areas shown on the Urban Land Use Map in Appendix
A. Existing power plants are shown on the Urban Land Use Map and Public
Facilities Map in Appendix A. Other system elements, such as sub-stations and
transmission lines, are not shown on the map and should be reviewed and
approved administratively.
   •   Consider any proposed major new electrical power plant through a City
review and approval process which provides public notification and opportunity
to comment and public agency analysis of impacts and mitigations.
4.5   SOLID WASTE HANDLING AND DISPOSAL
Two major solid waste handling and disposal facilities are located in ‘Ewa:
   •   The H-Power plant at Campbell Industrial Park is operating at maximum
capacity, receiving over 600,000 tons of solid waste each year. A new boiler
now under construction will boost the processing capacity up to 900,000 tons
per year and provide a significant reduction of material sent to the landfill
for disposal.
   •   The Waimānalo Gulch Sanitary Landfill, located between the proposed
Makaīwa Hills residential development and Kahe Valley, is the major active
waste disposal site on O‘ahu.
To comply with a 2003 LUC order setting 2008 as the limit for Waimānalo Gulch
Landfill operations, a special Advisory Committee was convened to locate new
landfill sites. In its December 2003 report, the Advisory Committee recommended
four sites for consideration, including Makaīwa Gulch. In December 2004, the
City Council adopted Resolution 04-348 which:
   a.   required the City to develop alternative technologies and extract the
maximum recyclable materials, energy, and alternative products to minimize the
waste placed in landfills in order “to effectively eliminate, to the extent
possible, the need for a landfall by 2008;”
   b.   selected the Waimānalo Gulch site as the site for the City’s landfill;
and
   c.   requested the City administration to immediately contact the Planning
Commission, the State Department of Health, and the State Land Use Commission
to satisfy any necessary requirements for continued use of Waimānalo Gulch as
the City’s landfill site.
In May 2008, the LUC approved an extension of the Waimānalo Gulch Sanitary
Landfill land use permit until November 2009.
The Final Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for proposed expansion of the
Landfill by 93 acres was accepted in October 2008. In September 2009, the LUC
approved a new Special Use Permit to allow the expansion, but required that
after July 31, 2012, only ash and residue from the City’s H-Power plant can be
deposited in the Landfill. Approval from the Department of Health will also be
required before the landfill footprint can be expanded.
In 2009, the City reached agreement on a contract to ship 100,000 tons of waste
per year from Kalaeloa Barbers Point Harbor to the Mainland in order to reduce
the amount of waste being disposed at the Waimānalo Gulch Landfill, However,
the City has cancelled the contract since permit problems and lawsuits have
prevented any shipments, and the intent for entering into the contract was to
fill the gap until a third boiler was added at the H-Power Plant, which is
expected in late 2011.
The Integrated Solid Waste Management Plan was updated in 2008 and, following a
public hearing and a 60-day public comment period, was submitted to Council for
approval.
The remainder of the section provides general policies for solid waste handling
and disposal in ‘Ewa.
4.5.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Do not develop the Makaīwa Gulch area identified by the Mayor’s Advisory
Committee in December 2003 as a landfill. It is in an area planned for
residential use and is adjacent to the Ko ‘Olina Resort, which plays an
important role in job creation for ‘Ewa.
   •   Analyze and approve siting and/or expansion of sanitary landfills based
on island-wide studies and siting evaluations.
   •   For master-planned communities, plan, in consultation with the
Department of Environmental Services, for how solid waste will be handled, to
include estimates of solid waste to be generated by the communities, provisions
for collection of solid waste, and provisions for and encouragement of
recycling.
4.6   DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
Low-lying parts of the ‘Ewa Plain are subject to flooding during intense
rainstorms. Flood control has typically been provided for urbanized areas
through the development of concrete-lined channels to convey storm waters to
the ocean. Discharge of stormwater to the ocean, however, is a major source of
non-point source pollution of nearshore waters, negatively affecting coral
growth, fish populations and use of the shoreline for swimming, surfing, and
other types of ocean recreation.
The federal government has initiated a major program to reduce non-point-source
pollution, mandating response by the State and the counties. In general, the
City requires all residential, commercial, public facilities, and
transportation development and redevelopment projects to address storm water
quality through the use of best management practices in accordance with the
City’s Rules Relating to Storm Drainage Standards. In many watersheds, however,
undeveloped mountain areas generate a disproportionately large share of the
total storm flow, and no party appears to be responsible for mitigating the
environmental impact.
Concrete-lined drainage channels can have other negative environmental impacts,
including disruption of lateral shoreline access, beach erosion, down drift of
channel mouths, and visual blight.
Drainage improvements are planned for:
   •   A major new system to drain Makaīwa Hills, Kapolei Business Park, and
the industrial areas closest to the Barbers Point Deep Draft Harbor;
   •   Expansion of the channel at the western edge of Kalaeloa to provide
additional capacity for the City of Kapolei;
   •   A system to drain the West Loch Drainage Basin, serving ‘Ewa by Gentry
and Ho‘opili; and
   •   A system to drain the Kalo‘i Gulch Drainage Basin.
The Makaīwa Hills system may have detention basins mauka of the H-1 Freeway and
a concrete-lined channel to convey storm waters to an ocean outlet just south
of Kalaeloa Barbers Point Harbor. It is being planned by Kapolei Property
Development LLC (KPD). KPD is also planning to expand the existing channel on
the western boundary of Kalaeloa.
Drainage improvements in the West Loch Drainage Basin need to be constructed to
handle storm water runoff from existing and proposed projects located in the
basin. These projects include the City’s West Loch residential project, Phase I
of the ‘Ewa by Gentry residential project, and the proposed Ho‘opili master-
planned community project.
The developer for Phase I of the ‘Ewa by Gentry East project had planned to
construct a grass-lined drainage channel running immediately east of the
project’s boundary to terminate at a detention basin immediately makai of the
Honouliuli National Wildlife Refuge. However, currently the developer is
considering using a large retention pond to hold storm waters, in lieu of
constructing the grass-lined channel.
The Kalo‘i Gulch Drainage Basin is one of the larger drainage basins in the
region. It encompasses an area of approximately 7,140 acres, and has a peak
design flow of approximately 11,500 cubic feet per second (cfs). Historically,
the drainage pattern in this basin has flowed from the Wai‘anae Mountain Range
above Makakilo through the Kalo‘i Gulch toward the ocean terminating at One‘ula
Beach Park. Floodwaters typically spread out in sheet flows through the former
sugarcane fields below Farrington Highway.
Prior to 2000, drainage flow through the Kalo‘i Gulch basin was constrained by
the elevation of the OR&L right-of-way which formed a man-made barrier that
impeded storm water runoff. However, this constriction was addressed by the
construction of a new railroad bridge in 2000.
In the interim until an ocean outlet is constructed, the ‘Ewa Villages, ‘Ewa by
Gentry, and Ocean Pointe projects handle drainage within their projects through
use of golf courses. The golf courses provide detention of storm waters and
meet the DPP drainage requirements for stormwater runoff.
Other development projects in the basin include the UHWO campus and associated
residential and commercial development which has not yet received City approval
for its drainage master plan, and the DHHL East Kapolei project whose drainage
master plan has been approved.
The drainage system serving the Villages of Kapolei, which consists of golf
course retention and disposal of storm water into large pits and a large ditch
near the Kalaeloa boundary, may need to be augmented in the future.
Both the regional drainage system and the on-site drainage facilities for
Kalaeloa need to be addressed during the redevelopment of Kalaeloa. The
existing regional drainage channel and box culverts that discharge into the
coral pit near the intersection of Fort Barrette Road and Franklin D. Roosevelt
Road are inadequate to handle the runoff from the 100-year storm, according to
the Kalaeloa Master Plan. In addition, the Master Plan notes that the Navy’s
system of drywells, installed to handle runoff within Kalaeloa, do not conform
to City standards.
See
Exhibit 4.3 for the location of ‘Ewa Drainage Basins.
The remainder of the section provides general policies and guidelines for
drainage systems in ‘Ewa.
   Exhibit 4.3
   ‘Ewa Drainage Basins Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8458.png]
 
4.6.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Design drainage systems to emphasize flood control and minimization of
non-point source pollution and the retention and/or detention of storm water
on-site and in appropriate open space and wetland areas.
   •   Use stormwater as a potential irregular source of water for recharge of
the aquifer that should be retained for absorption rather than quickly moved to
coastal waters.
   •   Use natural and man-made vegetated drainageways and retention basins as
the preferred solution to drainage problems wherever they could promote water
recharge, help control non-point source pollutants, and provide passive
recreation benefits. However, concrete-lined channels can be permitted, despite
their potential adverse environmental impacts, if there is no other reasonable
alternative to meet specific design challenges.
4.6.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for drainage systems
in ‘Ewa should be implemented.
   •   Retention and Detention - Employ methods of retaining or detaining storm
water for gradual release as the preferred strategy for management of storm
water. Where feasible, use any open space, including parking lots, landscaped
areas, mini and community parks, and public and private golf courses, to detain
or infiltrate storm water flows to reduce their volume and runoff rates and the
amounts of sediments and pollutants transported.
   •   Relation to the Regional Open Space Network - To the extent possible,
integrate planned improvements to the drainage system into the regional open
space network by emphasizing the use of retention basins, creation of passive
recreational areas, and recreational access for pedestrians and bicycles.
   •   Preservation of Natural Gulches - Preserve natural gulches on the slopes
of the Wai‘anae Range foothills that are within the Community Growth Boundary
as part of the open space network.
The following guidelines apply specifically to development within the Kalo‘i
Gulch drainage basin.
   •   Relation to the ‘Ewa Village Master Plan and Other Previously Approved
Developments in the Basin - Ensure that solutions to handling drainage problems
on lands above ‘Ewa Villages are compatible with the drainage design of the
‘Ewa Villages Master Plan and other developments in the Kalo‘i Gulch drainage
basin which have already been approved. The ‘Ewa Villages drainage design
assumes that runoff will not exceed levels previously received from sugarcane
fields north of the golf course, will enter the ‘Ewa Villages golf course water
retention areas through a number of dispersed channels, and will not be at
velocities which would scour out the golf course water retention areas.
4.7   SCHOOL FACILITIES
Statewide, the DOE faces an enormous shortfall in funding to meet projected
needs for new classrooms. Act 245, 2007, established a system for collecting
school impact fees from new residential developments. Developers are required
to provide “their proportionate share of the land and the construction cost of
new or expanded school facilities needed to serve new residential
developments.”
DOE is in the process of establishing the school impact districts required
under the Act in order to collect land and money from developers. In January
2012, the Board of Education approved creation of a Leeward O‘ahu Impact
District that includes the Kapolei Complex and Campbell Complex areas in ‘Ewa,
As shown in
Table 4.3, the DOE has projected a need by 2030 for ten new elementary schools,
three new intermediate schools, and two new high schools in ‘Ewa. (Needs
estimates could change if estimates of housing production and density or school
operation policies and funding are revised.)
Conceptual locations of three new intermediate schools and two new high schools
are shown on the Urban Land Use Map and the Public Facilities Map in Appendix
A. Elementary schools are not mapped because their sites are of community
rather than regional concern and should be determined as part of a master
planning and design process. Sites have been reserved for all of the planned
elementary schools, the three planned intermediate/middle schools, and one high
school. (Minimum site size for elementary schools is 8 to 15 acres, for
intermediate schools is 15 to 20 acres, and for high schools is 45 to 55
acres.)
Private schools play an important role in Hawaii with private school graduates
averaging around 16 percent of all graduates for the last 25 years. There were
four private schools in ‘Ewa with enrollment of almost 1,300 students in the
fall of 2008 which, compared with public school enrollment in ‘Ewa, is less
than half what would be expected based on the statewide average.
The remainder of the section provides general policies and guidelines for
school facilities development in ‘Ewa.
TABLE 4.3: EXISTING AND PLANNED PUBLIC SCHOOLS IN THE ‘EWA DEVELOPMENT PLAN
AREA
School FY 2011 Enrollment Capacity Site Reserved Opening Date
TABLE 4.3: EXISTING AND PLANNED PUBLIC SCHOOLS IN THE ‘EWA DEVELOPMENT PLAN
AREA
School                               FY 2011    Capacity   Site     Opening
                                     Enrollment            Reserved Date
Elementary Schools
Campbell Complex
   ‘Ewa Beach Elementary        507        544        Existing NA
   ‘Ewa Elementary              1,003      798        Existing NA
   Holomua Elementary             1,382      1,264      Existing NA
   Iroquois Point Elementary      718        995        Existing NA
   Ka‘imiloa Elementary         610        716        Existing NA
   Keone‘ula Elementary         847        742        Existing NA
   Pōhākea Elementary           565        626        Existing NA
Kapolei Complex
   Barbers Point Elementary       491        636        Existing NA
   Kapolei Elementary             1,043      1,233      Existing NA
   Makakilo Elementary            502        627        Existing NA
   Mauka Lani Elementary          563        702        Existing NA
   Total                          8,231      8,883
Planned
Kapolei II Elementary (Mehana) 1                400 to 750 X        2014
East Kapolei UH WOC I, II 2, 3                  400 to 750 X        N.D.
East Kapolei DHHL 2                             400 to 750 X        N.D.
East Kapolei Ho‘opili I, II, III 2            1,200 to   X        N.D.
                                                2,250
Makaīwa Hills 2                                400 to 750 X        N.D.
Kapolei West 2                                  400 to 750 X        N.D.
Ko ‘Olina 2                                   400 to 750 X        N.D.
   Total                                     3,600 to
                                                6,750
Intermediate/Middle School
‘Ewa Makai Middle (Campbell Complex587        700        Existing NA
‘llima Intermediate (Campbell      777        1,330      Existing NA
Complex)
Kapolei Middle (Kapolei Complex)     1,424      1,744      Existing NA
   Total                          2,788      3,774
Planned
East Kapolei Middle (DHHL) 2                    500 to     X        N.D.
                                                1,000
East Kapolei Middle (Ho‘opili) 2              500 to     X        N.D.
                                                1,000
West Kapolei Middle (Makaīwa Hills)            500 to     X        N.D.
2                                               1,000
   Total                                     1,500 to
                                                3,000
High School
Campbell High                        2,639      2,022      Existing NA
Kapolei High                         2,107      1,841      Existing NA
   Total                          4,746      3,863
Planned
East Kapolei High I (HHFDC land) 2              800 to              N.D.
                                                1,600
East Kapolei High II (Ho‘opili) 2             800 to     X        N.D.
                                                1,600
   Total                                     1,600 to
                                                3,200
NOTES:
1   Received appropriation for added design and construction funds in FY2012-
2013.
2   No legislative appropriation.
3   Includes a UH WOC lab school.
X   Site Reserved
NA   Not Applicable
N.D.   Not Determined
Source: State Department of Education Facilities Development Branch,
2011      
 
4.7.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Project Review and Approval Assessment - As new residential developments
are reviewed as part of the project application review and approval process,
request that the DOE report to the DPP whether the DOE will be able to provide
adequate school facilities, either at existing schools or at new school sites,
so that needs from the proposed development can be met.
   •   Fair Share Provisions - Require developers to comply with DOE school
impact fees requirements and pay their fair share of all costs needed to
provide adequate school facilities for the children living in their
developments.
4.7.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for schools
facilities development in ‘Ewa should be implemented.
   •   Schools as Community Centers - Because of the difficult financial
problems for all sectors, new communities are likely to have fewer churches,
private social halls, and recreation facilities. As a result, schools may have
to assume important functions as cultural and recreational centers and as
meeting facilities. Request that the State DOE design school facilities to
facilitate community use during non-school hours and weekends.
   •   Co-location with Parks - Co-locate neighborhood or community parks with
elementary and intermediate schools and coordinate design of facilities with
the State DOE when needless duplication of parking and of athletic, recreation,
and meeting facilities can be avoided.
   •   Shared Facilities - Coordinate the development and use of athletic
facilities such as swimming pools and gymnasiums with the DOE where such
facilities would maximize use and reduce duplication of function.
   •   Fair Share Contribution - Support the DOE’s establishment of impact
districts to obtain fair share requirements from developers of residential
projects and enforce existing agreements to ensure that adequate school
facilities are in place at existing and new schools to meet the needs of
residents.
4.8   PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES
Table 4.4 provides a listing of existing and planned public safety facilities
in the ‘Ewa Development Plan area.
To meet projected population and economic growth by 2035, the Fire Department
estimates ‘Ewa will need four new fire stations. They also plan to establish an
island-wide training facility at Kalaeloa.
Because police operate primarily in the field and do not have a need for
outlying stations, only one substation is projected by the Police Department to
be needed to serve the 2035 population of 164,500. A new regional station was
built in the City of Kapolei on donated land and became operational in 2001.
Land has been offered for a substation in the proposed Ho‘opili development.
The expected population growth and development of new communities and community
facilities in ‘Ewa will result in a need for additional emergency medical
service facilities and response units. The State Department of Health has not
identified how many new stand-alone emergency medical service facilities in
‘Ewa will be needed to meet expected growth.
TABLE 4.4: EXISTING AND PLANNED PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES IN THE ‘EWA
DEVELOPMENT PLAN AREA
Facilities Site Service Area Service Date
TABLE 4.4: EXISTING AND PLANNED PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES IN THE ‘EWA DEVELOPMENT PLAN AREA
Facilities             Site       Service Area                                                        Service
                                                                                                      Date
Fire Stations
Makakilo               Makakilo   Makakilo, Ko ‘Olina, Villages of Kapolei                          Existing
Kapolei                Kapolei    Campbell Industrial Park, City of Kapolei, Kapolei Business Park    Existing
‘Ewa Beach 1 2       Ocean      ‘Ewa by Gentry, Ocean Pointe, ‘Ewa Beach, Iroquois Point        2012
                       Pointe
East Kapolei           DHHL East  East Kapolei, Villages of Kapolei, UH West O‘ahu, Tenney Village, 2011
                       Kapolei    Kalaeloa
                       Old
                       Federal
Kalaeloa               Fire       Kalaeloa, ‘Ewa, and Kapolei                                       N.D.
                       Station
                       Site
‘Ewa Villages        Tenney     West Loch, ‘Ewa Villages, East Kapolei                            N.D.
                       Village
Ko ‘Olina            Ko ‘OlinaKo ‘Olina Resort                                                  N.D.
Makaīwa Hills         Makaīwa   Makaīwa Hills                                                      N.D.
                       Hills
                       Kalaeloa
Kalaeloa Tactical      (Former    Island-wide                                                         N.D.
Training Facility      BPNAS
                       site)
Police Stations
‘Ewa Plains Regional City of    ‘Ewa Region                                                       Existing
Station                Kapolei
Ho‘opili Substation  Ho‘opili East Kapolei, ‘Ewa Beach                                          N.D.
                       DOH has
Emergency Medical      not
Services Facilities    identified                                                                     
                       needed
                       sites
NOTES:
  1   To be replaced with new station on Fort Weaver Road.
  2    New.
N.D.   Not Determined.
 
Population growth will also result in need for additional public emergency
shelters. There is a state-wide shortage of shelters, compounded by the fact
that around a third of the existing shelters need to be retrofitted if they are
to withstand any hurricane strength winds, and few of the existing shelters are
capable of withstanding a Category 3 hurricane like Hurricane ‘Iwa. Civil
defense analysts expect 35 percent of the population will seek public shelter
in a disaster. Based on that standard, ‘Ewa needed public shelter space for
29,000 residents in 2005, and will need space for 57,600 in 2035.
Table 4.5 lists existing ‘Ewa shelters and their capacity.
It makes sense to supplement the public shelters with shelters in private
buildings since most of the population is not expected to seek a public shelter
during a disaster. A State law provides immunity to private organizations which
create hurricane resistant shelters that meet State standards. There are no
State or City programs providing incentives or support for private
organizations who create hurricane shelters or individuals who build hurricane-
resistant “safe rooms” in their homes. However, by 2012 at the latest, the
building code will require that all new homes either have a safe room or be
equipped with hurricane resistant glass.
TABLE 4.5: EXISTING PUBLIC EMERGENCY SHELTERS IN ‘EWA, 2009
Shelter Location Capacity
TABLE 4.5: EXISTING PUBLIC EMERGENCY SHELTERS IN ‘EWA, 2009
Shelter Location          Capacity
Barbers Point Elementary  385
Campbell High (S/P)       5,877
‘Ewa Beach Elementary   1,966
‘Ewa Elementary         2,689
‘Ilima Intermediate (S/P2,629
Ka‘imiloa Elementary    1,748
Kapolei Elementary (S)    1,255
Kapolei High (S)          511
Makakilo Elementary       2,088
Mauka Lani Elementary (S) 874
Pōhākea Elementary      1,165
TOTAL                     21,187
NOTES:
S   Facility designated to serve as a Special Needs Shelter and General
Population Shelter.
P   Pet Friendly Shelter co-located with General Population Shelter (and, in
some cases, Special Needs Shelter).
 
4.8.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Provide adequate staffing and facilities to ensure public safety.
   •   Approve new development only if staffing and facilities will be adequate
to provide fire and police protection and emergency medical service when
development is completed.
   •   Survey and retrofit, as appropriate, DOE and other public buildings to
make up the shortfall in hurricane resistant shelters.
   •   Require new City buildings which are “critical facilities used for
public assembly and able to perform as shelters” to be designed and built to
withstand a Category 3 hurricane.
   •   Provide incentives for private organizations to create hurricane
resistant shelter areas in their facilities and for homes to include hurricane
resistant “safe rooms.”
4.9   OTHER COMMUNITY FACILITIES
Other existing and proposed community facilities shown on the Urban Land Use
Map in Appendix A include hospitals, and colleges. Key facilities include the
planned University of Hawaii West O‘ahu campus. Hawaii Medical Center West is
the major medical facility serving the ‘Ewa region.
Location of new community facilities should comply with the following policies:
   •   Colleges and Hospitals - In most cases, locate colleges and hospitals in
urban areas near transit nodes, commercial centers, or medium density
residential areas.
   •   Correctional Facilities - In most cases, locate correctional facilities
on industrial or agricultural lands. (However, a youth detention facility was
appropriately located within the City of Kapolei as part of a relocated Family
Court.) If such a facility is proposed for lands not planned for industrial or
agricultural use, a City review and approval process that provides for public
review, complete analysis, and policy approval should be used.
Antennas have been around as long as we have had radio and television services.
Antennas associated with communication purposes have grown tremendously
especially since the U.S. introduction of mobile communication devices in the
early 1980s. While the telecommunication industry has provided more convenient
communication capabilities for individuals, it has also increased the public
agencies’ ability to provide faster and more efficient response to those in
need, particularly on an emergency basis.
While the benefits of the telecommunications industry cannot be disputed,
communities have opposed the antennas due to aesthetic impacts, particularly on
public views and on neighborhood character. Their visibility has increased,
especially where antennas are mounted on free-standing towers.
The general public has also raised concerns about the environmental effects of
electromagnetic field exposure associated with radio transmissions, as
evidenced by the presence of antennas. However, the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) is responsible for evaluating the human environmental effects
of radio frequency (RF) emissions from FCC-regulated transmitters. The federal
guidelines specifically preclude local decisions affecting environmental
effects of radio frequency emissions, assuming that the provider is in
compliance with the Commission’s RF rules.
The following are general principles governing utilization of antennas:
   •   Encourage co-location of antennas; towers should host the facilities of
more than one service provider to minimize their proliferation and reduce
visual impacts.
   •   Mount antennas onto existing buildings or structures so that public
scenic views and open spaces will not be negatively affected. However, except
for the occupant’s personal use, antennas on single-family dwelling roofs in
residential districts are not appropriate.
   •   Use stealth technology (e.g. towers disguised as trees) especially on
freestanding antenna towers in order to blend in with the surrounding
environment and minimize visual impacts.
CHAPTER 5.   IMPLEMENTATION
Implementation of the ‘Ewa Development Plan will be accomplished by:
   •   Limiting urban development to areas within the Community Growth Boundary
to support the vision for protection of agricultural lands and open space in
‘Ewa;
   •   Guiding development in areas of critical concern including Kalaeloa
through Special Area Plans;
   •   Guiding public investment in infrastructure through Functional Plans
that support the vision, and implement the policies and guidelines of the
Development Plan;
   •   Recommending approval, approval with modifications and/or conditions, or
denial of developments seeking zoning and other development approvals based on
how well they support the vision for ‘Ewa’s development and implement the
Development Plan’s policies, and guidelines;
   •   Implementing Development Plan priorities through the Public
Infrastructure Map amendments and the City’s annual budget process;
   •   Evaluating progress in fulfilling the vision of the ‘Ewa Development
Plan every two years and presenting the results of the evaluation in the
Biennial Report; and
   •   Conducting a review of the vision, policies, principles, guidelines, and
Capital Improvement Program (CIP) priority investments of the ‘Ewa Development
Plan every five years and recommending revisions as necessary.
5.1   PHASING OF DEVELOPMENT
Active projects in various stages of the development process are proceeding for
all the undeveloped areas in ‘Ewa within the Community Growth Boundary.
   1.   As identified in
Table 2.1, residential projects with estimated development capacity of almost
35,000 units either can exempt themselves from County zoning or already have
the zoning needed to proceed to apply for subdivision approval, and
construction and building permits. These projects, subject to availability of
infrastructure, are the projects likely to be developed first. These projects,
if subject to County zoning, will have to meet unilateral agreement conditions
(if adopted as part of zoning approval for each of these projects), and
subdivision approval requirements that help ensure that adequate infrastructure
is available, and that project development implements key elements of the Plan
vision.
   2.   Finally, there are projects which need the LUC to approve a change from
the State Agricultural District to the Urban District and then the City Council
to approve a zone change. These projects have an estimated residential
development capacity of over 13,000 units.
The City Council, in reviewing and deciding on the zone changes for these
latter projects, will have the opportunity to evaluate the availability of
infrastructure and require conditions that the developer must meet as a
condition of zoning to insure infrastructure adequacy and attainment of key
elements of the Plan vision.
However, there are two major projects involving substantial amounts of
residential, commercial, and office development which are not required to gain
Council approval or incorporate conditions regarding infrastructure adequacy or
other elements of the ‘Ewa Plan vision.
   •   The Department of Hawaiian Home Lands (DHHL) currently is developing 630
acres in ‘Ewa, located along the Kualaka‘i Parkway. Because the DHHL has the
power under the State Constitution to exempt itself from all State and County
land use laws, rules and regulations, the City has no ability to require DHHL
to follow the ‘Ewa Plan vision, policies and guidelines. Over 2,600 residential
units and a million square feet of retail and office space could be developed
under DHHL’s plans for the area, as of 2010.
   •   In 2002, the State Legislature transferred redevelopment responsibility
for Kalaeloa to the HCDA. HCDA also has the power, under its establishing
statutes, to exempt itself from County land use laws, rules and regulations.
The HCDA estimates that almost 6,500 dwelling units could be developed at
Kalaeloa by 2025, and over 116 thousand square feet of commercial space, 725
thousand square feet of office space, 1.8 million square feet of light
industrial space, and 470 thousand square feet of light industrial mixed use
space.
The City will seek the cooperation of the DHHL and the HCDA in implementing the
vision for ‘Ewa’s development.
5.1.1   PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT PHASING
The ‘Ewa Development Plan provides a clear signal to private landowners and
developers as to where development will be supported.
The Urban Expansion Area is shown on the Phasing Map in Appendix A. The Urban
Expansion Area shows where new urban development is occurring and where
applications for new urban development will be accepted for processing.
Projects in the Urban Expansion Area needing zone changes and other development
approvals would be eligible for processing with the adoption of the revised
Plan and will be supported if:
   •   The project implements the vision for ‘Ewa and relevant policies and
guidelines, and
   •   Adequate infrastructure will be available to meet the demand resulting
from the project.
No additional areas should be approved for development beyond the Community
Growth Boundary in order to protect agricultural and preservation lands.
5.1.2   PUBLIC FACILITY INVESTMENT PRIORITIES
The regional directed growth strategy requires the cooperation of both public
and private agencies in planning, financing, and constructing infrastructure.
The City must take an active role in planning infrastructure and coordinating
construction of needed infrastructure, such as expansion of Honouliuli
Wastewater Treatment Plant and recovery of nonpotable water from its effluent,
development of drainage systems for the Kalo‘i Gulch and Kapolei watersheds,
provision of recreational open spaces, and development of the regional
transportation system, parks, police and fire facilities.
Significant Capital Improvement Projects of the highest priority for the ‘Ewa
Development Plan are:
   •   A dedicated Rail Transit Corridor linking the City of Kapolei, Kalaeloa,
the University of Hawai‘i West O‘ahu Campus, and Waipahu;
   •   Elementary, middle, and high schools identified by the DOE as needed by
2035, as shown in
Table 4.3;
   •   Additional City offices in the City of Kapolei;
   •   Additional State offices in the City of Kapolei;
   •   The University of Hawaii West O‘ahu campus and related development near
the intersection of Kualaka‘i Parkway and Farrington Highway;
   •   Uncompleted elements of the ‘Ewa Highway Master Plan, and the East-West
arterial between UH West O‘ahu and Fort Weaver Road;
   •   A network of collector/connector roads (at approximately 1/4 mile
intervals) where feasible;
   •   Drainage improvements for Kalo‘i Gulch, Kapolei, and West Loch
Watersheds;
   •   New potable and non-potable water sources; and
   •   Expanded wastewater treatment plant capacity, and recycling of non-
potable water reclaimed from wastewater effluent at the Honouliuli Wastewater
Treatment Plant.
5.2   SPECIAL AREA PLANS
Special Area Plans provide more detailed policies, principles, and guidelines
than the Development Plan for areas requiring particular attention. The form
and content of Special Area Plans depends on what characteristics and issues
need to be addressed in greater detail for the planning and guiding of
development or use within the Special Area.
Special Area Plans can be used to guide land use development and infrastructure
investment in Special Districts, Redevelopment Districts, or Resource Areas.
Plans for Special Districts would provide guidance for development and
infrastructure investment in areas with distinct historic or design character
or significant public views. Plans for Redevelopment Districts would provide
strategies for the revitalization or redevelopment of an area. Plans for
Resource Areas would provide resource management strategies for areas with
particular natural or cultural resource values.
Kalaeloa is the only area in ‘Ewa currently identified for Special Area Plan
status. Its Special Area Plan is a combination of a Redevelopment District and
Resource Area Plan.
The Kalaeloa Redevelopment Plan, a Special Area Plan of the ‘Ewa Development
Plan, was prepared by the Barbers Point Naval Air Station Redevelopment
Commission in December 2000 under guidelines of the Federal Base Realignment
and Closure Act (BRAC). It was accepted by the City Council as the Special Area
Plan for Kalaeloa in April 2001.
Responsibility for planning for and coordinating redevelopment of Kalaeloa was
transferred from the Redevelopment Commission to the HCDA in 2002 by the Hawaii
State Legislature. HCDA has prepared a community-based Kalaeloa Master Plan
that was approved by the HCDA Board and the Governor in 2006, and should be
submitted to the City Council for acceptance as the revised Special Area Plan
for Kalaeloa.
5.3   FUNCTIONAL PLANS
Functional Plans are meant to provide guiding principles and strategies, which
will be used by the various functional agencies to determine needs, assign
priorities, phase infrastructure and facilities development, and secure
financing to meet the needs identified in the Development Plan.
City agencies responsible for developing infrastructure and public facilities
shall review existing Functional Plans, and in consultation with the Director
of the DPP, update the existing Plans or prepare and submit to the Mayor new
long-range Functional Plans for providing facilities and services for ‘Ewa to
the year 2035.
Agencies with Functional Planning responsibilities (and representative plans)
include:
   •   Department of Planning and Permitting;
   •   Department of Design and Construction;
   •   Department of Environmental Services (Solid Waste Management Plan);
   •   Honolulu Fire Department;
   •   Honolulu Emergency Services Department;
   •   O‘ahu Metropolitan Planning Organization (O‘ahu Regional Transportation
Plan);
   •   Department of Parks and Recreation;
   •   Honolulu Police Department;
   •   Department of Transportation Services (O‘ahu Regional Transportation
Plan); and
   •   Board of Water Supply (O‘ahu Water Management Plan).
The Functional Plans should provide:
   •   A Resource-constrained Long-Range Capital Improvement Program with
priorities;
   •   A Long-Range Financing Plan, with any necessary new revenue measures;
   •   A Development Schedule with first priority to areas designated for
earliest development; and
   •   Service and facility design standards, including Level of Service
Guidelines for determining infrastructure adequacy.
A resource-constrained program is one that identifies the fiscal resources that
can be reasonably expected to be available to finance the improvements.
Level of Service Guidelines for determining adequacy of public facilities and
infrastructure to support new development shall be established by the
responsible City line agencies as part of their review and update of Functional
Plans. Level of Service Guidelines for infrastructure and utilities which are
primary State agency responsibilities (such as schools) shall be established by
the DPP in consultation with the responsible State agencies.
In preparing the Functional Plans, a proactive public involvement process
should be established which provides the public with access to complete
information about infrastructure and public facility needs assessment,
alternatives evaluation, and financing. Outreach activities should involve the
Neighborhood Boards, community organizations, landowners, and others who might
be significantly affected by the infrastructure or public facilities projects
to be developed under the Functional Plan.
The process should be characterized by opportunities for early and continuing
involvement, timely public notice, public access to information needed to
evaluate the decision, and the opportunity to suggest alternatives and to
express preferences.
5.4   REVIEW OF ZONING AND OTHER DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS
A primary way in which the vision of the ‘Ewa Development Plan will guide land
use will be through the review of applications for zone changes and other
development approvals. Approval for all development projects should be based on
the extent to which the project supports the policies, and guidelines of the
Development Plan.
All applications for projects requiring zone changes will be reviewed by the
DPP for consistency with the policies, principles, and guidelines of the ‘Ewa
Development Plan during the Zone Change Application process. Those projects
requiring environmental assessments shall follow the provisions of Hawai‘i
Revised Statutes, Chapter 343.
All projects involving significant zone changes will require either an
Environmental Assessment or an Environmental Impact Statement (See Section
5.4.1) which must include a Project Master Plan when 25 acres or more are
involved (See Section 5.4.2). This is submitted to the DPP for review and
acceptance prior to initiation of the first Zone Change Application for the
project. (See definition of significant zone change in Section 5.4.1 below, and
the definition of Project Master Plan in Section 5.4.2 below.)
5.4.1   ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
Projects involving a significant zone change will be required to submit an
Environmental Assessment (prepared in compliance with procedures for Chapter
343, Hawai‘i Revised Statutes) to the DPP to help the Department determine
whether the project involves a significant environmental impact and if the
project is supportive of the vision for ‘Ewa’s development.
A project will be considered to involve a significant zone change if:
   •   The application involves a zone change of 25 acres or more to any zoning
district or combination of zoning districts, excluding preservation and
agricultural zoning districts; or
   •   The project is more than 10 acres and involves a change from one zoning
district to a Residential, or Country zoning district; or
   •   The project is more than 5 acres and involves a change from one zoning
district to an Apartment, Resort, Commercial, Industrial, or Mixed Use zoning
district; or
   •   The project would have major social, environmental, or policy impacts,
or cumulative impacts due to a series of applications in the same area.
The Director of the DPP will determine, based on review of the Environmental
Assessment, whether an Environmental Impact Statement (prepared in compliance
with procedures for Chapter 343, Hawai‘i Revised Statutes) will be required or
whether a Finding of No Significant Impact should be issued.
In applying for a zoning change, the applicant must either:
   •   Receive a determination from the director of planning and permitting
that the project does not involve a significant zone change; or
   •   Submit an Environmental Assessment or Environmental Impact Statement
with the zone change application.
Before an application for a significant zone change can be accepted for
processing by the Department of Planning and Permitting, the applicant must
either:
   •   Receive a Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI) from the director of
planning and permitting; or
   •   Receive an acceptance of a Final Environmental Impact Statement (FEIS)
for the project from the director of planning and permitting.
All Environmental Assessments/Environmental Impact Statements (EA/EIS) required
for a significant zone change involving 25 acres or more should include a
Project Master Plan (See Section 5.4.2 following). The scope of the EA/EIS must
cover, at a minimum, the specific development associated with a particular zone
change application, but at the option of the applicant, may cover subsequent
phases of a larger project, as well.
Zone change applications for a project already assessed under the National
Environmental Policy Act, Hawai‘i Revised Statutes Chapter 343, Revised
Ordinances of Honolulu Chapter 25 (Shoreline Management), or a preceding zoning
change application, will not require a new Environmental Assessment so long as
the Director of Planning and Permitting determines that the desired zoning and
land use generally conform to that described in the existing Environmental
Assessment/Environmental Impact Statement.
5.4.2   PROJECT MASTER PLANS
The Project Master Plan is intended solely as a guide to help describe in words
and illustrations how a project promotes the vision, policies, and guidelines
for ‘Ewa.
Projects associated with a significant zone change for 25 acres or more, shall
include a Project Master Plan as part of the Environmental Assessment or
Environmental Impact Statement submitted to the DPP. The Project Master Plan
shall cover all project phases. It shall be reviewed to determine whether the
project supports the vision, policies, and guidelines of the ‘Ewa Development
Plan. In the event a FONSI or Final EIS has already been accepted by the City
for a particular project, a subsequent Project Master Plan will not be
required.
The Project Master Plan should be based on the best information available to
the applicant at the time the Zone Change Application is submitted to the City.
5.4.2.1   Coverage and Scope
The Project Master Plan should cover all phases of the project and should
describe, using narrative and graphic illustration, how the project conforms to
the vision for ‘Ewa, and the relevant policies, and guidelines for the project
site, the surrounding lands, and the region.
5.4.2.2   Key Elements
While the scope and detail will vary according to the scope and complexity of
the project, the Project Master Plan should contain the following elements.
When a key element enumerated below is adequately addressed elsewhere in an EA/
EIS, discussion of related issues should be referenced within the Master Plan
portion of the document.
   •   Statement of Consistency with the ‘Ewa Development Plan Vision - The
Master Plan should indicate how the project supports the vision, policies, and
guidelines of the ‘Ewa Development Plan.
   •   Site Analysis - The Master Plan should identify how the proposed
development physically relates to prominent existing site features, views
identified in
Table 3.2 and on the Open Space Map in Appendix A, and surrounding urban or
urbanizing areas and should describe any related opportunities and constraints.
   •   Land Use - The Master Plan should indicate the proposed pattern of land
uses by general zoning district category.
      °   Land uses proposed for lands in any future development phases that
are not included in the current Zone Change Application will be considered only
conceptual and intended to serve only as a working guide for future
development.
      °   In larger projects, residential neighborhoods should be designated,
and concepts intended to create a sense of neighborhood should be described.
      °   The Master Plan should identify where the community’s “main street”
or village or town center is located and show how any planned commercial
development will help create a pedestrian friendly environment for that center.
      °   For projects that involve multiple uses, the intended relationship
between zoning districts should be described.
   •   Open Space - The Master Plan should discuss open space as a component of
the overall land use element, and should indicate how the proposed development
promotes the Development Plan open space and guidelines and the vision of an
integrated regional open space system.
   •   Circulation - The Master Plan should indicate:
      °   General street patterns and the application of street and block
standards which minimize dead end streets and provide adequate connectivity;
      °   Intended connections to the regional roadway network and adjacent
communities; and
      °   Potential transit routes and pedestrian and bicycle routes.
   •   Design Theme or Character - The Master Plan should depict, with
sketches, photos or descriptions, the intended general urban design of the
area. These vignettes should be represented and understood to be conceptual
depictions of the potential general design theme of the project.
   •   Telecommunications - The Master Plan should indicate the sites and
network conduit facilities that would be provided to meet expected
telecommunications infrastructure needs, if applicable.
5.4.2.3   Review Procedures
The DPP shall review the Project Master Plan concurrently with the
Environmental Assessment/Environmental Impact Statement and shall determine
whether the Project Master Plan supports the ‘Ewa Development Plan vision or
whether changes are needed.
5.4.2.4   Modification of Master Plans for Future Phases
Often, projects are developed in phases. As a result, the Project Master Plan
is likely to cover more land than the developer is currently requesting for a
zone change. The feasibility and desirability of plans for later phases of the
Project Master Plan can be greatly altered in light of more detailed study of
site characteristics and site planning, or change in market forces or
government policies.
As a result, elements of Master Plans covering lands in phases which are not
included in a current Zone Change Application should be considered only
conceptual and intended to serve only as a working guide for future
development. Changes to these parts of a Master Plan can be made by the
developer at any time without requiring approval by the City.
If a Master Plan has been revised in planning for a subsequent phase of a
project, an updated version of the Master Plan should be submitted with the
zone change application for that phase. No new Environmental Assessment or
Master Plan review should be required unless there has been a major alteration
in the project vision and land uses from that proposed in the original Master
Plan.
5.4.3   ADEQUATE FACILITIES REQUIREMENT
All projects requesting zone changes shall be reviewed to determine if adequate
public facilities and infrastructure will be available to meet the needs
created as a result of the development. Level of Service Guidelines to define
adequate public facilities and infrastructure requirements will be established
during the Capital Improvement Program.
In order to guide development and growth in an orderly manner as required by
the City’s General Plan, zoning and other development approvals for new
developments should be approved only if the responsible City and State agencies
indicate that adequate public facilities and utilities will be available at the
time of occupancy or if conditions the functional agency indicates are
necessary to assure adequacy are otherwise sufficiently addressed.
The DPP will review and summarize any individual agency’s findings regarding
public facilities and utilities adequacy which are raised as part of the EA/EIS
process. The DPP will address these findings and any additional agency comments
submitted as part of the agency review of the zone change application, and will
recommend conditions that should be included in the Unilateral Agreement or
Development Agreement to insure adequacy of facilities.
5.4.4   ZONING APPLICATION REVIEW
Zoning applications will be reviewed by the DPP for consistency with the
General Plan, the ‘Ewa Development Plan, and any applicable Special Area Plan
provisions as part of the Zone Change application review.
The Director of the DPP will recommend either approval, approval with changes
and/or conditions, or denial within the prescribed period as set forth in ROH
Section
21-2.40, and the Director’s written review of the application shall address the
consistency or inconsistency of the project with the General Plan, the ‘Ewa
Development Plan and any applicable Special Area Plan and shall become part of
the zone change report which will be sent to the Planning Commission and the
City Council.
5.4.5   UNILATERAL AGREEMENTS
Before the enactment of an ordinance for a zone change, conditions may be
associated with the zone change approval. These conditions are set forth in the
applicant’s Unilateral Agreement which is recorded with the Bureau of
Conveyances and/or the Land Court so that the conditions set forth in the
agreement run with the land and bind all subsequent owners of the property.
The Director of Planning and Permitting evaluates zone change requests and may
initially recommend conditions of approval in a report to the Planning
Commission which evaluates the requested zone change and recommends approval,
denial or approval with conditions. The Director’s recommendations and the
Planning Commission recommendations are sent to the City Council which makes
the final decision on the proposed development, including what conditions
should be included in the Unilateral Agreement.
In the evaluation, the Director of Planning and Permitting evaluates the
proposed zone change for consistency with the ‘Ewa Development Plan vision,
policies and guidelines. In addition, Project Master Plans submitted for large
projects at the time of the zone change application may be referenced as a
working guide in formulating conditions of approval.
5.4.6   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
Before the enactment of an ordinance for a zone change, the City and the
applicant may negotiate a Development Agreement. The Development Agreement sets
forth mutually acceptable contractual conditions agreed upon by the City and
the applicant once an ordinance for a zoning change has been approved. The
Development Agreement conditions are recorded with the Bureau of Conveyances
and/or the Land Court so that the conditions of the agreement run with the land
and bind all subsequent owners of the property.
Development agreements negotiated by the City Council shall be consistent with
the Development Plan vision for ‘Ewa and should incorporate key conditions that
are necessary to implement the Development Plan vision.
5.5   ANNUAL CIP REVIEW
Annually, the Director of Planning and Permitting will work jointly with the
Director of Budget and Fiscal Services and the City agencies to review all
projects in the City’s Capital Improvement Program (CIP) budget for conformance
to the purposes of the General Plan, the ‘Ewa Development Plan, and other
Development Plans, any applicable Special Area Plan provisions, and the
appropriate Functional Plans. The Director of Planning and Permitting will make
a written report of findings in the budget submittal to the Council, pursuant
to Revised Charter Section 6-1503.
Public review of how projects in the City’s CIP budget help accomplish the
vision of the ‘Ewa Development Plan should be a high priority. Public review
should be encouraged both in the screening of agency CIP budget proposals in
the preliminary draft CIP Budget (which is available in November), in review of
projects included in the Draft CIP Budget (typically completed sometime in
January or February), and in the City Council’s formal public review and CIP
Budget adoption processes.
5.6   BIENNIAL REPORT
Every two years, the DPP prepares the Biennial Report. The Report is a review
of the City in terms of the General Plan and the Development Plans.
Each Biennial Report should address the achievements and progress in fulfilling
the vision of the ‘Ewa Development Plan.
5.7   FIVE YEAR DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW
The DPP shall conduct a comprehensive review of the ‘Ewa Development Plan and
shall report its findings and recommended revisions to the Planning Commission
and the City Council five years after adoption and every five years thereafter.
In the Five Year review, the ‘Ewa Development Plan will be evaluated to see if
the regional vision, policies, guidelines, and implementing actions are still
appropriate.
5.8   DEVELOPMENT PLAN COMMON PROVISIONS AND EXISTING LAND USE APPROVALS
This Development Plan will go into effect upon adoption by ordinance. At that
time, the revised Development Plan will become a self-contained document, not
reliant on the Development Plan Common Provisions which formerly applied to the
‘Ewa Development Plan as well as all the other Development Plans.
Land use approvals granted under previously approved Development Plan
amendments will remain in force and guide zoning decisions unless clearly
inconsistent with the vision and policies of the ‘Ewa Development Plan.
Development can proceed in accordance with existing zoning, Unilateral
Agreements, and approved Urban Design Plans.
If an Environmental Assessment or Environmental Impact Statement (EA/EIS) was
accepted in the course of a Development Plan land use approval for a project,
it should be acceptable to meet the requirement for an initial project EA/EIS
when zone change applications are submitted for subsequent phases of the
project unless the project scope and land uses are being significantly changed
from that described in the initial EA/EIS.
5.9   RELATION TO GENERAL PLAN POPULATION GUIDELINES
The ‘Ewa Development Plan implements the General Plan population distribution
policies (in Population Objective C) as follows:
   •   ‘Ewa’s projected share of O‘ahu population in 2025 (13.8 percent) will
be slightly above the General Plan guideline of 13 percent;
   •   Development will be encouraged within the secondary urban center at
Kapolei and the urban fringe areas in ‘Ewa; and
   •   The recommended land use pattern also implements Population Objective C,
Policy 3, which is to limit growth in areas outside the PUC, Central O‘ahu, and
‘Ewa so that the suburban and country character of these outlying areas can be
maintained.
The General Plan population distribution guidelines will continue to be used as
a guide to direct the pattern of growth and development in the ‘Ewa Development
Plan Area. Assessments of this performance will be reported in both the
Biennial Report and in the Five Year Reviews of the Development Plan.
Under the ‘Ewa Development Plan, all proposed projects will be evaluated
against how well they fulfill the vision for ‘Ewa set forth in the Development
Plan and how closely they meet the policies, principles, and guidelines
selected to implement that vision.
5.10    REVIEW AND REVISION OF DEVELOPMENT CODES
To ensure that the vision, policies, and guidelines of the ‘Ewa Development
Plan and other Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans are
implemented, current regulatory codes and standards should be reviewed and
revised, as necessary, including the following:
   •   Land Use Ordinance (Chapter 21, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu). Zoning
code standards and the zoning map for ‘Ewa need to be revised to reflect
policies, principles and guidelines in the ‘Ewa Development Plan.
   •   Subdivision Rules and Regulations (Department of Planning and
Permitting, pursuant to Chapter 22, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu). Public
right-of-way standards used for subdivision and consolidation of land need to
be revised to reflect transportation policies, principles, and guidelines in
the Development Plan.
   •   Traffic Standard Manual (Department of Transportation Services, July
1976, as revised). Standards which are applied to local and most collector/
connector streets need to be revised to reflect transportation policies,
principles, and guidelines in the ‘Ewa Development Plan.
   •   State Highways Division Procedures Manual, Vol. 8, Chapter 5, Section 4
(State Department of Transportation). These State highway standards need to be
reviewed to identify provisions which may conflict with the transportation
policies, principles, and guidelines in the ‘Ewa Development Plan.
   •   Standard Details for Public Works Construction (Honolulu Department of
Public Works with Kaua‘i, Mau‘i, and Hawai‘i County Departments of Public
Works, September 1984). Engineering standards for the dedication of public
works construction need to be revised to reflect ‘Ewa Development Plan
principles and guidelines.
   •   Storm Drainage Standards (Department of Planning and Permitting, January
2000). Standards for the dedication of drainage systems to incorporate grassed
swales and retention basins into the design need to be created to reflect the
Development Plan policies, principles, and guidelines for open space.
   •   Park Dedication Rules and Regulations (Department of Planning and
Permitting, pursuant to Chapter 22, Article 7, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu).
Regulations need to be reviewed to determine if passive drainage systems, which
are designed for recreation use, should count toward park dedication
requirements, especially in cases where the area would exceed the amount of
land that would be required under current rules and regulations.
   •   Wastewater Management Design Standards (Department of Wastewater
Management Design Standards, Volumes I and II) and the 1990 Revised Ordinance
of Honolulu, Chapter 14 (relating to sewer services). These standards and
ordinance may require review to further implement Development Plan policies and
guidelines.
5.11    IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
This section provides a summary of the Plan’s policies and guidelines from
Chapters 3 and 4 to help understand how the Plan will be implemented. This
implementation matrix presents the policies and guidelines as generalized and
consolidated statements. Chapters 3 and 4 should be consulted for the specific
language of each policy or guideline.
For each policy and guideline statement, the matrix identifies:
   •   The regulatory code or program for effecting implementation,
   •   Agencies with responsibility for implementation, and
   •   The role of each agency.
Implementation of the policies and guidelines will depend on each agency’s
priorities and availability of resources.
The DPP is either a regulator or an implementer for many plan components, while
simultaneously acting as the advocate for implementation of all the Plan vision
elements and policies.
The key to abbreviations used in the table is found at the end of the table.
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies and Guidelines Statements Programs Agencies Roles
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies and Guidelines Statements                                                    Programs Agencies  Roles
OPEN SPACE
      Provide long-range protection for diversified agriculture on lands outside         LUC       Regulator
Community Growth Boundary. Protect scenic views and natural, cultural, and historic   SLUDBA   DPP       Advocate/
resources.                                                                                               Regulator
                                                                                      ZC       DPP       Regulator
   Mountain Areas
                                                                                      State
      Protect and expand access to recreational resources in the mountains. AcquTrails   DLNR      Implementer/
and maintain a public campground and hiking trails in the area mauka of the Community State             Regulator
Growth Boundary on the Wai‘anae Range. Acquire and maintain public access to mountaiParks
trails in the Pālehua Ridge area via Pālehua Road and Makakilo Drive.               ZC/UA    DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      UDP
      Maintain the forest at higher elevations in the State Conservation DistricCons     LUC       Regulator
Plan utility corridors and other uses to avoid disturbance to areas with high         Distr    DLNR      Implementer
concentrations of native species.                                                      
                                                                                      Cons     LUC       Regulator
      Identify and protect areas that are important to Native Hawaiian cultural Distr    DLNR      Implementer
practices.                                                                             
                                                                                      Hist     DLNR      Regulator
                                                                                      Pres
   Natural Gulches and Drainageways
      Preserve the natural gulches on the slopes of the Wai‘anae Range foothilZC       DPP       Advocate
within the Community Growth Boundary as part of the open space system.                LUO      DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      SUB
      Integrate planned improvements to the ‘Ewa drainage systems into the regional
open space network by emphasizing the use of retention basins and recreational access Drain MP DPP       Regulator
in the design approach.
      View drainageways and utility corridors as opportunities to link major opeDrain MP DPP       Regulator
spaces with pedestrian and bike paths along open corridors in order to create the     UDP                
regional open space network.
      Where practical, retain drainageways as natural or man-made vegetated chanDrain MP DPP       Regulator
rather than concrete channels.
   Shoreline Areas
      Protect and expand access to recreational resources at the shoreline and iSMA
ocean. Provide public pedestrian access, with limited improvements (e.g., parking,    SUB      DPP       Regulator
potable water supply), except where access is restricted by the military for security Shore     
reasons.                                                                              Stbk
                                                                                               USFWS/    Implementer
                                                                                               NOAA      Regulator
                                                                                      ESA/MBTA USACE     Regulator
                                                                                               DLNR      Implementer
      Maintain and enhance near-shore wetlands and mangroves as wildlife habitats.                 Regulator
                                                                                      INRMP    USDOD     Implementer
                                                                                      ZC       DPP       Advocate
                                                                                      SMA      DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      LUO/UA
                                                                                      Cons     LUC       Regulator
      Identify and protect areas that are important to Native Hawaiian cultural Distr    DLNR      Implementer
practices.                                                                             
                                                                                      Hist     DLNR      Regulator
                                                                                      Pres
                                                                                      KMP      HCDA      Regulator
                                                                                      SMA
      Coordinate private and public landowners’ efforts to create continuous  SUB
shoreline easements to ensure the maximum feasible degree of lateral public access.   Shore    DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      Stbk
                                                                                      UDP
      Provide, at a minimum, a 60-foot setback along the shoreline, and, where  SUB
possible, expand the setback to 150 feet where justified, based on historic or        Shore    DPP       Regulator
adopted projected coastal erosion rates.                                              Stbk
                                                                                      CZM      OP        Regulator
      Analyze the possible impact of sea level rise for new public and private  SMA
projects in shoreline areas and incorporate, where appropriate and feasible, measures SUB      DPP       Regulator
to reduce risks and increase resiliency to impacts of sea level rise.                 Shore
                                                                                      Stbk
      Avoid the use of breakwaters or jetties at the Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei marinSMA
entrance in order to preserve surf sites.                                             Shore    DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      Stbk
      Expand limited public access to the shoreline waters of West Loch beyond tINRMP    DOD       Regulator
West Loch Shoreline Park.                                                                               Implementer
   Agricultural Areas
      Permit facilities necessary to support intensive cultivation of arable    Agric    LUC       Regulator
agricultural lands.                                                                   Distr
                                                                                      LUO      DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      Agric    LUC       Regulator
      Permit facilities to support limited outdoor recreation use, such as campiDistr
horseback riding, and hiking, in areas where agricultural use is not feasible.        SUP      DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      LUO
      Permit residential use only to the extent that it is accessory to the     LUO      DPP       Regulator
agricultural use.
      Design and locate buildings and other facilities that are accessory to an
agricultural operation to minimize impact on nearby urban areas, arterial roads, and  LUO      DPP       Regulator
major collector streets.
   Golf Courses
      Locate and design golf courses to optimize their function as drainage reteUDP      DPP       Regulator
areas.                                                                                Drain MP           
      Design golf courses to consider public safety and potential impacts on vieUDP      DPP       Regulator
and recreational resources, and accommodate and incorporate pedestrian paths and      LUO                
bikeways.
   Wildland-Urban Fire Hazard Setbacks
      As determined appropriate by the Honolulu Fire Department, require residential
or commercial developments that are adjacent either to preservation areas within the           DPP       Regulator
Community Growth Boundary or to lands within the State Conservation District to       SUB      HFD       Advocate
provide a setback to reduce the risk of fire spreading from the “wildlands” to the
developed area.
   Greenways and Open Space Corridors
      Provide additional connectivity for bicyclists and pedestrians by developiState    DOT       Implementer
the Pearl Harbor Historic Trail between ‘Aiea and Nānākuli.                       CIP      DDC       Implementer
                                                                                      City CIP
      Provide sufficient easement width for the major trunk lines and transmission       DLNR      Regulator
and distribution lines for utility systems to allow landscaping within and adjacent   Cons     DPP       Regulator
to the easement, consistent with all applicable operations, maintenance, and safety   Distr    PUC       Regulator
requirements. Place new transmission lines underground, where possible, under         SUB      BFS       Regulator
criteria specified in State law.                                                      BID/CFD  HECO      Implementer
                                                                                               DA        Implementer
      Permit the use of utility easements for pedestrian and bicycle routes,    SUB      DPP       Regulator
consistent with all applicable operations, maintenance, and safety requirements.               HECO      Implementer
      Design the rights-of-way for major and minor arterials as landscaped parkwSUB      DPP       Regulator
or greenways, complete with a landscaped median strip, landscaped sidewalks, and      UDP                
bikeways.
REGIONAL PARKS AND RECREATION COMPLEXES
                                                                                      City CIP DPR       Implementer
   Consider using public-private partnerships to build, and maintain new regional          DDC       Implementer
parks and recreation complexes in order to sustain economic development.                       DES       Implementer
                                                                                      BID/CFD  BFS       Regulator
                                                                                               DA        Implementer
   Develop a major regional park within Kalaeloa that provides beach-oriented      KMP      HCDA      Regulator
recreation, camping, and support facilities near the shoreline, other active                   DDC       Implementer
recreation facilities in mauka areas, and preserves for cultural and archaeological   City CIP DPR       Implementer
resources and for wildlife habitats such as wetlands and endangered plant colonies.
   Complete development of Kapolei Regional Park to provide diverse active and     City CIP DDC       Implementer
passive recreation within easy walking distance of both the City Center and the       Park MP  DPR       Implementer
Villages of Kapolei.
   Use best practices in the architectural and landscaping design, incorporation ofCity CIP DDC       Implementer
natural features and indigenous plants, siting of facilities, connectivity, and       Park MP  DPR       Implementer
provision of transit for regional parks and recreation complexes.                     UDP      DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      SUB
   Develop additional beach and shoreline parks along the ‘Ewa coastline.        City CIP DDC       Implementer
                                                                                               DPR       Implementer
                                                                                      City CIP DDC       Implementer
   Maintain prominent landforms at Pu‘u O Kapolei and Pu‘u Pālailai as natural visual  DPR       Implementer
features and regional landmarks. Develop Pu‘u Pālailai Park as a private nature parZC       DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      BID/CFD  BFS       Regulator
                                                                                               DA        Implementer
                                                                                               USFWS/
                                                                                      ESA/MBTA NOAA      Regulator
   Retain, protect, and incorporate wetland, and other wildlife habitat and                 USACE     Implementer
environmentally sensitive areas as passive recreational resources.                             DLNR
                                                                                      INRMP    DOD       Regulator
                                                                                                         Implementer
                                                                                      SMA      DPP       Regulator
COMMUNITY-BASED PARKS
                                                                                      Park     DPP       Regulator
   Provide adequate parks and supporting amenities to meet residents’ recreationaDedic.
needs.                                                                                City CIP DDC       Implementer
                                                                                               DPR       Implementer
   Co-locate parks with elementary or intermediate schools. Coordinate design,     State    DOE       Implementer
development and use of recreational facilities with the DOE where efficient and       CIP
effective.                                                                            City CIP DDC       Implementer
                                                                                               DPR       Implementer
   Where feasible, site parks near the center of neighborhoods, in order to maximizUDP      DPP       Regulator
accessibility and connectivity. Provide pathways to parks from surrounding streets.   SUB
                                                                                                       
   Use xeriscaping, nonpotable irrigation water, and efficient irrigation systems  City CIP DDC       Implementer
wherever possible.                                                                             DPR       Implementer
                                                                                      State
   Support continuation of controlled access to the Wai‘anae Range mountain trailCIP      DLNR      Implementer
via Pālehua Road.                                                                    State
                                                                                      Trails
HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
   Emphasize physical references to ‘Ewa’s history and cultural roots to help dZC/UA    DPP       Regulator
‘Ewa’s unique sense of place. Protect existing visual landmarks, and support creatUDP                
of new culturally appropriate landmarks. Preserve significant historic features from  Hist     SHPD      Regulator
the plantation era and earlier periods as recommended by the State Historic           Pres
Preservation Officer. Retain significant vistas whenever possible.                    City CIP DDC       Implementer
                                                                                               DFM       Implementer
                                                                                      UA       DPP       Regulator
   Assume that historic, cultural, and archaeological site mitigations approved as UDP
part of prior development approvals carry out the Plan vision and policies.           Hist     SHPD      Regulator
                                                                                      Pres
   Sites Under Review
      Vary the treatment of sites according to their characteristics and potentiHist     SHPD      Regulator
value. Use in situ preservation and appropriate protection measures for historic,     Pres
cultural, or archaeological sites with high preservation value Allow historic sites   LUO      DPP       Implementer
to be converted from their original intended use to serve a new function if historic  City CIP DDC       Implementer
value is maintained, especially if interpretive value is enhanced.                             DFM       Implementer
      Protect the Honouliuli Internment Camp site and the ‘Ewa Marine Corps AiHisteld  SHPD      Regulator
site in Kalaeloa from development while the value and appropriate treatment of the    Pres
two sites are being determined.                                                       KMP      HCDA      Regulator
                                                                                               DPR       Implementer
   Impacts of Development on Historic and Cultural Resources
      Plan and design adjacent uses to avoid conflicts or abrupt contrasts that Hist     SHPD      Regulator
detract from or destroy the physical integrity and historic or cultural value of the  Pres
site.                                                                                 City CIP DDC       Implementer
                                                                                             DFM       Implementer
                                                                                      UA       DPP       Regulator
      Design and site all structures, where feasible, to reflect the need to maiUDPin
and enhance available views of significant landmarks and vistas. Whenever possible,            PUC       Regulator
relocate or place underground overhead utility lines and poles that significantly     BID/CFD  BFS       Regulator
obstruct public views, under criteria specified in State law.                                  HECO      Implementer
                                                                                               DA        Implementer
   OR&L Historic Railway                                                                             
      Maintain or repair the existing track to the extent feasible to permit hisHistc    SHPD      Regulator
and educational rides. Extend the route from ‘Ewa Villages to Nānākuli. To allow  Pres
connectivity within the region, accommodate cross-traffic at appropriate intervals    U&OA     HiRS      Implementer
along the right-of-way. Set back new development a minimum of 50 feet on either side  DOT      Regulator
of the R-O-W. Allow railroad accessory structures, parking, and loading areas in the  ZC       DPP       Advocate
R-O-W and setback areas.                                                              LUO      DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      SUB
      Develop a parallel paved bikeway along the length of the rail route as parState    DOT       Implementer
the Pearl Harbor Historic Trail, even in those sections where railroad rides are not  CIP
operational. Design structures and elements to reflect the historic nature of the     BPH      DOT       Implementer
railway. Provide landscaping, interpretive signs, and occasional rest stops.          Hist     SHPD      Regulator
                                                                                      Pres
   Lanikūhonua
      Maintain the visual identity and unique setting of Lanikūhonua as closelySMA      DPP       Regulator
possible to its present condition through the use of native landscaping, maintenance  LUO                
of the architectural style of the original buildings, and limits on public access and Hist     SHPD      Regulator
use.                                                                                  Pres     LCI       Implementer
   Native Hawaiian Cultural and Archaeological Sites
      Determine the appropriate preservation method, site boundaries, setbacks, Hist     SHPD      Regulator
restrictions for adjacent uses on a site-by-site basis, in consultation with the      Pres
State Historic Preservation Officer.                                                  ZC/UA    DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      UDP
                                                                                      Hist     SHPD      Regulator
      Determine the appropriate level of public access on a site-by-site basis, Pres     OHA       Advocate
consultation with the State Historic Preservation Officer, Hawaiian cultural           
organizations, and the land owner.                                                    ZC/UA    DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      UDP
NATURAL RESOURCES
   Conserve potable water by supporting water conservation measures (e.g. non-potabWUP      CWRM      Regulator
irrigation, xeriscaping).                                                                      BWS       Advocate
                                                                                      SUB      DPP       Regulator
                                                                                               USFWS/    Regulator
                                                                                      ESA/MBTA NOAA
   Protect valuable habitat for waterbirds, fish, invertebrates and other endangered        USACE     Regulator
animals and plants. Require surveys for proposed new developments to identify                  DLNR      Regulator
endangered species habitat, and require appropriate mitigations for adverse impacts.  SMA
                                                                                      ZC/UA    DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      UDP
                                                                                                       
                                                                                               EPA       Regulator
   Clean up contaminated areas that pose hazards to soil and water quality,        EPA Act  DOH       Regulator
especially in Kalaeloa.                                                                        HCDA      Regulator
                                                                                               DHHL      Implementer
                                                                                               USFWS     Regulator
                                                                                      ESA/MBTA DLNR      Regulator
   Reduce light pollution’s adverse impact on wildlife and human health and its           DOT       Implementer
unnecessary consumption of energy by using, where possible, fully shielded lighting            DTS       Implementer
fixtures using lower wattage.                                                         BC
                                                                                      UDP      DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      LUO
MASTER PLANNED COMMUNITIES
   City of Kapolei
      Develop the City of Kapolei as the downtown for the Secondary Urban Center with
a balanced mix of business and residential areas, complemented by the recreational,   UDP
social and cultural activities of a city. Allow development of a business hotel in    UA
the Mixed Use District of the City. Create a grid system of public streets and keep   SUB      DPP       Regulator
block lengths relatively short. Allow buildings up to 150 feet high in the City       TOD
Center. Use best practices to conserve potable water, make the City a garden city,
and encourage walking, biking, and transit usage.
   ‘Ewa Plantation Villages
                                                                                               DPR       Implementer
                                                                                               DFM       Implementer
      Preserve and enhance the rural form and historic character of the VillagesEVMP/MOA FmHA      Implementer
the ‘Ewa Villages Master Plan as a vehicle for preservation and redevelopment efforts        ACHP      Advocate
within the existing villages. Rehabilitate or adapt existing village structures in             HHF       Advocate
the ‘Ewa Villages for reuse. Develop additional neighborhood parks/open space and a City CIP DDC       Implementer
small shopping center. Make infrastructure improvements. Establish community          Hist     SHPD      Regulator
facilities and a market place for local businesses.                                   Pres
                                                                                      201H     DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      CC&R     AOHO      Implementer
                                                                                      Hist     SHPD      Regulator
                                                                                      Pres
                                                                                      EVMP/MOA DFM       Implementer
      Ensure continued tenancy and ownership opportunities for current residentsCDBG/    DCS       Implementer
Develop or rehabilitate 1,900 affordable and market housing units.                    HOME
                                                                                      201H     DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      City CIP DDC       Implementer
                                                                                      RPT      BFS       Implementer
   Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei
      Develop Hoakalei as the region’s principal recreational marina for localUDP
residents and visitors. Develop the project by following best practices to ensure     UA       DPP       Regulator
environmental compatibility. Provide expanded public recreation areas and access to   SUB
shoreline and waterfront areas. Develop a mix of activities around the marina basin,  Drain MP
including a Marina Mixed Use area with resort and commercial development, a Medium    ORTP     OMPO      Implementer
Density Residential area, and a Marine Industrial area. Develop the marina as a       TIP
commuter ferry terminal if feasible and if financing for improvements can be found.            DDC       Implementer
Retain, enhance, and protect wetlands and other wildland habitat. Develop the golf    City CIP DTS       Implementer
course to provide open space and detention basins for run-off from light storms.
   Other Existing and Planned Residential Communities
      Develop suburban residential areas with housing density of 10 to 15 units KMP      HCDA      Regulator
acre. Develop residential areas along the rapid transit corridor at housing densities KRMP     DHHL      Regulator /
of 25 units per acre, and mixed use residential/commercial areas within 1/4 mile of                      Implementer
transit stations at densities from 25 to 90 units per acre. Require that 30 percent   ZC/UA
of the housing units be affordable to low and low-moderate income households.         UDP      DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      TOD
      Develop or redevelop residential communities to have an identified pedestrKMP-     HCDA      Regulator
friendly town center or “Main Street” area, and design commercial development to hKRMP     DHHL      Regulator /
establish and support that center. Encourage walking and biking and bus transit usage                    Implementer
by providing ample path and roadway connectivity both to the town center and          ZC/UA
throughout the community, and by providing sufficient right-of-way to provide bus     UDP      DPP       Regulator
shelters and pull-outs.                                                               SUB
                                                                                      TOD
                                                                                      KMP      HCDA      Regulator
                                                                                      KRMP     DHHL      Regulator /
                                                                                                         Implementer
                                                                                      ZC/UA
      Provide land for community facilities including churches, community centerUDP      DPP       Regulator
and elderly and child care centers.                                                   TOD      AOHO      Implementer
                                                                                      Park
                                                                                      Dedic.
                                                                                      City CIP DDC       Implementer
                                                                                      Park MP  DPR       Implementer
                                                                                       
      Use xeriscaping, non-potable water for irrigation, and efficient irrigatioSUB      BWS       Regulator
systems wherever possible to conserve groundwater resources.                                   DPP       Regulator
   Ko ‘Olina
                                                                                      UA
      Develop Ko ‘Olina as an integral part of the Secondary Urban Center.    UDP      DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      SUB
      Provide substantial waterfront areas for public use and retain the shoreline as
natural open space softened by landscaping and focused on the beach and swimming      UA
lagoons. Avoid adverse impacts on natural resources or processes in the coastal zone. UDP      DPP       Regulator
Follow best practices with respect to urban form, natural environment, shoreline      SMA
access, views and vistas, circulation system and transportation facilities, water     SUB
conservation, and landscaped treatment.
   Kalaeloa
      Develop Kalaeloa in ways that integrate the circulation system and land usKMP      HCDA      Regulator
pattern of the ‘Ewa Plain. Provide additional ways for ‘Ewa residents and workers State    DOT       Implementer
cross ‘Ewa from east to west and north to south.                                    CIP
                                                                                      City CIP DDC       Implementer
      Develop a major new regional park. Provide continuous lateral shoreline acKMPs     HCDA      Regulator
with links to adjacent pathways in Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei and Campbell Industrial      City CIP DDC       Implementer
Park.                                                                                 Park MP  DPR       Implementer
      Provide ample lands devoted to uses that will create long-term jobs for �KMPa     HCDA      Regulator
residents.                                                                                              
      Follow best practices for shoreline setback and access; protection of     KMP      HCDA      Regulator
archaeological, cultural, historical, and natural resources; separation of use areas; City CIP DDC       Implementer
appropriate scale; accessibility and connectivity; landscaping; and water             Park MP  DPR       Implementer
conservation.
   University of Hawai‘i West O‘ahu
      Develop University of Hawai‘i West O‘ahu campus to be environmentally ZC/UA    DPP       Regulator
culturally sensitive to the site, to be reflective of the Hawaiian culture and ‘Ewa,UDP
and, in combination with an adjacent University Village, to be an important civic and LUO      UHWO      Implementer
cultural institution for ‘Ewa. Follow best practices for place making, design,      PRU
landscaping, circulation, open space, and views.                                      TOD
      Provide direct vehicle access to the campus from both Farrington Highway aPRU      DPP       Regulator
Kualaka‘i Parkway. Orient the campus to support pedestrian access to and transit    SUB      DOT       Regulator
usage from two rapid transit stations planned for locations on Kualaka‘i Parkway.            UHWO      Implementer
      Design the campus to use open space areas for flood detention and retention as
part of the Kalo‘i Gulch watershed master plan in order to reduce the downstream    Drain MP DPP       Regulator
impact of major storm events and keep stormwater flows and velocity below design
levels used for earlier developments in the Kalo‘i Gulch watershed.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL RETAIL CENTERS
   Develop planned commercial centers, outside of the City of Kapolei, to provide  KMP      HCDA      Regulator
retail shopping and offices delivering services for the ‘Ewa residential communitiesKRMP     DHHL      Regulator /
in which they are located. Concentrate commercial uses in central locations instead                      Implementer
of in continuous commercial strips along arterial roads, and design the centers to    ZC/UA
support pedestrian-friendly centers or “Main Streets” for their communities. AllowUDP      DPP       Regulator
medium density mixed use commercial development near rail transit stations on the     TOD
rail transit corridor.
   Locate Major Community Commercial Centers or Regional Commercial Centers and majKMP      HCDA      Regulator
office buildings in the City of Kapolei. Allow offices providing support to the       KRMP     DHHL      Regulator /
University of Hawai‘i West O‘ahu to be located in the TOD areas around the two                       Implementer
transit stations closest to the campus.                                               ZC/UA    DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      KMP      HCDA      Regulator
   Permit multi-family residential use above the first floor and include it whereveKRMP     DHHL      Regulator /
possible in commercial centers.                                                                          Implementer
                                                                                      ZC/UA    DPP       Advocate
                                                                                      LUO                Regulator
                                                                                      KMP      HCDA      Regulator
                                                                                      KRMP     DHHL      Regulator /
   Follow best practices for architectural character, building siting, building                       Implementer
height and density, accessibility, connectivity, pedestrian and bicycle facilities,   ZC/UA
visual screening, water conservation, lighting, and signage.                          UDP      DPP       Advocate
                                                                                      LUO               Regulator
                                                                                      SUB
INDUSTRIAL AREAS
   Maintain the Barbers Point Industrial Area as one of O‘ahu’s and the State�KMPmost  HCDA      Regulator
important industrial areas. Develop the northern parts of Kapolei Business Park,
Kapolei Harborside, and any Kalaeloa lands designated for industrial use for light    LUO
industrial uses or compatible commercial uses as a transition between heavy industry  UDP      DPP       Regulator
at Campbell Industrial Park and the City of Kapolei. Allow development of marine
industrial uses at Hoakalei.
   If a major film studio is developed within the Barbers Point Industrial Area,
allow accessory uses, such as film production offices, film crew overnight            LUO      DPP       Regulator
accommodations, a “back lot” area with commercial uses, and visitor attractions.
   Develop Honouliuli as a smaller industrial area, used for wastewater treatment aUA       DPP       Regulator
for light industrial and industrial- commercial mixed uses to serve the surrounding   LUO
communities. Expand the Honouliuli Wastewater Treatment Plant to accommodate                   DDC       Implementer
additional growth in the region as well as to provide additional facilities for       City CIP ENV       Implementer
higher levels of wastewater treatment.
   Allow the Hawaiian Electric Company generating plant in Kahe Valley to be expandPUC      PUC       Implementer
to take advantage of available land area, cooling system capacity, and power                   HECO      Implementer
transmission lines.                                                                   LUO      DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      KMP      HCDA      Regulator
   Follow best practices for appropriate scale, environmental compatibility, buildiZC/UA
height and mass, shoreline setback and access, roadway setbacks, water conservation,  UDP      DPP       Regulator
and landscape treatment.                                                              LUO
                                                                                      SUB
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS   
                                                                                      ORTP     OMPO      Implementer
                                                                                      TIP
                                                                                      State    DOT       Implementer
   Provide adequate access between residences and jobs, shopping, and recreation   CIP
centers in ‘Ewa as development occurs. To improve connectivity, provide a multi-modaCity CIP DDC       Implementer
network of interconnected routes that safely accommodate walkways, bikeways, and               DTS       Implementer
streets throughout ‘Ewa and that efficiently link arterials, residences, schools,   KMP      HCDA      Regulator
parks, community facilities, commercial and employment centers, and transit stops.    ZC/UA
                                                                                      UDP      DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      ECS
                                                                                      SUB
                                                                                      ORTP     OMPO      Implementer
                                                                                      TIP
   Provide improved access and capacity to and from adjacent areas, especially     State    DOT       Implementer
Central O‘ahu.                                                                      CIP
                                                                                      City CIP DDC       Implementer
                                                                                               DTS       Implementer
   Provide adequate capacity for major peak hour commuting to work in the Primary  ORTP     OMPO      Implementer
Urban Center. Meet demand for peak-period transportation capacity by increased use of TIP
transit, and by transportation demand management (improved HOV lane service,          State    DOT       Implementer
provision of park-and-ride facilities, and reduction of single occupant automobile    CIP
traffic). Establish a commuter ferry from Hoakalei Marina if feasible and if          City CIP DDC       Implementer
financing for improvements can be found.                                                       DTS       Implementer
                                                                                      KMP      HCDA      Regulator
   Reserve land for the right-of-way for the Council- identified rapid transit     KRMP     DHHL      Regulator /
corridor in ‘Ewa and plan to develop medium density high-traffic land uses and                         Implementer
transit-oriented development nodes along the route.                                   ZC/UA    DPP       Regulator
                                                                                     UDP      DTS       Advocate
                                                                                      TOD
WATER ALLOCATION AND SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT   
   Require new developments to provide adequate potable and nonpotable water, and           DPP       Implementer
implement water conservation measures. Require developments with large landscaped     ZC/UA
areas, roadway landscaping, or industrial processes to have dual water lines (potable SUB      BWS       Regulator
and non-potable) to conserve use of potable water through use of non-potable water
for irrigation and other appropriate uses.
   Develop an adequate supply of nonpotable water for irrigation and other suitableWater    CWRM      Regulator
uses on the ‘Ewa Plain. Require nonpotable water used for irrigation above Pearl    OWMP     BWS       Implementer
Harbor aquifer to be low in chlorides and total dissolved solids. Request that the
State Commission on Water Resource Management consider all sources of water in making City CIP DDC       Implementer
allocations of nonpotable water.
   Develop alternative water supplies using new technologies in water reclamation, Water    CWRM      Regulator
membrane and distillation desalination and deep ocean water applications. Encourage   OWMP     BWS       Implementer
use of technologies conserving water and using renewable energy that could support             ENV       Implementer
alternative water supplies.                                                           City CIP DDC       Implementer
WASTEWATER TREATMENT
   Require all wastewater produced by new developments in ‘Ewa to be connected toSUB      DPP       Regulator
regional or municipal sewer service system.                                                    ENV       Implementer
   Where feasible, use recycled water recovered from wastewater effluent for       WP       DOH       Regulator
irrigation and other uses below the Underground Injection Control (UIC) line and the  OWMP     BWS       Implementer
“No-Pass” Line.                                                                   ZC/UA    DPP       Regulator
                                                                                      SUB
                                                                                      WP       DOH       Regulator
   Locate wastewater treatment plants in areas shown as planned for industrial use City CIP DDC       Implementer
and away from residential areas                                                       WMBFP    ENV       Implementer
                                                                                      LUO      DPP       Regulator
ELECTRICAL POWER DEVELOPMENT
                                                                                      PUC      PUC       Regulator
   Analyze and approve system improvements based on island-wide studies and siting          HECO      Implementer
evaluations. Give strong consideration to placing any new transmission lines          LUO      DPP       Regulator
underground.                                                                          BID/CFD  BFS       Regulator
                                                                                               DA        Implementer
   Locate electrical power plants in areas shown as planned for Industrial use and PUC      PUC       Regulator
away from residential areas.                                                                   HECO      Implementer
                                                                                      LUO      DPP       Regulator
   Analyze and approve siting expansion of sanitary landfills based on island wide SUP      LUC       Regulator
studies or both siting evaluations. Do not develop Makaīwa Gulch as a landfill.               DPP       Advocate
                                                                                      SWIMP    ENV       Implementer
SOLID WASTE HANDLING AND DISPOSAL
   For master-planned communities, in consultation with the Department of          ZC/UA    DPP       Regulator
Environmental Services, estimate the amount of solid waste to be generated and plan   SUB      ENV       Implementer
how solid waste will be collected and recycling will be encouraged.
DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
   Design drainage systems to emphasize flood control, minimize non-point source   NPDES    DOH       Regulator
pollution, and retain and/or detain storm water. Use storm water for aquifer
recharge. Use natural and man-made vegetated drainageways and retention basins as the
preferred solution to drainage problems. Permit concrete-lined channels if there is   Drain MP DPP       Regulator
no other feasible alternative. Ensure that solutions to handling drainage problems on
lands above ‘Ewa Villages are compatible with the drainage design of the ‘Ewa
Villages Master Plan and other developments in the Kalo‘i Gulch drainage basin.
   Integrate planned drainage system improvements into the regional open space
network by allowing recreational use of retention basins, and creating passive        Drain MP DPP       Regulator
recreational areas and pathways for pedestrians and bikers.
SCHOOL FACILITIES
   Request DOE to report to DPP if adequate school capacity can be provided as partZC/UA
of the project review and approval process, both at the entitlement and permit        SUB      DPP       Implementer
approval stages.
   Require developers to comply with DOE school impact fees requirements and existiSIF      DOE       Regulator
UA school impact conditions and pay their fair share of all costs needed to provide   ZC/UA    DPP       Implementer
adequate school facilities for the children living in their developments.
   Design school facilities to facilitate community use during nonschool hours and State    DOE       Implementer
weekends.                                                                             CIP      DPP       Advocate
                                                                                       
   Co-locate neighborhood or community parks with elementary and intermediate schooState    DOE       Implementer
and coordinate design of facilities with the State DOE when needless duplication of   CIP
parking and of athletic, recreation, and meeting facilities can be avoided.           City CIP DDC       Implementer
                                                                                               DPR       Implementer
PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES
                                                                                      City CIP DDC       Implementer
   Provide adequate facilities and staffing to ensure public safety and provide fire        BFS       Implementer
protection, police protection, and emergency medical service for existing and new     Op Bud   HFD       Implementer
development.                                                                                   HPD       Implementer
                                                                                               EMS       Implementer
Survey and retrofit, as appropriate, existing DOE and other public buildings to make  City CIP DDC       Implementer
up the shortfall in hurricane resistant shelters. Require new City buildings which             DEM       Implementer
are “critical facilities used for public assembly and able to perform as shelters”BCo      DPP       Regulator
be designed and built to withstand a Category 3 hurricane.
   Provide incentives for private organizations to create hurricane resistant sheltCDBG/    DCS       Implementer
areas in their facilities and for homes to include hurricane resistant “safe rooms.�HOME     DEM       Implementer
                                                                                      Op Bud   BFS       Regulator
OTHER COMMUNITY FACILITIES
   Encourage co-location of antennae. Mount antennae on existing buildings or
structures so that public scenic vistas and open spaces will not be negatively        LUO      DPP       Regulator
affected. Use “stealth” technology to minimize visual impacts.
 
 
Key to Abbreviations
Programs                                                                          Agencies                                                                          Roles
•   Agric Distr: State Agriculture District, Chapter 205, Hawai‘i Revised
Statutes (HRS)
•   BC: Building Code,
Chapter 16, ROH
•   BID: Business Improvement District,
Chapter 28, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu (ROH)
•   BPH: Bike Plan Hawai‘i                                                 •   AOHO: Association of Home Owners
•   CDBG: Community Development Block Grant, HUD                             •   BFS: Department of Budget and Fiscal Services
•   CFD: Community Facilities Districts,                                     •   BWS: Board of Water Supply
Chapter 27, ROH                                                                   •   CWRM: State Commission on Water Resource Management
•   CIP: Capital Improvement Program                                         •   DA: Business Improvement District Association
•   Cons Distr: State Conservation District, Ch. 205, HRS                    •   DCS: Department of Community Services
•   CZM: Coastal Zone Management, Chapter 205A, HRS                          •   DDC: Department of Design and Construction
•   Drain MP: Drainage Master Plan                                           •   DEM: Department of Emergency Management
•   ECS: ‘Ewa Connectivity Study                                           •   DES: Department of Enterprise Services
•   EPA Act: Environmental Protection Agency Act                             •   DFM: Department of Facility Maintenance
•   ESA: Endangered Species Act                                              •   DLNR: State Department of Land and Natural Resources
•   EVMP/MOA: ‘Ewa Villages Master Plan/ Memorandum of Agreement           •   DOD: United States Department of Defense                                 •    Implementer
•   HOME: Home Investment Partnerships Program, HUD                          •   DOE: State Department of Education                                       •    Advocate
•   Hist Pres: Historic Preservation, Chapter 6E, HRS                        •   DOH: State Department of Health                                          •    Regulator
•   HSCD: Hawai‘i State Civil Defense                                      •   DOT: State Department of Transportation
•   INRMP: Integrated Natural Resource Master Plan                           •   DPP: Department of Planning and Permitting
•   Kapolei MP: Kapolei Area Long Range Master Plan, The Estate of James Camp•   DPR: Department of Parks and Recreation
•   KMP: Kalaeloa Master Plan                                                •   DTS: Department of Transportation Services
•   KRMP: Kapolei Regional Master Plan, DHHL                                 •   ENV: Department of Environmental Services
•   LUO: Land Use Ordinance,                                                 •   EPA: Environmental Protection Agency
Chapter 21, ROH                                                                   •   HCDA: Hawai‘i Community Development Authority
•   MBTA: Migratory Bird Treaty Act                                          •   HECO: Hawaiian Electric Company
•   NPDES: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System                   •   HiRS: Hawaiian Railway Society
•   OMTP: O‘ahu Metropolitan Transportation Plan                           •   HFD: Honolulu Fire Department
•   Op Bud: City Operating Budget                                            •   HSCD: Hawai‘i State Civil Defense
•   Park Dedic: Park Dedication,
Chapter 22, ROH
•   Park MP: Park Master Plan
•   PRU: Plan Review Use
•   PUC: Public Utilities Commission , Ch. 269, HRS
•   RPT: City Real Property Transactions,
Chapter 37, ROH
•   SIF: School Impact Fees, Chapter 302A- 1601 to 1611, HRS
•   Shore Stbk: Shoreline Setback,
Chapter 23, ROH
•   SLUBDA: State Land Use District Boundary Amendment
•   SMA: Special Management Area,                                            •   HUD: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Chapter 25, ROH                                                                   •   LCI: Lanikuhonua Cultural Institute
•   State Parks: DLNR State Parks; Division of Forestry and Wildlife Camping •   LUC: State Land Use Commission
permits                                                                           •   NOAA: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
•   State Trails: DLNR Nā Ala Hele State Trails and Access Program          •   OHA: Office of Hawaiian Affairs
•   SUB: Subdivision                                                         •   OMPO: O‘ahu Metropolitan Planning Organization
•   SUP: Special Use Permit                                                  •   OP: State Office of Planning
•   SWIMP: Solid Waste Integrated Management Plan                            •   PUC: State Public Utilities Commission
•   TIP: Transportation Improvement Plan                                     •   SHPD: State Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Land and
•   TOD: Transit-Oriented Development                                        Natural Resources
•   UA: Unilateral Agreement, LUO Sec. 21- 2.80                              •   UHWO: University of Hawai‘i West O‘ahu
•   U&OA: Use and Occupancy Agreement                                        •   USACE: United States Army Corps of Engineers
•   UDP: Urban Design Plan                                                   •   USFWS: United States Fish and Wildlife Service
•   Water: State Water Code, Chapter 174C, HRS
•   WMBFP: West Māmala Bay Facilities Plan
•   WP: Water Pollution, Chapter 342D, HRS
•   WUP: Water Use Permit/Well Permit, CWRM
•   ZC: Zone Change
 
APPENDIX A: CONCEPTUAL MAPS
This appendix includes the four primary conceptual maps used to illustrate the
vision for ‘Ewa’s future development. The maps include:
   PAGE
   OPEN SPACE   24-295
   URBAN LAND USE   24-296
   PUBLIC FACILITIES      24-297
   PHASING   24-298
These maps illustrate the long-range vision of the future of the plan area and
the major land use, open space, and public facility policies that are
articulated in the plan. In using these maps, the reader should keep in mind
that:
   1.   These maps are general and conceptual, and are not intended to be used
to determine specific land use boundaries. Such boundaries are to be determined
during the review of specific land use or public facilities investment
decisions, and their exact locations are to be guided by the vision and
policies of this Plan.
   2.   These maps illustrate the Plan’s vision and policies which are
presented in Chapters Two, Three, and Four. These policy statements are
considered the most important elements of the Plan.
The maps are considered illustrations of the policies. However, the text should
be consulted to determine the appropriate application of the Plan vision,
policies, and guidelines for any specific project or location. In case of
disagreement, the text should prevail over the map depiction.
A brief explanation of the terms used in each of these maps follows.
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Descriptions of elements common to each of the four maps are presented in the
following section. Descriptions of elements specific to each map (Open Space,
Land Use, Public Facilities, Phasing) are presented in separate sections for
each map which follow the section on Common Elements.
COMMON ELEMENTS
Preservation Areas
Preservation areas are lands with natural, cultural, or scenic resource value.
They include the following types of land:
   •   Land necessary for protecting watersheds, water resources and water
supplies.
   •   Lands necessary for the conservation, preservation and enhancement of
sites with scenic, historic, archaeological or ecological significance.
   •   Lands necessary for providing and preserving park lands, wilderness and
beach reserves, and for conserving natural ecosystems of endemic plants, fish
and wildlife, for forestry, and other related activities to these uses.
   •   Lands with topography, soils, climate or other related environmental
factors that may not be normally adaptable or presently needed for urban, rural
or agricultural use.
   •   Lands with general slopes of 20 percent or more which provide for open
space amenities and/or scenic values.
   •   Lands susceptible to floods and soil erosion, lands undergoing major
erosion damage and requiring corrective attention by the State or Federal
Government, and lands necessary to the protection of the health, safety and
welfare of the public by reason of soil instability or the lands’
susceptibility to landslides and/or inundation by tsunami and flooding.
   •   Lands used for national, state or city parks.
   •   Lands suitable for growing of commercial timber, grazing, hunting, and
recreation uses, including facilities accessory to such uses when said
facilities are compatible with the natural physical environment.
Agricultural Areas
Agricultural areas are lands with agricultural value by virtue of current
agricultural use or high value for future agricultural use, including those
areas identified as Prime, Unique, or Other Important lands on the Agricultural
Lands Important to the State of Hawai‘i (ALISH) maps. These are lands suitable
for crop growing, grazing and livestock raising, flower cultivation, nurseries,
orchards, aquaculture, or similar activities.
Under the State Constitution, the State is to identify Important Agricultural
Lands (IAL). Once identified, these lands cannot be rezoned except under a
“super majority” vote. To date, IAL lands have not be identified. In 2005, Act
183 was adopted to address this mandate. It established a two-step process:
   •   The State Legislature would adopt incentives to assure the long-term use
and protection of IAL.
   •   The State Legislature would approve adequate funding to allow the
counties to prepare maps identifying IAL lands which would then be adopted by
the LUC.
Act 233, enacted in 2008, adopted the incentive programs. To date, no state
funding has been appropriated to the counties for the mapping. Lands identified
for agricultural purposes by this plan can serve as the basis for the county
mapping process.
Parks
The maps show locations of existing public and private parks and recreational
facilities, including regional parks, district parks, shoreline parks, and
nature parks and conceptual locations for planned and proposed parks. Smaller
community-based parks, including community parks, neighborhood parks, and mini-
parks, are not shown.
Golf Courses
The maps show the locations of existing and proposed public and private golf
courses.
Historic Railway/Bikeway Corridor
The corridor shown on the ‘Ewa maps is part of the Pearl Harbor Historic Trail,
a continuous greenway stretching from Nānākuli across the ‘Ewa Plain to West
Loch and then along the shores of Pearl Harbor to Rainbow Marina near Aloha
Stadium with a connection to the Waipahū Cultural Garden Park. The corridor
will include a major pedestrian and bike path and a restored OR&L right-of-way
that would allow train operations between ‘Ewa Plantation Villages and
Nānākuli.
Community Growth Boundary
The Community Growth Boundary defines and contains the intended extent of
developed or “built up” areas of urban and urban fringe communities. Its
purpose is to provide adequate land to support established or developing
communities while protecting lands outside this boundary for agriculture or
open space values. Areas within this boundary are generally characterized by
extensive tracts of residential, commercial, industrial, or mixed-use
development clearly distinguishable from undeveloped or more “natural” portions
of a region’s environment.
In the ‘Ewa Development Plan, the mauka portion of the Community Growth
Boundary follows the Special Management Area boundary around Kahe Point, runs
along the mauka boundary of the Makaīwa Hills project and Makakilo, follows the
proposed extension of Makakilo Drive to the H-1 freeway, and then follows the
H-1 freeway to the Kunia Road where it turns and follows Kunia Road to the
boundary between the ‘Ewa Development Plan area and the Central O‘ahu
Sustainable Communities Plan area. It excludes all State Agricultural and
Conservation District lands mauka of the boundary from urban development.
The makai portion of the Community Growth Boundary excludes the area within the
Explosive Safety Quantity Distance (ESQD) arc for the West Loch Naval Magazine
from urban development.
Highways, Arterials, and Major Collector Streets
Major existing and proposed roadways providing east-west and mauka-makai
linkages across the ‘Ewa Development Plan area.
OPEN SPACE MAP
The Open Space Map illustrates the vision for the ‘Ewa Open Space Network. The
Open Space Network consists of large areas of preservation and agricultural
lands outside the Community Growth Boundary and a network of parks, wildlife
habitats, golf courses, agricultural lands, ravines, grass-lined drainageways,
and greenways along utility corridors and major arterials within the Community
Growth Boundary. (See definitions of terms and discussion in Sections 2.2.1,
2.2.2, 2.2.3 in Chapter 2 and in Section 3.1 in Chapter 3.)
The Open Space Map shows major open space elements and resources, including
agricultural and preservation lands, major recreational facilities, important
“panoramic” views, natural stream corridors and drainageways, and important
boundaries.
Terms on the Open Space Map which are not common to all of the maps include:
Natural Drainageways/Gulches
Natural waterways which are to be retained as flood plains and open space
resources and protected from development, disturbance, or channelization except
where absolutely necessary to protect existing urban development from flooding.
Panoramic Views
Significant views and vistas which are to be retained, whenever possible. (See
Table 3.2,
Exhibit 3.2, and Section 3.4.2.)
Shoreline Access
The proposed lateral public easement/access along the ‘Ewa shoreline with
public pedestrian access to the shoreline at intervals of approximately 1/
4 mile.
Urban Areas
Areas which have been developed or are planned for development for residential,
retail, office, and industrial uses.
Landscaped Boulevard/Greenway
Major arterials and major collector streets which should be developed as
landscaped parkways, complete with a landscaped median strip, landscaped
sidewalk, and bikeways. (See Sections 3.1.3.8 and 3.8.3.)
URBAN LAND USE MAP
The Urban Land Use Map illustrates the desired long-range land use pattern for
‘Ewa resulting from implementation of the plan’s vision and policies. It
portrays the vision for development of the City of Kapolei, for the development
of master planned residential communities, and for creation of new jobs at the
Ko ‘Olina Resort, Campbell Industrial Park, Kapolei Business Park, West
Kalaeloa Industrial Park, Kalaeloa, the University of Hawai‘i West O‘ahu, and
the resort area at Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei. (See definition of terms and
discussion in Sections 2.2.4, 2.2.5, 2.2.6, 2.2.7, and 2.2.10 in Chapter 2, and
in Chapter 3.)
Terms on the Urban Land Use Map which are not common to all the maps include:
Residential and Low-Density Apartment
Suburban communities characterized by:
   •   Single-family detached homes;
   •   Attached homes or townhouse units with individual entries; and
   •   Low density, low rise, multi-family residences, including townhouses,
stacked flats, or apartment buildings.
In addition to residential uses, these areas may include neighborhood
commercial centers, elementary schools, parks, churches, community centers,
elderly care centers, child care centers, fire stations and other public
facility and utility uses serving the community.
Medium-Density Apartment
Mixed use communities adjacent to transit nodes or resort areas which are
characterized by medium density, low- to mid-rise multi-family residences with
retail or service commercial uses on the ground or lower floors, where
appropriate.
Community Commercial Center
This type of center principally serves the community in which it is located,
providing for basic shopping and service needs on a larger scale than the
neighborhood center. Community Commercial Centers may contain up to 250,000 sq.
ft. of floor area. Major attractions typically include a large grocery store, a
drug store, and/or a department store.
City of Kapolei
The urban core or “downtown” for ‘Ewa which is intended to be ‘Ewa’s center for
shopping, civic activity, and municipal services. It offers a wide range of
shopping and dining opportunities and professional, business and industrial
services, and provides housing in high and medium density residential mixed-use
buildings.
Resort/Recreation Area
Areas at Ko ‘Olina and Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei to be developed for hotels,
apartments, and accessory commercial and recreational facilities for resort
use.
Industrial
Areas shown include the State’s prime location for heavy industry at Campbell
Industrial Park and Kalaeloa Barbers Point Harbor as well as areas designated
for light- and service-related industrial uses associated with repair,
processing, construction, manufacturing, transportation, wholesaling,
distribution, storage and similar economic activities. Industrial areas also
can include a range of compatible commercial activities. See Sec. 3.11 for more
details on the appropriate uses for specific industrial locations in ‘Ewa.
Military
Lands for military and military support purposes.
Public Institution
Major facilities for public use or benefit.
Transit Node
Areas of medium density apartment and commercial development located around
rail transit stations on the rail transit corridor, which extends from the City
of Kapolei through Waipahū to downtown Honolulu. (See Sections 3.9, 3.10, and
4.1.4.2.)
Civic Center
The regional center with City and State offices and facilities providing
services to all O‘ahu residents.
Electric Power Plant
Existing power plants at Kahe Point and Campbell Industrial Park.
Wastewater Treatment Plant
The existing wastewater treatment plant at Honouliuli.
Intermediate/Middle School
Existing intermediate/middle schools, ‘Ilima Intermediate in ‘Ewa Beach, and
Kapolei Middle School in the Villages of Kapolei and conceptual locations for
new intermediate/middle schools at ‘Ewa by Gentry (Makai), East Kapolei (DHHL
and Ho‘opili), and Makaīwa Hills.
High School
Existing high schools, James Campbell High in ‘Ewa Beach, and Kapolei High
School in the Villages of Kapolei, and conceptual locations for new high
schools near the intersection of Kualaka‘i Parkway (formerly North-South Road)
and Farrington Highway and near the corner of H-1 and Kunia Road.
University of Hawaii West O‘ahu (UHWO)
Campus located on 136 acres near the intersection of Kualaka‘i Parkway and
Farrington Highway.
Hospital
The existing Hawai‘i Medical Center West on Fort Weaver Road.
Small Boat Marina
The existing Ko ‘Olina Marina and the proposed Hoakalei Marina.
Commercial Harbor
The existing Kalaeloa Barbers Point Deep Draft Harbor.
Airfield
The existing airfield at Kalaeloa.
Quarry
The existing quarry in Makakilo on the slopes of Pu‘u Makakilo.
PUBLIC FACILITIES MAP
The Public Facilities Map illustrates the major infrastructure needed to
implement the vision for ‘Ewa. It shows the location of existing facilities and
conceptual locations for some of the future required infrastructure facilities.
It is not meant to be amended between revisions of the Plan, and should not be
confused with the Public Infrastructure Map used in the Capital Improvement
Program budget process.
Major public facilities which are to be funded through Capital Improvement
Program budget appropriates must be shown on the Public Infrastructure Map
(PIM). The PIM is not part of the ‘Ewa Development Plan, and is adopted and
amended by resolution.
Projects which are not listed in the ‘Ewa Development Plan or not shown on the
‘Ewa Development Plan maps can still be added to the Public Infrastructure Map
by Council resolution if the Council finds them to be consistent with the
vision and policies of the ‘Ewa Development Plan. (For definitions, information
about existing and planned public facilities, and functional planning
processes, see Chapter 4 and Sec. 5.3 in Chapter 5.)
Terms on the Public Facilities Map which are not common to all maps include:
Urban Areas
Areas which have been developed or are planned for development for residential,
retail, office, and industrial uses.
Grade Separated Interchange
Existing interchanges at Kunia Road and H-1 Freeway, Kualaka‘i Parkway and H-
1 Freeway, Makakilo Drive and H-1 Freeway, Kalaeloa Boulevard and H-1 Freeway,
and Ali‘inui Drive and H-1 Freeway, and proposed interchanges at Kapolei (Wākea
Street and H-1 Freeway), and Makaīwa Hills.
Elevated Rail Transit Line
A rail line raised above ground for high speed rail service in urban areas.
Rail Transit Station
A dedicated rail transit facility providing passengers access to high-speed
rail service on the elevated rail transit line.
Park and Ride Site
Special parking lots where commuters park their cars and continue their commute
by mass transit.
HOV (High Occupancy Vehicle) Lane
An exclusive lane on a roadway reserved for transit and vehicles with more than
one occupant which is developed to improve transit speed and to provide
incentives for commuters to opt for mass transit or carpooling.
Bike Lane
A biking facility (bikeway) which is a four- to six-foot lane exclusively for
bike use which is included in a roadway.
Bike Path
A biking facility (bikeway) which is separate from the roadway network.
Civic Center
The regional center with City and State offices and facilities providing
services to all O‘ahu residents.
Electric Power Plant
Existing power plants at Kahe Point and Campbell Industrial Park.
Wastewater Treatment Plant
The existing wastewater treatment plant at Honouliuli.
Intermediate/Middle School
Existing intermediate/middle schools, ‘Ilima Intermediate in ‘Ewa Beach, and
Kapolei Middle School in the Villages of Kapolei and conceptual locations for
new intermediate/middle schools at ‘Ewa Makai, East Kapolei (DHHL, and
Ho‘opili), and Makaīwa Hills.
High School
Existing high schools, James Campbell High in ‘Ewa Beach, and Kapolei High
School in the Villages of Kapolei, and conceptual locations for new high
schools near the intersection of Kualaka‘i Parkway and Farrington Highway and
near the corner of H-1 and Kunia Road.
University of Hawaii West O‘ahu (UHWO)
Campus located on 136 acres near the intersection of Kualaka‘i Parkway and
Farrington Highway
Hospital
The existing Hawai‘i Medical Center West on Fort Weaver Road.
Small Boat Marina
The existing Ko ‘Olina Marina and the proposed Hoakalei Marina.
Commercial Harbor
The existing Kalaeloa Barbers Point Deep Draft Harbor.
Airfield
The existing airfield at Kalaeloa.
Corporation Yard
The existing Kapolei Corporation Yard in Campbell Industrial Park.
Landfill
The current Waimānalo Gulch Landfill site.
Desalination Plant
The Board of Water Supply’s existing deactivated pilot desalination plant
located in the Kapolei Business Park and the proposed desalination plant site
located in Kalaeloa adjacent to the Campbell Industrial Park.
PHASING MAP
The Phasing Map shows where urban development has already occurred in ‘Ewa,
where new development will take place within the Community Growth Boundary, and
the only area in ‘Ewa that has a Special Area Plan (Kalaeloa).
Terms on the Phasing Map which are not common to all of the maps include:
Existing Urban Areas
Areas which already have been developed for residential, retail, office,
institutional, or industrial uses. Growth in such areas can occur through re-
development or in-fill.
Urban Expansion Areas
Undeveloped areas formerly in agricultural uses which are either already
approved or will be considered for approval for development for residential,
retail, office, institutional, or industrial uses. Applications for zone
changes and other development approvals needed for new urban development in the
Urban Expansion Area will be accepted for processing, and will be supported for
approval if the project supports the vision and implementing policies of the
‘Ewa Development Plan and if adequate infrastructure can be provided. (See
Sections 2.2.10, 5.1.2, and 5.3.) Total acreage as of July 2009 was estimated
at over 6,500 acres with capacity for development of over 48,000 housing units
(See
Table 2.1.)
Kalaeloa Special Area
Special areas are areas which require more detailed planning than can be
provided in a Development Plan (See Section 5.2). Kalaeloa is the only area in
‘Ewa currently designated for a Special Area Plan.
Rail Transit Corridor
An area designated for establishment of communities that encourage use of
transit, walking, and biking to go to work, to school, to shop, or to have fun
by providing easy access to high speed mass transit; designing streets, public
places, and pathways to be friendly to pedestrians and bikers; and locating
medium density housing and commercial development within easy walking distance
of the nearest rail transit station. Sufficient land will be reserved in the
corridor so that an elevated rail transit line and rail transit stations may be
developed in the future. (See Sections 2.2.7, 3.9.1, 3.10.1, and 4.1.4.2.).
Rail Transit Station
A dedicated rail transit facility providing passengers access to high speed
rail service on the elevated rail transit line.
Landscaped Boulevard/Greenway
Major arterials and major collector streets which should be developed as
landscaped parkways, complete with a landscaped median strip, landscaped
sidewalk, and bikeways. (See Sections 3.1.4.8 and 3.8.2.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8456.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8454.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8452.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8450.png]
 
ARTICLE 4: EAST HONOLULU
Editor’s note:
   Ordinance 22-20 amended the East Honolulu Sustainable Communities Plan.
Sections
   
24-4.1   Definitions
   
24-4.2   Applicability and intent
   
24-4.3   Adoption of the East Honolulu SCP
   
24-4.4   Existing zoning and subdivision ordinances, approvals, and
applications
   
24-4.5   Consistency
   
24-4.6   Review of development and other applications
   
24-4.7   Zone change applications
   
24-4.8   Annual capital improvement program review
   
24-4.9   Ten-year review
   
24-4.10   Authority
   
24-4.11   Severability
   
24-4.12   Conflicting provisions
§ 24-4.1 Definitions.
   Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this
section govern the construction of this article and the East Honolulu
development plan.
Department. The department of planning and permitting of the city.
Development. Any public improvement project, or any public or private project
requiring a zoning map amendment.
Development Plan or Sustainable Communities Plan. A plan document for a given
geographic area that consists of conceptual schemes for implementing and
accomplishing the development objectives and policies of the general plan for
the several parts of the city.
Director. The director of planning and permitting.
East Honolulu SCP. The revised East Honolulu Sustainable Communities Plan
attached to Ordinance 21-11 as Exhibit A and made a part hereof.
Environmental Assessment and EA. A written evaluation prepared in compliance
with the environmental council's procedural rules and regulations implementing
HRS Chapter 343 to determine whether an action may have a significant
environmental effect.
Environmental Impact Statement and EIS. An informational document prepared in
compliance with the procedural rules and regulations of the environmental
council established in HRS § 341-3(c) for the implementation of HRS Chapter
343; and which discloses the environmental effects of a proposed action,
effects of a proposed action on the economic and social welfare of the
community and State, effects of the economic activities arising out of the
proposed action, measures proposed to minimize adverse effects, and
alternatives to the action and their environmental effects.
Finding of No Significant Impact and FONSI. A determination, based on an
environmental assessment that the subject action will not have a significant
effect and, therefore, will not require the preparation of an environmental
impact statement.
Functional Plan. The public facility and infrastructure plans prepared by
public agencies to further implement the vision, policies, and guidelines set
forth in the East Honolulu SCP.
General Plan. The general plan of the city as defined by Charter § 6-1508.
Planning Commission. The planning commission of the city.
Project Master Plan. A conceptual plan that covers all phases of a development
project. The project master plan consists of that portion of an environmental
assessment or environmental impact statement that illustrates and describes how
the project conforms to the vision for East Honolulu, and the relevant policies
and guidelines for the site, the surrounding lands, and the region.
Significant Zone Change. A zone change that involves at least one of the
following:
(1)   Changes in zoning of ten or more acres of land to any zoning district or
combination of zoning districts, excluding preservation or agricultural zoning
districts;
(2)   Any change in zoning of more than five acres to a residential or country
zoning district;
(3)   Any change in zoning of more than five acres to an apartment, resort,
commercial, industrial, or mixed use zoning district; or
(4)   Any development that may have a major social, environmental, or policy
impact, or major cumulative impacts due to a series of applications in the same
area.
Special Area. A designated area within the East Honolulu SCP area that requires
more detailed planning efforts beyond what is contained in the East Honolulu
Sustainable Communities Plan.
Special Area Plan. A plan for a special area.
Unilateral Agreement. A conditional zoning agreement made pursuant to §
21-2.80 ROH or any predecessor or successor provision that imposes conditions
on a landowner or developer's use of the property at the time of the enactment
of an ordinance for a zoning change.
Vision. The future outlook for the East Honolulu region extending out to the
year 2040 and beyond that entails the creation of a community growth boundary,
an open space network for preserving natural features, scenery, and shoreline
areas for recreational use by the public, protection of historic and community
resources, and provision of adequate infrastructure and community facilities to
address the anticipated impacts of climate change and to meet East Honolulu's
future needs.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.1) (Added by Ord. 21-11)
§ 24-4.2 Applicability and intent.
(a)   The East Honolulu SCP encompasses the entire area from the mountains to
the southern shoreline of Oahu stretching from Makapuu Point on the eastern
sector, along the ridgeline of Koolau Mountain Range in a westerly direction to
the Waialae Nui Gulch Stream.
(b)   It is the intent of the East Honolulu SCP to provide a guide for orderly
and coordinated public and private sector development in a manner that is
consistent with applicable general plan provisions, recognizing this urban
fringe area as one of the principal stable areas in the county for low-density
residential development.
(c)   The provisions of this article and the East Honolulu SCP are not
regulatory. Rather, they are established with the explicit intent of providing
a coherent vision to guide all new public and private sector development within
East Honolulu. This article shall guide any development for East Honolulu,
public investment in infrastructure, zoning and other regulatory procedures,
and the preparation of the city's annual capital improvement program budget.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.2) (Added by Ord. 21-11)
§ 24-4.3 Adoption of the East Honolulu SCP.
(a)   This article is enacted pursuant to Charter § 6-1509 and provides a self-
contained development plan document for East Honolulu. Upon enactment of this
article, all proposed developments will be evaluated against how well they
fulfill the vision for East Honolulu enunciated in the East Honolulu SCP and
how closely they meet the East Honolulu SCP policies and guidelines set forth
to implement that vision.
(b)   The plan entitled, "East Honolulu Sustainable Communities Plan," attached
to this ordinance as an exhibit to Ordinance 21-11, is hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this article.
(c)   
Chapter 24, Article 1, entitled "Development Plan Common Provisions," in its
entirety, is no longer applicable to the East Honolulu SCP area. This article
and the East Honolulu SCP, as adopted by reference in this article, supersedes
any and all common provisions previously applicable to the East Honolulu SCP.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.3) (Added by Ord. 21-11)
§ 24-4.4 Existing zoning and subdivision ordinances, approvals, and
applications.
(a)   All existing subdivisions and zoning approved prior to April 21, 2021 for
projects, including but not limited to those subject to unilateral agreements,
continue to remain in effect following the enactment of this ordinance.
(b)   Subdivision and zoning ordinances applicable to the East Honolulu SCP
area enacted prior to April 21, 2021 continue to regulate the use of land
within demarcated zones of the East Honolulu SCP area until such time as the
subdivision and zoning ordinances may be amended to be consistent with the
revised East Honolulu SCP.
(c)   Notwithstanding adoption of the East Honolulu SCP, applications for
subdivision actions and land use permits accepted by the department for
processing prior to April 21, 2021 continue to be subject only to applicable
ordinances and rules and regulations in effect at the time the application is
accepted for processing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.4) (Added by Ord. 21-11)
§ 24-4.5 Consistency.
(a)   In the performance of their prescribed powers, duties, and functions, all
city agencies shall conform to and implement the policies and provisions of
this article and the East Honolulu SCP. Pursuant to Charter § 6-1511.3, public
improvement projects and subdivision and zoning ordinances must be consistent
with the East Honolulu SCP.
(b)   Any questions of interpretation regarding the consistency of a proposed
development with the provisions of the East Honolulu SCP and the objectives and
policies of the general plan will ultimately be resolved by the council.
(c)   In determining whether a proposed development is consistent with the East
Honolulu SCP, the responsible agency shall primarily take into consideration
the extent to which the development is consistent with the vision, policies,
and guidelines set forth in the East Honolulu SCP.
(d)   Whenever there is a question regarding consistency between existing
subdivision or zoning ordinances, including any unilateral agreement, and the
East Honolulu SCP, the existing subdivision or zoning ordinances prevail until
such time as they may be amended to be consistent with the East Honolulu SCP.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.5) (Added by Ord. 21-11)
§ 24-4.6 Review of development and other applications.
   The review of applications for zone changes and other development approvals
will be guided by the vision of the East Honolulu SCP. Decisions on all
proposed developments must be based on the extent to which the project, enabled
by the development approval, supports the policies and guidelines of the East
Honolulu SCP.
   The director may review other applications for improvements to land, to help
the responsible agency determine whether a proposed improvement supports the
policies and guidelines of the East Honolulu SCP.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.8) (Added by Ord. 21-11)
§ 24-4.7 Zone change applications.
(a)   All zone change applications relating to land in the East Honolulu SCP
area will be reviewed by the department for consistency with the general plan,
the East Honolulu SCP, and any applicable special area plan.
(1)   The director shall recommend either approval, approval with amendments,
or denial. The director's written review of the application shall become part
of the zone change report, which will be sent to the planning commission and
the city council.
(2)   A project master plan must be part of an EA or EIS for any project
involving 25 acres or more of land. The director shall review the project
master plan for its consistency with the East Honolulu SCP.
(3)   Any development or phase of development already covered by a project
master plan that has been fully reviewed under the provisions of this article
does not require a new project master plan; provided that the director
determines the proposed zone change is generally consistent with the existing
project master plan for the affected area.
(4)   If a final EIS has already been accepted for a development, including one
accepted prior to April 21, 2021, then a subsequent project master plan is not
required for the development.
(b)   Projects that involve a significant zone change will be required to
submit an EA to the department prior to an application for a zone change being
accepted. Any development or phase of a development that has already been
assessed under the National Environmental Policy Act ("NEPA"), HRS Chapter 343
(the Hawaii Environmental Policy Act or "HEPA"), Chapter 25, or the provisions
of this article, and for which a FONSI has been filed or a required EIS has
been accepted, is not subject to further EA or EIS requirements under this
article, unless otherwise required by NEPA or HEPA.
(c)   The department shall review the EA, and based on the review of the EA,
the director shall determine whether an EIS will be required or whether a FONSI
will be issued.
(d)   If an EIS is required, the EIS must be accepted by the director prior to
the acceptance of a zone change application.
(e)   Zone changes are to be processed in accordance with this section; Section
5.5 of the East Honolulu SCP;
Chapter 2, Article 24, Part A; and all applicable requirements under
Chapter 21.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.7) (Added by Ord. 21-11)
§ 24-4.8 Annual capital improvement program review.
   Annually, the director shall work jointly with the director of budget and
fiscal services and other city agencies to review all projects in the city's
capital improvement program and budget for compliance and consistency with the
general plan, the East Honolulu SCP and other development plans, any applicable
special area plan provisions, and the appropriate functional plans. The
director shall prepare a written report of findings to be submitted to the
council in accordance with Charter § 6-1503.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.9) (Added by Ord. 21-11)
§ 24-4.9 Ten-year review.
(a)   The department shall conduct a comprehensive review of the East Honolulu
SCP, adopted by reference in §
24-4.3(b), every ten years subsequent to April 21, 2021, and shall report its
findings and recommended revisions, if any, to the council.
(b)   The East Honolulu SCP will be evaluated to assess the appropriateness of
the plan's regional vision, policies, guidelines, and implementing actions, as
well as its consistency with the general plan.
(c)   Nothing in this section should be construed as prohibiting the processing
a revision to the East Honolulu SCP at any time in the event the director or
the council recommends consideration of such a revision, pursuant to the
Charter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.10) (Added by Ord. 21-11)
§ 24-4.10 Authority.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed as an abridgement or delegation
of the responsibility of the director, or of the inherent legislative power of
the council, to review or revise the East Honolulu SCP pursuant to the Revised
Charter and the above procedures.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.12) (Added by Ord. 21-11)
§ 24-4.11 Severability.
   If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or
property or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity does not affect the
validity of the other provisions or applications of this article that may be
given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the
provisions of this article are declared to be severable.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.13) (Added by Ord. 21-11)
§ 24-4.12 Conflicting provisions.
   Any provision contained in this article as it pertains to land within the
East Honolulu SCP area, prevails should there be any conflict with the common
provisions or any other provisions under
Chapter 24.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.14) (Added by Ord. 21-11)
EAST HONOLULLU SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9560.png]
 
PREFACE & EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The East Honolulu Sustainable Communities Plan (the “Plan”) has been prepared
in accordance with the City Charter prescribed requirements for development
plans and is to be accorded force and effect as such for all Charter and
Ordinance-prescribed purposes. It is one of a set of eight community-oriented
plans intended to help guide public policy, investment, and decision-making
over the next 25 years. Each of the plans addresses one of eight geographic
planning regions on O‘ahu, responding to specific conditions and community
values of each region.
Exhibit ES-1 on the following page illustrates these planning regions.
Of the eight documents, the plans for ‘Ewa and the Primary Urban Center (PUC)
are the areas to which the General Plan says population growth and development
activity are to be directed over the next 25 years and beyond. The plans for
these regions will continue to be titled “Development Plans” and will serve as
the policy guides for the development decisions and actions required to support
that growth.
Plans for the remaining six areas, including East Honolulu, which are
envisioned as relatively stable regions for which public actions will focus on
supporting existing populations, have been entitled “Sustainable Communities
Plans” in order to properly indicate their intent.
The vision statement and implementing policies for the Plan are intended to
sustain East Honolulu’s character, lifestyle, and economic opportunities while
stabilizing East Honolulu’s share of O‘ahu’s population at approximately five
percent, or 50,000 (in 2010, East Honolulu had 5.2 percent of O‘ahu’s
population).
   Exhibit ES-1: Development Plan and Sustainable Communities Plan Areas for
O‘ahu
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9214.png]
 
P.1   THE SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN REVIEW PROCESS
This Plan is a revision of the Plan adopted by the City Council in 1999. The
1999 Plan was the second of the eight plans revised in response to a 1992 City
Charter amendment which changed the nature of the Development Plans from
relatively detailed, parcel-specific plans to conceptual, visionary plans.
As required by the adopting ordinance, the Plan is to be reviewed starting ten
years after adoption to assess if the Plan vision, land use and infrastructure
policies and guidelines, and implementation methods are still appropriate and
consistent with the General Plan.
This document is the culmination of a community-based planning effort led by
the Department of Planning and Permitting (DPP) which involved public meetings
and workshops, interviews, focus groups, and numerous meetings since 2005.
In its final form, the Plan incorporates and responds to comments received from
the public. The DPP performed numerous outreach events with community leaders
and organizations, business and labor representatives, landowners, developers,
and public and private agency staff through a variety of formats including:
public workshops, workgroup meetings, and presentations and meetings with trade
groups, companies, and Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs). The DPP also
conducted phone interviews and in-person meetings with community leaders,
researchers, and residents.
The East Honolulu Sustainable Communities Plan Technical Report (the “Technical
Report”) provides relatively detailed documentation of the review process,
comments and suggestions received, and research on significant land use and
infrastructure issues. The Technical Report also includes proposed revisions to
the Plan and improvements to its implementation. Like this Plan, the Technical
Report is available on the DPP website.
P.2   A SUSTAINABLE FUTURE FOR O‘AHU
There has been a recent surge in widespread community discussions, actions and
laws adopted to address sustainability. In 2005, the State Legislature convened
a statewide group to draft a Hawai‘i 2050 Sustainability Plan, whose primary
purpose is to provide policy recommendations for creating a sustainable
Hawai‘i. In 2007, greenhouse gas emissions goals for 2020 were enacted by Act
234 (2007). There was a mandate in 2015 that 100 percent of Hawai‘i’s energy
generated by 2045 must come from renewable resources (Act 97). In 2016, the
City and County conducted a review of its building codes to ensure that new
structures would be able to meet the new challenges presented by climate change
and sea level rise. In 2017, the Hawai‘i Climate Change Mitigation and
Adaptation Commission published its findings and recommendations to the State
Legislature in the Sea Level Rise Vulnerability and Adaptation Report.
Public service announcements dealing with conserving water and electricity
abound. The concept of buildings that are designed, built and occupied with
environmental considerations at the forefront largely did not exist when the
Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans were first adopted. This
setting raises the question of the role of the Development Plans and
Sustainable Communities Plans. Are they the City’s version of a sustainability
plan?
The answer is that they are the land development portion of a larger blueprint
for sustainability. As discussed below, the General Plan sets long-term goals
for the City and County of Honolulu, across 11 major elements. Perhaps its most
substantive chapter deals with population, and hence land development
distribution. The General Plan sets the growth management strategy for O‘ahu.
The Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans provide more detail on
this land management strategy, assuring that how we use the land now, and in
the future, responds to the three major elements of a Sustainable Place:
economic health, social equity, and environmental protection.
Since 1977, the City’s policy, as adopted by the City Council in the O‘ahu
General Plan, has been to reduce development pressures within the rural areas
of O‘ahu by fully developing downtown Honolulu from Pearl City to Kahala, by
building O‘ahu’s Second City in ‘Ewa, and by developing surrounding suburban
“urban fringe” areas in ‘Ewa and Central O‘ahu. There has been substantial
investment in roadways, schools, sewers, water systems, and other
infrastructure to support this pattern of development.
The most recent projections show that O‘ahu will need 77,700 new housing units
to meet expected population growth between 2010 and 2040. The General Plan, and
the Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans adopted by the City
Council to implement the General Plan, provide capacity for most new homes to
be built either in the Primary Urban Center, ‘Ewa, or Central O‘ahu.
The issues addressed either directly or indirectly by these regional plans
certainly overlap with other planning responsibilities of other departments,
such as water delivery and consumption, wastewater services, community
resilience and hazard mitigation, crime reduction, increasing public health,
developing responsive transportation systems, and recreation facilities.
Collectively, these efforts comprise the strategy of developing a sustainable
future for O‘ahu.
P.3   INTEGRATING PRINCIPLES OF SUSTAINABILITY INTO DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES
A community that can successfully manage change will flourish and prosper in
the future. For this Plan, this means ensuring that planned growth and
development respects and adheres to the following principles of sustainability
that are intended to promote the long-term health of the land and its people,
and its community resources for current and future generations:
   •   Adopt the concept of ahupua‘a in land use and natural resource
management;
   •   Protect lands designated for recreation, agriculture, physical and
environmental resources, and where appropriate, open spaces and view planes;
   •   Use resources so they are not depleted, permanently damaged or
destroyed;
   •   Plan, develop, and utilize construction technologies that minimize
negative environmental impacts and promote restoration of natural processes;
   •   Adapt infrastructure and programs to be more accessible and age-friendly
based on the recommendations in the Honolulu Age-Friendly City Action Plan;
   •   Respect the cultural, social and physical resources that shape and
reinforce residents’ sense of community and quality of life;
   •   Guide the process of change. Strive to make decisions based on an
understanding of the cumulative effects such decisions will have on the land
and community resources;
    •    Improve community resilience to natural and man-made hazards,
including climate change and sea level rise, in accordance with the O‘ahu
Resilience Strategy;
   •   Balance economic prosperity, social and community well-being, and
environmental stewardship; and
   •   Encourage greater collaboration across agencies and with the community
to manage and protect resources.
P.4 THE HONOLULU LAND USE PLANNING AND MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
The City and County of Honolulu guides and directs O‘ahu land use and
development through a three-tier system of objectives, policies and guidelines,
and regulations.
    •    The General Plan forms the first tier of this system. First adopted by
resolution in 1977, the General Plan is a relatively brief document, consisting
primarily of one-sentence statements of objectives and policies. It has been
amended several times, but the basic objectives and policies set forth in the
1977 plan remain intact.
    •    The second tier of the system is formed by the Development Plans and
Sustainable Communities Plans, which are adopted and revised by ordinance.
These plans address eight geographic regions of the island, including the
Primary Urban Center, ‘Ewa, Central O‘ahu, Wai‘anae, North Shore, Ko‘olau Loa,
Ko‘olau Poko, and East Honolulu.
    •    The third tier of the system is composed of implementing ordinances
and regulations, including the Land Use Ordinance (Honolulu's zoning code), the
Subdivision Rules and Regulations, and the City’s Capital Improvement Program.
Mandated by the City Charter, these ordinances and regulations constitute the
principal means for implementing the City’s plans. These ordinances and
regulations are required to be consistent with the General Plan, the
Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans, and each other.
In addition, the Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans are
supplemented by two planning mechanisms:
    •    Functional plans, like the O‘ahu Regional Transportation Plan or the
O‘ahu Water Management Plan, or City departmental plans, which are required by
City Charter for solid waste or parks and recreation, some of which are
mandated by state or federal regulations, provide long-range guidance for the
development of public facilities and infrastructure; and
    •    Special Area Plans give specific guidance for neighborhoods,
communities or specialized resource areas. There are currently no Special Area
Plans in East Honolulu.
P.5   AUTHORITY OF THE DEVELOPMENT AND SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLANS
The authority of the Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans is
derived from the City Charter, which mandates preparation of a General Plan,
Development Plans, and Sustainable Communities Plans to guide the development
and improvement of the City. The City Charter states the purpose of these plans
are:
“to recognize and anticipate the major problems and opportunities concerning
the social, economic and environmental needs and future development of the city
and to set forth a desired direction and patterns of future growth and
development.” (Section 6-1507)
Together, Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans provide policies
to guide land use and budgetary actions of the City and to evaluate progress
toward the goals and objectives put forth in the General Plan.
The City Charter provides that “public improvement projects and subdivision and
zoning ordinances should be consistent with the development plan for that
area.” Although the Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans are not
themselves regulatory, they provide guidance that decision makers and
administrators should follow in approving project development and in revising
rules and regulations and standard policies. The plans are policy tools and are
to be used, in conjunction with the programs and budgets of the City, to
accomplish the objectives of the City as guides for decisions.
Consistent with the City Charter’s description of Development Plans and
Sustainable Communities Plans conceptual schemes and policy guides, the
language, maps, and illustrations of the plans shall serve as a policy guide
for regulations which will implement the plans.
The Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans are also intended to
aid decisions made in the public and private sector by clearly indicating what
the City’s development priorities are, where development is appropriate, and
what kinds of development are appropriate in each location.
The 1992 City Charter amendments established that the purpose of the
Development Plans and Sustainable Community Plans is to be conceptual plans
whose purposes are to provide:
   •   “priorities … (for the) coordination of major development activities;”
and
   •   sufficient description of the “desired urban character and the
significant natural, scenic and cultural resources … to serve as a policy guide
for more detailed zoning maps and regulations and public and private sector
investment decisions.”
The revised Plan presented in this document conforms to that mandate.
P.6   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY OF THE EAST HONOLULU SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN
This Plan is organized in five chapters and an appendix, as follows:
   •   Chapter 1: East Honolulu’s Role in O‘ahu’s Development Pattern defines
the region’s role and identity within the overall framework of islandwide
planning and land use management;
   •   Chapter 2: The Vision for East Honolulu’s Future summarizes the
community-based vision for the future of the region, discusses key elements of
that vision, and presents illustrative maps and tables;
   •   Chapter 3: Land Use Policies and Guidelines provides the land use
policies needed to implement the vision for East Honolulu described in Chapter
2;
   •   Chapter 4: Public Facilities and Infrastructure Policies and Guidelines
provides the infrastructure policies needed to implement the vision for East
Honolulu described in Chapter 2 and Chapter 3;
   •   Chapter 5: Implementation identifies the means through which the
policies will be applied, including zone changes, and infrastructure budgeting
and development outlined by the Plan; and
   •   Appendix A includes:
      °   Three conceptual maps (Open Space, Urban Land Use, and Public
Facilities) which illustrate the vision and policies of the Plan; and
      °   A glossary of terms used in the Plan and on those maps.
The following summary provides an overview of the vision, land use and
infrastructure policies of the Plan and the means of implementation.
P.7   EAST HONOLULU’S ROLE IN O‘AHU’S DEVELOPMENT PATTERN
   •   Limited development and population growth so that East Honolulu’s share
of O‘ahu’s population remains stable at approximately five percent, or 50,000;
   •   Maintenance as a predominantly residential area characterized by
generally low-rise, low-density development; and,
   •   Moderate growth of business centers, retail and service commercial uses,
and satellite institutional and public uses geared to serving the needs of
households.
P.8   THE VISION TO 2040
East Honolulu is a safe, clean community with unique landscapes and natural and
cultural resources. Each residential neighborhood has its own special quality
and sense of place. The suburban development patterns of the 20th century have
been modified to provide for more walkable streets and local convenience
stores. There is a full range of commercial, medical and legal services to meet
the needs of the elderly community members. Agricultural areas have been
preserved and are producing food for the East Honolulu community. Community
organizations partner with government agencies and develop plans and strategies
to adapt and respond to the challenges of climate change, sea level rise,
flooding, severe coastal storms, inundation of coastal areas and Kalaniana‘ole
Highway, and wildfires. Best management practices have been implemented to
retain stormwater runoff, replenish valuable ground water reserves and improve
the quality of nearshore ocean waters.
   •   Population remains stable at approximately 50,000, or five percent of
O‘ahu’s population, through 2035 and 2040;
   •   An estimated 24 percent of O‘ahu residents will be 65 years and older by
2040 with approximately 37 percent of East Honolulu residents that will be 65
years and older, the highest on O‘ahu; and,
   •   Job stabilization and slight growth from 10,240 civilian jobs in 2010 to
10,400 jobs.
P.9   ELEMENTS OF THE VISION
   •   Protect Community Resources by:
      °   Protecting scenic views, particularly the Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline;
      °   Providing and improving access to shoreline and mountain recreational
areas;
      °   Creating more complete streets that are walkable, facilitate ease of
use for pedestrians, cyclists, and other alternative mode uses that adhere to
the following key principles:
            Safety;
            Consistency of design;
            Context sensitive solutions;
            Energy efficiency;
            Accessibility and mobility for all;
            Use and comfort of all users;
            Health; and
            Green infrastructure.
      °   Promoting stewardship of natural and cultural resources;
      °   Implementing the goals and actions of the O‘ahu Resilience Strategy.
      °   Preserving significant historic, cultural, and archaeological
features;
      °   Protecting and preserving existing agricultural areas; and
      °   Containing all urban development within the existing Community Growth
Boundary.
   •   Adapt to Changing Community Needs by:
      °   Improving and replacing the region’s aging infrastructure, as needed;
      °   Preparing the community and infrastructure for anticipated impacts
from natural disasters and climate change by providing community-based
training, and creating or strengthening existing shelters capable of
withstanding Category 3 hurricanes;
      °   Adapting the housing supply, public spaces, and street orientation to
meet the expected aging of the population; and
      °   Focusing commercial centers on serving the region’s neighborhoods.
P.10   IMPLEMENTING POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
Chapter 5 discusses the various measures that support implementation of this
Plan, including the regulatory mechanisms, physical improvements, and other
actions that are needed to realize the Plan’s vision. Section 5.7 presents an
Implementation Matrix to help organize and facilitate plan implementation. The
Implementation Matrix, which is based on the policies and guidelines presented
in Chapters 3 and 4, identifies the specific actions, corresponding plans and/
or codes, and public and private entities responsible for implementation.
Land use development policies and implementing guidelines are provided for:
   •   Open space preservation, natural resources, and scenic views;
   •   Recreational access to shoreline and mountain areas;
   •   Island-based and community-based parks and recreation;
   •   Historic and cultural resources;
   •   Residential communities and commercial redevelopment; and
   •   Disaster Preparedness.
Infrastructure policies and implementing guidelines are provided for:
   •   Transportation systems;
   •   Water allocation and systems development;
   •   Wastewater treatment;
   •   Electrical and communications systems;
   •   Solid waste handling and disposal;
   •   Drainage systems;
   •   School facilities; and
   •   Civic and public safety facilities.
The means for implementing the Plan are provided through:
   •   Focusing residential and nonresidential development to areas within the
Community Growth Boundary;
   •   Guiding development within areas of critical concern with Special Area
Plans, as needed;
   •   Incorporating the Plan vision and policies in the review of zone changes
and other land use approvals and in establishing conditions for these land use
approvals which will help ensure the vision and policies are implemented;
   •   Incorporating the Plan vision and policies in the review of projects to
be added to the Public Infrastructure Map and funded through the Capital
Improvement Program budget; and
   •   Conducting a periodic evaluative review of the Plan vision, policies and
implementation.
1.   EAST HONOLULU’S ROLE IN O‘AHU’S DEVELOPMENT PATTERN
The East Honolulu region spans from Makapu‘u Point in the east to Wai‘alae Nui
stream and gulch in the west and is further defined by the peaks of the Ko‘olau
Range, the shoreline, and Maunalua Bay. The General Plan of the City and County
of Honolulu designates the East Honolulu Sustainable Communities Plan (the
“Plan”) area, shown in
Exhibit 1-1, as an urban fringe area which is to remain predominantly
residential communities characterized by generally low-rise, low-density
development. General Plan policies call for sustaining those development and
environmental characteristics which make East Honolulu a desirable place to
live, and maintaining East Honolulu’s existing population at around 50,000,
which is within the General Plan’s allotment of five percent of O‘ahu’s
projected population in 2040.
The present land use pattern and suburban character of East Honolulu began to
take shape with the inauguration of the master planned community of Hawai‘i Kai
(Maunalua) in 1961. Prior to that time, most of the region was regarded as too
far removed from Honolulu to be suitable for large-scale residential
development.
Building on the momentum that development in Hawai‘i Kai (Maunalua) was
creating in the 1960s and 1970s, residential development spread quickly to the
valleys of Kamilo Iki and Kalama and to Mariners Ridge. With the development of
newer communities at Kamehame Ridge, Hawai‘i Loa Ridge, and portions of
Wai‘alae Iki, most of the ridges and valleys in East Honolulu from Kahala to
Kalama Valley have been developed for residential use.
In the past three decades, however, the rate of urban growth in East Honolulu
has slowed as the availability of suitable development sites has diminished.
   Exhibit 1-1: Development Plan and Sustainable Communities Plan Areas for
O‘ahu
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9220.png]
 
This update reaffirms East Honolulu’s role in O‘ahu’s development pattern as
intended in the General Plan policies by establishing the following guidelines
for future land use and development in the Plan:
   •   Limit the potential for substantial new housing in the region so that
significant residential growth is directed instead to the Primary Urban Center,
the ‘Ewa Development Plan area, and the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities
Plan area;
   •   Revitalize existing commercial centers while limiting the expansion of
commercial and other economic activities in the region to promote the
development and growth of employment in the Primary Urban Center, Central
O‘ahu, and ‘Ewa while reorienting existing commercial centers to better serve
their neighborhood community needs;
   •   Maintain the predominantly low-rise, low-density form of residential
development in the neighborhoods;
   •   Redesign and repurpose infrastructure and programs to become a more age-
friendly community with a focus on senior housing and complete streets;
   •   Avoid flood damage, slippage and other problems associated with
development of steep slopes and sites with expansive soils;
   •   Create resilient, disaster-ready communities that are strategically and
physically prepared for disasters and environmental stressors;
      °   Improve evacuation area designations and procedures;
      °   Increase cooperation with neighborhood emergency preparedness groups;
      °   Create a City-community liaison to leverage non-profit and volunteer
assets;
      °   Seek to harden emergency shelters to be capable to minimally
withstand winds from a Category 3 hurricane;
   •   Address, minimize risks from, and adapt to the impacts of climate change
and sea level rise;
      °   Integrate climate change adaptation into the planning, design, and
construction of all significant improvements to and development of the built
environment;
      °   Prepare for the anticipated impacts of sea level rise on existing
communities and facilities through remediation, adaptation, and other measures;
   •   Utilize the design capacity of Kalaniana‘ole Highway, the region’s key
component of transportation, as a means to manage urban growth;
   •   Preserve scenic views of ridges, upper valley slopes, and shoreline
areas along Kalaniana‘ole Highway, popular hiking trails, and the Kaiwi Scenic
Shoreline;
   •   Promote access to mountain and shoreline resources for recreational
purposes and traditional hunting, fishing, gathering, hiking, religious, and
cultural practices; and
   •   Adopt and implement the ahupua‘a concept to improve downstream water
quality through improved upland management and the implementation of low-impact
development (LID) standards when properties or infrastructure are redeveloped.
2.   THE VISION FOR EAST HONOLULU’S FUTURE
This chapter presents the vision for East Honolulu’s future, discusses the key
elements of the vision, and presents illustrative maps and tables.
This vision for East Honolulu has two horizons. The first horizon extends from
the present to the year 2040. The 2040 horizon is used to project likely socio-
economic change in East Honolulu and to assess the infrastructure and public
facility needs that will have to be met over that period. The second horizon is
used for the purposes of illustrating long-term, gradual trends and extends to
2050 and beyond.
2.1   VISION STATEMENT
East Honolulu is a safe, clean community with unique landscapes and natural and
cultural resources. Each residential neighborhood has its own special quality
and sense of place. The suburban development patterns of the 20th century have
been modified to provide for more walkable streets and local convenience
stores. There is a full range of commercial, medical and legal services to meet
the needs of the elderly community members. Agricultural areas have been
preserved and are producing food for the East Honolulu community. Community
organizations partner with government agencies and develop plans and strategies
to adapt and respond to the challenges of climate change, sea level rise,
flooding, severe coastal storms, inundation of coastal areas and Kalaniana‘ole
Highway, and wildfires. Best management practices have been implemented to
conserve and recover natural and cultural areas, retain stormwater runoff,
replenish valuable ground water reserves, and improve the quality of nearshore
ocean waters.
The Vision to 2040 – Through 2035 and 2040, East Honolulu is projected to
experience population stabilization. According to projections by the Department
of Planning and Permitting (DPP), East Honolulu’s population is expected to
remain stable at approximately 50,000, or roughly five percent of O‘ahu’s total
population, which is consistent with the General Plan. The region is expected
to experience a growing elderly population and an associated decrease in
average household size.
Due to the expected population stabilization, there is not anticipated to be
significant demand for additional commercial development or major investments
in infrastructure and public facility capacity in East Honolulu. As a
consequence, job growth in East Honolulu is expected to be minimal, remaining
close to 2010 levels at approximately 10,400 jobs.
To forestall anticipated impacts of climate change, East Honolulu must begin
taking active steps to improve resiliency to hurricanes, coastal and inland
erosion, inundation, and flooding.
Beyond 2040 – There will be little residential development capacity available
in East Honolulu beyond 2040. Capacity will be limited to infill and
redevelopment opportunities. After 2040, the impacts of climate change will
become more evident, requiring East Honolulu to actively manage adaptation and
improve resiliency to hurricane winds, coastal and inland erosion, inundation,
flooding, and impacts to watersheds.
As discussed below, the vision for East Honolulu focuses on the long-term
protection of community resources and adapting to changing community needs.
2.1.1   PROTECT COMMUNITY RESOURCES
The Plan provides a vision for preservation, conservation, and enhancement of
community resources.
•   Protect Natural and Scenic Resources – Significant scenic views of ridges,
upper valley slopes, and shoreline areas along Kalaniana‘ole Highway, popular
hiking trails, and the Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline, mauka to makai, are protected
from residential and commercial development and degradation by vehicle
operations. Furthermore, access to shoreline areas and mountainous regions are
improved and provided for all to use responsibly. Urban uses are contained
within the Community Growth Boundary protecting agricultural lands in Hawai‘i
Kai (Maunalua), undeveloped ridges and valley walls throughout East Honolulu,
and important wildlife habitat areas. Key open space areas within the Community
Growth Boundary are retained to provide active and passive recreation and
community gathering places. Maunalua Bay continues to serve as one of East
Honolulu’s primary viewsheds, recreational assets, and important habitats for
various native aquatic species.
•   Preserve Cultural and Historical Resources – Visual landmarks and
significant views are retained, and significant historic, cultural, and
archaeological features from East Honolulu’s past are preserved.
2.1.2   ADAPT TO CHANGING COMMUNITY NEEDS
The Plan provides a vision for the gradual physical transformation of East
Honolulu to address changing demographics and aging of housing stock and
infrastructure.
•   Address Changing Demographics – Different housing types and services are
developed to meet the needs of East Honolulu's growing elderly population,
“empty nesters” who want to move out of single-family dwellings, and younger
families who want to move into these dwellings. In addition, the need to
provide for the increasing number of “multi-generation” households, as well as
smaller, more affordable housing types, such as accessory dwelling units (ADUs)
is being addressed.
•   Address Aging Housing and Infrastructure – The region’s housing stock and
infrastructure systems are aging. Incrementally, existing structures and
facilities are modified, expanded, or replaced due to obsolescence. As changes
are made, new structures and facilities are designed to adapt to and mitigate
the impacts of climate change. New structures and facilities are also designed
to respond to the needs for ecological restoration through low-impact
development standards, increased energy efficiency, and potable water
conservation.
2.2   KEY ELEMENTS OF THE VISION
The vision for East Honolulu’s future will be implemented through the following
key elements:
   2.2.1   Community Growth Boundary, and Agricultural and Preservation Lands;
   2.2.2   Adoption of the Concept of Ahupua‘a in Land Use and Natural Resource
Management;
   2.2.3   Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline;
   2.2.4   Ridge-and-Valley Neighborhoods;
   2.2.5   Mauka-Makai Recreational Access;
   2.2.6   Protection and Preservation of Natural Areas;
   2.2.7   Housing Stability and Age-Friendly Communities;
   2.2.8   Refocus Commercial Centers; and
   2.2.9   Climate Change Adaptation.
2.2.1   COMMUNITY GROWTH BOUNDARY, AND AGRICULTURAL AND PRESERVATION LANDS
The Community Growth Boundary (previously Urban Community Boundary) was
established to guide development and preserve open space and agricultural areas
in East Honolulu. Lands outside the Community Growth Boundary are identified as
either Agricultural Lands or Preservation Lands.
The Community Growth Boundary will remain fixed through the 2040 planning
horizon and is intended to help guide future development, redevelopment, and
resource management within existing zoning designations or future zoning
designations. Other standards or guidelines may be developed in response to
established entitlements, or in accordance with pertinent policy and guidelines
described in this Plan (see
Exhibit 2-1 and conceptual maps in Appendix A).
   Exhibit 2-1: Community Growth Boundary
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9224.png]
 
Areas within the Community Growth Boundary characteristically include extensive
tracts of residential or commercial development clearly distinguishable from
undeveloped or more natural portions of the region’s environment. The Community
Growth Boundary may include areas designated park or preservation, or areas
with development-related hazards such as steep slopes or unstable soils. These
areas, while inside the boundary, will not be developed with uses unsuitable to
their designations or in ways that may tend to exacerbate hazards.
The Community Growth Boundary is intended to confine most new development to
infill sites that are within or adjacent to existing urbanized areas. Existing
homes and property adjacent to new development on infill sites should be
protected from adverse effects of the new development. A more compact form of
development will result in relatively lower site development costs, more
efficient utilization of existing urban infrastructure systems, and reduced
reliance on the automobile by making transit ridership, walking, and bicycling
more feasible and attractive as modes of travel.
The Community Growth Boundary is generally coterminous with the State Urban
District boundary, but excludes the following areas of the State Urban District
listed below and shown in Exhibit 2-1. These exclusions highlight the need for
City planners and community members to guard against State decisions for its
State Urban District that may negatively impact this and other Sustainable
Communities Plans.
   •   ‘Āina Haina Nature Preserve;
   •   Areas committed to agricultural use by long-term leases (i.e., the farm
lot subdivisions in Kamilo Nui Valley and adjacent to Kaiser High School);
   •   Undeveloped areas in Kamilo Nui Valley which are adjacent to existing
agricultural uses but zoned as preservation;
   •   Large tracts of undeveloped lands at higher elevations that are
prominently visible from the coastal highway or other public areas and are
desirable natural scenic features;
   •   Mauka lands along the Kaiwi coast are zoned as preservation and located
outside of the Community Growth Boundary to protect open space;
   •   Significant undeveloped Urban District land areas identified as suspect
areas for land movement by the U.S. Geological Survey; and,
   •   Keawāwa Marsh and Wetlands.
The six main objectives of the Community Growth Boundary are to:
   •   Avoid Development of Hazardous Areas – Undeveloped lands on the fringes
of urbanized areas which are characterized by steep slopes and/or unstable
soils are placed outside the Community Growth Boundary to prevent potential
property damage and threats to public safety. These physical constraints also
increase site development costs, which are passed on to housing consumers.
   •   Support General Plan Policy – Consistent with General Plan policy
Housing Objective B, Policy 1, which aims to encourage the State government to
coordinate its urban-area designations with the developmental policies of the
City and County, the Community Growth Boundary indicates an appropriate
adjustment to the State Land Use Urban District boundary.
   •   Support Agricultural Use – Two areas in Hawai‘i Kai (Maunalua) are
placed outside the Community Growth Boundary to protect agricultural lots with
long-term leases. Preventing the encroachment of suburban residential
development supports active use of these lots for agricultural purposes.
   •   Provide Sufficient Capacity for Projected Population Stability –
Excluding the amount of land reserved for parks and open space, there is
sufficient capacity within the Community Growth Boundary to accommodate
anticipated residential and commercial development to 2040 (see Table 2-1).
About 300 new housing units can be identified as probable or possible within
the Community Growth Boundary under existing zoning. This translates to a total
potential population in East Honolulu consistent with the DPP’s projected
population for 2035-2040 of about 50,000 residents (or approximately five
percent of O‘ahu’s population) to counteract shrinking household sizes.
TABLE 2-1: POTENTIAL HOUSING WITHIN CGB ON LANDS ZONED FOR RESIDENTIAL USE
Project Areas Probable Units1 Possible Units2 Description
TABLE 2-1: POTENTIAL HOUSING WITHIN CGB ON LANDS ZONED FOR RESIDENTIAL USE
Project Areas          Probable Units1 Possible Units2 Description
Wai‘alae Nui         14                              Ord. 96-69 limits site
                                                       to 14 units
Wai‘alae Iki         9                               Owner-build lots
‘Āina Haina         8                               Lower ‘Āina Haina (8)
Hawai‘i Loa Ridge    26                              Owner-build lots
Niu Valley                             30              3 large adjacent lots
                                                       with 6 existing units
Kamilo Iki Valley                      16              Large vacant lot
Hawai‘i Kai (Maunalua28                              Remaining units from
                                                       Ord. 99-54 & Ord. 00-70
Nā Pali Hāweo        16                              Owner-build lots
(Kamehame)
Lower Kalama Valley    21                              2015/CL-5 (14) & 499
                                                       Kealahou (7)
                                                       Vacant standard-size
Infill Vacant Lots     50                              lots within the Plan
                                                       area
‘Ohana or ADU units  50                              Assumes 2-3 units per
                                                       year from 2020-2040
Total                  222             54               
Cumulative Total       276 units
1   Includes unbuilt units with approved building permits, units approved as
part of a larger development or cluster project, vacant standard-size lots
within approved subdivisions, and ‘Ohana/ADU units at 2-3 per year.
2   Estimates based on lot size built to underlying zoning density after
accounting for steep lands and clustering of units.
 
Promote an Efficient Pattern of Urban Development – The Community Growth
Boundary confines most new development to infill sites that are adjacent to
existing urbanized areas on relatively level terrain. A more compact form of
development on the coastal plain will result in relatively lower site
development costs, more efficient utilization of existing urban infrastructure
systems, and reduced reliance on the automobile by making transit ridership,
walking, and bicycling more feasible and attractive as modes of travel.
Protect Natural and Scenic Resources – By confining the potential area for new
urban development through the Community Growth Boundary, significant natural
landscape features can be protected from physical changes that will permanently
impair their scenic value. These scenic landscape elements include the ridges
and valley walls that are visible from Kalaniana‘ole Highway, particularly in
the area between Koko Head and Makapu‘u Head, and the unaltered shoreline (See
Exhibit 2-2).
   Exhibit 2-2: Scenic Resources
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9228.png]
 
2.2.1.1   Agricultural Lands
Agricultural lands are identified to protect the region’s economic and open
space values. The primary uses for all lands designated as agricultural lands
are open space, agriculture uses, or uses directly supportive of agriculture
and farming for food sustainability.
Two areas in Hawai‘i Kai (Maunalua) are identified as agricultural lands: the
farm lots in Kamilo Nui Valley and lands adjacent to Kaiser High School. See
Appendix A-2. Both agricultural areas are in active use and have long-term
leases. In addition, undeveloped areas in Kamilo Nui Valley that are adjacent
to existing agricultural uses are placed within the Agriculture Lands.
Preventing the encroachment of urban fringe residential development within the
existing agricultural uses supports active use of these lots for agricultural
purposes while preventing adverse impacts associated with residential
development including an increase in stormwater, sediment, and toxic pollutant
runoff from the addition of impermeable surfaces.
2.2.1.2   Preservation Lands
Preservation lands are identified to protect undeveloped lands which form an
important part of the region’s open space fabric but that are not valued
primarily for agricultural uses. Such lands include important native (i.e.,
indigenous and endemic) Hawaiian plant, invertebrate and wildlife habitat,
archaeological or historic sites, significant landforms or landscapes over
which significant views are visible, recreational areas, agricultural areas,
areas important to the health of the watershed, and areas hazardous to
potential development.
Preservation lands generally include undeveloped lands that:
   •   Are necessary for protection of watersheds, water resources, and water
supplies;
   •   Are necessary for the conservation, preservation, and enhancement of
sites with scenic, recreational, historic, cultural, archaeological, or
ecological significance;
   •   Are necessary for providing and preserving parklands, wilderness, and
beach reserves, and for conserving natural ecosystems of indigenous and endemic
plants, invertebrates, fish and wildlife, for forestry, and other activities
related to these uses;
   •   Are located at an elevation below the maximum inland line of the zone of
wave action, and marine waters, fishponds, and tide pools unless otherwise
designated;
   •   Are generally characterized by topography, soils, climate or other
related environmental factors that may not be normally adaptable or presently
needed for urban or agriculture use;
   •   Have general slopes of 20 percent or more and which provide for open
space amenities and/or scenic values;
   •   Are susceptible to floods and soil erosion, are undergoing major erosion
damage and requiring corrective attention, or are necessary to the protection
of the health, safety and welfare of the public by reason of soil instability
or the land’s susceptibility to landslides and/or inundation by tsunami and
flooding;
   •   Are used for State parks outside the Community Growth Boundary or City
parks within the Community Growth Boundary;
   •   Are suitable for growing commercial timber, grazing, hunting, and
recreation uses, including facilities accessory to such uses when such
facilities are compatible with the natural and physical environment;
   •   Have historical significance. Preserve and enhance significant historic
and prehistoric features including Native Hawaiian cultural and archaeological
sites especially:
      °   ‘Ihi‘ihilauākea Preserve;
      °   Makani ‘olu Shelter;
      °   Hāwea Heiau Complex; and
      °   Pahua Heiau.
   •   Retain visual landmarks and significant vistas including:
      °   The Kaiwi coast;
      °   Views of Maunalua Bay and other shoreline areas from Kalaniana‘ole
Highway; and
      °   Views from ridge, valley, and shoreline hiking trails.
   •   Limit building heights to low-rise and mid-rise structures to protect
panoramic views and the existing character of the built environment; and,
   •   Limit vehicle operations which could cause degradation to the dunes,
vegetation, and beach at Wāwāmalu Beach.
2.2.2   AHUPUA‘A IN LAND USE AND NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
Prior to Western contact, Hawaiians managed the environment and organized their
society through a land division system known as ahupua‘a. Ahupua‘a boundaries
are similar to those of watersheds. Pukui and Elbert provide the following
definition of ahupua‘a:
Land division usually extending from the uplands to the sea, so called because
the boundary was marked by a heap (ahu) of stones surmounted by an image of a
pig (pua‘a).1
The ahupua‘a has also been described as follows:
A principle very largely obtaining in these divisions of territory was that a
land should run from the sea to the mountains, thus affording to the chief and
his people a fishery residence at the warm seaside, together with the products
of the high lands, such as fuel, canoe timber, mountain birds, and the right of
way to the same, and all the varied products of the intermediate land as might
be suitable to the soil and climate of the different altitudes from sea soil to
mountainside or top.2
The ahupua‘a system recognizes the interconnected relationship between land-
based and marine-based natural resources, focusing on streams as the connecting
element between ridge and reef, especially in an island environment. The
ahupua‘a concept is still a useful concept for managing the natural environment
and fostering desirable community development, adapted to the context of
today’s community needs and technology. It also serves as a logical foundation
for sub-planning areas.
East Honolulu contains and is comprised of two larger ahupua‘a: the Waimānalo
Ahupua‘a, spanning from Waimānalo to Kuli‘ou‘ou in the moku of Ko‘olau Poko,
and the Waikīkī Ahupua‘a, spanning from Niu to Mānoa and Ala Moana in the moku
of Kona.
East Honolulu previously contained several fishponds including Wailupe,
Kānewai, and Loko I‘a o Maunalua, one of the largest inland fishponds in
Hawai‘i. In addition to aquaculture, these fishponds, surrounding wetlands, and
upland land management assisted in controlling the distribution of stormwater,
sediment, and toxic pollutant runoff into Maunalua Bay. These fishponds have
since been filled in, degraded, or developed for other use. Over the past few
decades, the community has made efforts to ensure the revitalization of
fishponds, especially in the case of Kānewai Spring, which was acquired using
Clean Water and Natural Lands Fund moneys.
The filling of wetlands and fishponds has been restricted for decades.
Regulatory and management practices have been improved to promote more
effective maintenance of these resources and deter land-based activities which
contribute to their degradation. In addition, wetlands to detain and retain
stormwater have been protected to increase infiltration and reduce polluted
runoff into streams, estuaries and nearshore waters.
As applied to East Honolulu’s drainage system, the ahupua‘a management concept
involves the retention of natural stream beds and, as feasible, partial or full
restoration of drainage ways that have been altered by concrete-lined channels.
A streamside management zone or buffer area along natural streambeds defines
where uses or activities are controlled or modified to protect water quality
and aquatic resources and reefs. Revised or new public works standards have
allowed the dedication of passive stormwater drainage systems and minimal
channel modifications to provide flood protection for the redevelopment of
properties.
Adapting and implementing the ahupua‘a concept requires significant cooperation
and integration of efforts among the various government agencies whose
jurisdictions encompass all or part of each ahupua‘a, community organizations,
large landowners, and those looking to redevelop.
1 Pukui, M.K. and Elbert, S.H. Hawaiian Dictionary, 1986.
2 Ibid.
2.2.3   KAIWI SCENIC SHORELINE
The rugged coastal lands of the Kaiwi coast, also known as the Maunalua-
Makapu‘u State Scenic Byway, are composed of the areas between Koko Head and
Makapu‘u Head. The Kaiwi coastline is among O‘ahu’s most unique and spectacular
scenic resources, offering mauka and makai views from many vantage points (see
Exhibit 2-2, above). Protection of the scenic value of the Kaiwi viewshed has
island wide importance because of its attraction to both residents and
visitors. Preserving O‘ahu’s open space resources is critical to the economy
since tourism is a base industry.
Nowhere else on the island, with the exception of the Ka‘ena coastline, are
there elements of a natural environment in one large, contiguous area of
undeveloped open space. Unfortunately, like Ka‘ena, the Wawamalu Beach section
of Sandy Beach Park, which is the site of dunes and white-sand beaches, suffers
from unconstrained vehicle incursions from Kalaniana‘ole Highway, resulting in
the degradation of the area’s historic, cultural, or ecological resources.
Overuse and misuse are pressures that threaten the integrity of this coastal
area.
Historic, cultural, ecological, and recreational resources of the Kaiwi region
should be protected and enhanced. The publicly-owned Koko Head Regional Park,
which includes Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve and Sandy Beach Park, should
continue to provide world-class educational and recreational opportunities for
residents and visitors alike. At the same time the value of historic, cultural,
and ecological resources are protected from overuse. This area also provides
critical habitat, as designated by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, for at
least six endangered native or endemic plants, and potentially habitat for the
endangered native yellow-faced bee, which is managed by the State Department of
Land and Natural Resources (DLNR).
2.2.4   RIDGE-AND-VALLEY NEIGHBORHOODS
East Honolulu’s residential communities, and their geographic extent, are
physically defined by the topography of the region. A series of ridges and
valleys serve as natural boundaries separating one community from the next. The
first areas to develop, in approximate order, were the coastal plains of
Wai‘alae, the Wailupe coastal plains and flatter valley floors (now known as
‘Āina Haina), Kuli‘ou‘ou, and Niu. Over time, further subdivision into smaller
lots, infill lot developments, and home expansions have intensified the use of
these areas. Also, development has extended deeper into the valleys and up the
lower slopes of valley walls.
Residential development of hillsides and descending ridges generally followed
the development of the coastal plain and valleys. Most of the residential zoned
areas of these hillsides have been fully developed, but there is some vacant
land which is zoned residential remaining in upper and side slope fringes.
Hawai‘i Kai (Maunalua), located in the eastern portion of the region, is a
large, mixed-use master-planned community containing a broad mix of housing
types. It was inaugurated on a grand scale in the 1960s with the dredging of
the coastal wetland for a marina, housing subdivisions, and apartment
complexes. The master plan encompassed several geographic sub-areas: the
Marina, Haha‘ione Valley, Mariners Ridge, Kamilo Nui Valley, Kamilo Iki Valley,
Kamehame Ridge, Kalama Valley, and Queen’s Beach. Most of these areas have been
fully developed except for Queen's Beach, which is zoned preservation but is
still within the State Urban District.
Kalaniana‘ole Highway is the primary linkage between these hillside and valley
neighborhoods. It is a major route for joggers and bicyclists, as well as
vehicles, and its attractively landscaped median helps to unify the image of
East Honolulu as a distinct region.
With most of O‘ahu’s future population growth being directed to the Primary
Urban Center, ‘Ewa and Central O‘ahu regions, no major developments are
expected in East Honolulu. New construction that will occur in East Honolulu
should be on infill properties within existing built-up areas rather than
spreading development onto steep slopes, higher elevations, undeveloped
mountain ridges and valley walls, or deeper recesses of the valleys.
The character of existing neighborhoods must not only be protected, but also
enhanced through effective design of public and private infrastructure and
other community facilities. East Honolulu’s existing communities may need to
adapt facilities and services to accommodate the changing composition of the
region’s population, particularly for the elderly (see Section 2.2.7).
2.2.5   MAUKA-MAKAI RECREATIONAL ACCESS
The Ko‘olau Mountain Range provides a wealth of actual and potential
recreational opportunities including, but not limited to, hiking, hunting,
biking, bird-watching, and camping opportunities. It is important that access
to the shoreline and publicly-owned trails be made as open as possible while
balancing the potential ecological impacts of hikers, as well as the potential
disruption to adjacent communities caused by hikers. The State, City, and
communities, both open and gated, should collaborate to ensure that visitor
parking and access to trails are provided to the public. If these agreements do
not work, consideration should be given to purchasing or condemning land and
easements.
Existing mauka-makai beach access and rights-of-way in East Honolulu should be
maintained and new perpendicular and lateral shoreline access ways should be
provided as the opportunities arise. Erosion and sea level rise are expected to
continue to reduce lateral shoreline access, furthering the need for better
mauka-makai access.
Along Portlock Road there are approximately 19 private shared driveways with
access to the coastline occurring approximately every 200 feet. At least three
public access points should be acquired along Portlock Road in order to meet
the City’s standard of public shoreline access at approximately one-quarter-
mile intervals. Furthermore, access to the Kaiwi shoreline, which extends from
Koko Head to Makapu‘u Head, should be improved as part of the Maunalua-Makapu‘u
State Scenic Byway Corridor. Wawamalu Beach should be developed as a nature
park with the addition of demarcated parking and installation of barriers to
protect natural dunes, native vegetation, beach rock, and beach.
2.2.6   PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION OF NATURAL AREAS
Natural areas in East Honolulu include, but are not limited to, the following
areas:
   •   Kānewai Spring and Fishpond
   •   Keawāwa Marsh and Wetlands
   •   Paikō Lagoon Wildlife Sanctuary
   •   Kuli‘ou‘ou and Honolulu Watershed Forest Reserves
   •   ‘Ihi‘ihilauākea and Nono‘ula Preserves
   •   Hanauma Bay Marine Life Conservation District
   •   Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline
   •   Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve
   •   Kaiwi Mauka Lands
   •   Maunalua Bay
   •   Wailupe Nature Preserve
These natural areas will be protected and preserved by providing proper
management and security to protect endangered species habitat, and by
monitoring and regulating uses to avoid overuse and misuse of resources. Access
to these areas and the provision of facilities will be provided to the public
insofar as to mitigate existing impacts or not adversely impact existing
habitats these areas provide to endangered, indigenous, and endemic plants,
animals, and invertebrates.
The policies in this Plan are intended to protect the aforementioned natural
areas and supplement the zoning ordinance and State Land Use District through
the Plan’s horizons. However, to protect the land from development in
perpetuity, community leaders and organizations have partnered together, and
with the City, to purchase either the title to the land or a conservation
easement. Mauka lands near the Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline area and in the back of
Wailupe Valley were purchased as a means to protect both areas’ rich
recreational, scenic, and historic resources (see Section 3.2.1.2). Kanewai
Spring was also purchased to protect and restore the culturally and
ecologically important spring. Other areas have been examined for purchase
agreements including Paikō Ridge.
Community residents and organizations will continue to serve as stewards of
natural areas and nearshore waters. Environmental and community organizations
have a stewardship role in engaging the larger community, applying political
pressure, fundraising for the purchase of lands for preservation, and routine
beach cleanup events protecting Maunalua Bay from stormwater, sediment, and
toxic pollutant runoff and invasive algae.
2.2.7   HOUSING STABILITY AND AGE-FRIENDLY COMMUNITIES
East Honolulu should remain a relatively stable residential area, with only
modest growth in housing stock or changes in household characteristics. In
1990, the owner occupancy rate for East Honolulu was approximately 79 percent,
compared to 49 percent for the island as a whole, and remained fairly constant
up to 2000. Population in East Honolulu is projected to remain stable at around
50,000 until 2035 and 2040. See
Table 2-2. With a minimal population change in East Honolulu, housing stability
will not be affected by rapid growth and new developments.
Table 2-2: Population and Projections by Development Plan Area
DP Area 2000 Pop 2000 % 2010 Pop 2010 % 2035 Pop 2035 % 2040 Pop 2040 % Share
                 Share           Share           Share
Table 2-2: Population and Projections by Development Plan Area
DP Area     2000 Pop 2000 % 2010 Pop 2010 % 2035 Pop  2035 % 2040 Pop  2040 %
                     Share           Share            Share            Share
PUC         419,333  47.9%  435,118  45.6%  458,200   42.8%  467,100   43.0%
‘Ewa      68,696   7.8%   101,397  10.6%  173,800   16.2%  172,700   15.9%
Central     148,208  16.9%  168,643  17.7%  189,500   17.7%  192,400   17.7%
O‘ahu
East        46,735   5.3%   49,914   5.2%   48,900    4.6%   50,000    4.6%
Honolulu
Ko‘olau   117,999  13.5%  115,164  12.1%  110,800   10.3%  113,300   10.4%
Poko
Ko‘olau Lo14,546   1.7%   16,732   1.8%   18,000    1.7%   18,100    1.7%
North Shore 18,380   2.1%   17,720   1.9%   19,200    1.8%   19,600    1.8%
Wai‘anae  42,259   4.8%   48,519   5.1%   52,900    4.9%   53,600    4.9%
Population  876,156  100%   953,207  100%   1,071,200 100%   1,086,700 100%
Total
 
The gradually changing composition of East Honolulu’s population, however,
could have an impact on housing supply. O‘ahu, and East Honolulu, have a
significant and growing percentage of elderly residents. However, the growth
rate of East Honolulu’s elderly population continues to outpace that of O‘ahu
as a whole with an estimated 37 percent of East Honolulu’s population to be 65
and older in 2040. See
Table 2-3.
 
Table 2-3: Percentage of Area Population 65 Years and Older
Area          19801 19901 20001 20101 20151 2040
East Honolulu 9.3%  11.7% 18.2% 21.6% 23.5% 37%2
All O‘ahu   7.3%  10.9% 13.4% 14.5% 16.2% 23.7%3
Sources:
1   U.S. Census & ACS 5-Year Est., 2015.
2   DPP Projections, 2018.
3   DBEDT 2045 Series, 2017.
 
This aging trend, however, is not consistent throughout the region. In the
region around Lunalilo Home Road and Kaiser High School, approximately 24.7
percent of the population is 65 years or older (Census Tract 1.12). In
comparison, 14.2 percent of Kalama Valley residents are 65 years or older
(Census Tract 1.10).
The trend for the aging population in East Honolulu and the island in general
is expected to continue to accelerate through 2040 and beyond, indicating an
increasing need for geriatric services, including long-term and care home
services, alternative transportation modes, and alternative living
accommodations for seniors such as retirement communities and group homes. East
Honolulu will strive to create “an inclusive and accessible urban or suburban
environment that encourages active and healthy aging” in accordance with the
goals and visions from Making Honolulu an Age-Friendly City: An Action Plan.
These changing demographics may require different housing types and could
result in changes to mature neighborhoods through the expansion of existing
dwellings or the further addition of “‘ohana” units, or accessory dwelling
units, on a long-term basis. Zoning, infrastructure, and other community
guidelines will need to ensure that neighborhood character is not adversely
altered by the incremental intensification of existing residential lots.
To meet the need for affordable housing for seniors, for those who are
downsizing, for students and young families who are just starting out, and for
others, residential uses should be allowed as a permitted use above the first
floor of parcels zoned B-1 Neighborhood Business District or B-2 Community
Business District. In most cases these areas are well-served by bus service,
allowing the occupants to minimize use of personal automobiles and thereby
increasing the affordability of such units.
2.2.8   REFOCUS COMMERCIAL CENTERS
East Honolulu’s commercial areas should continue to be oriented primarily to
the region’s residential community. General Plan policy discourages major new
employment growth in this region. Any significant retail and office expansion
in this region would countervail the General Plan policy to direct job growth
to the Primary Urban Center and Secondary Urban Center. Furthermore, given the
small amount of population growth that is forecast for East Honolulu, there is
expected to be only modest growth in the demand for commercial land uses to
support the communities of the East Honolulu region.
The Hawai‘i Kai Towne Center, with over 200,000 square feet of gross leasable
area, is East Honolulu’s largest retail complex and includes “big box” stores
that cater to the community and attract shoppers from outside the region. It is
expected to maintain its role as the region’s major commercial center. Its
present floor area could be increased to accommodate more retail establishments
to fulfill future demand without any expansion of land area.
The smaller Koko Marina Shopping Center serves a dual market, containing
specialty stores and services oriented to both local residents and tourists,
particularly visitors to Hanauma Bay.
East Honolulu’s five other retail complexes, those at the community and
neighborhood scale, are spaced at somewhat even intervals between ‘Āina Haina
and Kalama Valley. The market areas of the ‘Āina Haina, Niu Valley, Haha‘ione
Valley, Hawai‘i Kai (Maunalua), and Kalama Valley shopping centers are limited
mostly to the communities for which they are named, emphasizing food, household
products, and personal services. None of these retail areas should require
additional land area for expansion. The Kalama Village Center continues to be
under-leased, primarily because it serves a very limited market area that is
not expected to grow significantly. Consequently, the land presently planned
for expansion of this commercial center could be redesignated to serve as a
residential or residential-mixed use project. In addition, to meet the need for
affordable housing for seniors who are downsizing and for students and young
families who are just starting out, residential uses above the first floor
should be allowed as a permitted use.
2.2.9   CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION
East Honolulu faces new and emerging challenges within both of the Plan’s
horizons as a result of climate change. Some of these changes likely include:
rising sea levels, increasing coastal erosion, storm surge flooding, salt water
intrusion, a rising water table and groundwater inundation in low-lying areas,
rainfall that may deviate from historical records including drought, and
frequency and scale of flooding. To counter the increase in risk associated
with these hazards, the communities of East Honolulu will mitigate and minimize
the vulnerability of social and physical infrastructure while increasing
community resiliency as outlined in the O‘ahu Resilience Strategy.
The City and County of Honolulu and the State are taking steps to mitigate and
adapt to the impacts of climate change, sea level rise, and increased threat of
hurricanes, higher intensity rainfall, and wildfires. The City and County of
Honolulu participates in the State Building Code Council which establishes the
State building code through the timely adoption of national building codes,
including the International Building Code.
The State Office of Planning/Coastal Zone Management Program examined the
building codes and development controls in effect for the City and County of
Honolulu with the objective of developing a model ordinance for all the Hawai‘i
counties to strengthen and/or replace existing standards and regulations in
order to reduce existing and future building vulnerability to coastal hazards
and climate impacts. The City will work cooperatively to develop and implement
land use policies, hazard mitigation actions, and design and construction
standards that mitigate and adapt to the impacts of climate change and sea
level rise.
The State of Hawai‘i published the Sea Level Rise Vulnerability and Adaptation
Report in December 2017. On June 5, 2018, the City Climate Change Commission
published Sea Level Rise Guidance and an accompanying Climate Change Brief. The
Guidance was followed by Directive No. 18-2 in which the Mayor directed that
all City departments and agencies are required to use the Guidance, Brief, and
Report in their plans, program, and capital improvement decisions.
The Sea Level Rise Vulnerability and Adaptation Report and accompanying online
Hawai‘i Sea Level Rise Viewer project sea level impacts from passive flooding,
annual high wave flooding, coastal erosion, and groundwater inundation for an
overall Sea Level Rise Exposure Area (SLR-XA) with sea level rise of 0.5 feet,
1.1 feet, 2.0 feet, and 3.2 feet. The Sea Level Rise Guidance recommends that
the SLR-XA at 3.2 feet be adopted as a vulnerability zone (hazard overlay) for
planning by the City. Further, the Sea Level Rise Guidance recommends that it
is reasonable to set, as a planning benchmark, up to six feet of sea level rise
for critical infrastructure projects with long expected lifespans and low risk
tolerance. City shoreline maps and regulations will be updated based on
guidance from the City Climate Change Commission. Proposed projects should
reflect up-to-date data from the most current versions of the Sea Level Rise
Guidance and Climate Change Brief.
Exhibit 2-3 shows the SLR-XA with 3.2 feet of sea level rise as published in
the Sea Level Rise Vulnerability and Adaptation Report, and passive flooding
with 6 feet of sea level rise from the NOAA Sea Level Rise Viewer. East
Honolulu communities are especially vulnerable to flooding and sea level rise
if the main transportation connection, Kalaniana‘ole Highway, become
impassible. Access between neighborhoods needs to be maintained and restored in
a timely manner after flooding to ensure the safety of residents and the
efficiency in distribution of emergency resources and supplies. Additional
protections should be made to Kalaniana‘ole Highway, particularly in the
vicinity of Kuli‘ou‘ou, to mitigate the anticipated impacts from sea level
rise. Climate change and sea level rise increase disaster risk and the cost of
disasters. In recognition of this, the City’s Office of Climate Change,
Sustainability and Resiliency has prepared the O‘ahu Resilience Strategy to
guide preparation and recovery from potential disasters. Redevelopment and
disaster recovery in East Honolulu will “build back better and smarter” by
incorporating adaptive design and resiliency strategies that consider location,
structure, and operations plans.
   Exhibit 2-3: Sea Level Rise Exposure Area and Passive Flooding
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9240.png]
 
3.   LAND USE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
The vision for East Honolulu described in the preceding chapter will be
implemented through application of the following land use general policies and
guidelines.
3.1   OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT
Open space preservation and development is a key element of the vision for East
Honolulu’s future. Long-term protection and preservation of scenic resources,
natural areas, and recreational areas are important to maintaining the
desirability and attractiveness of East Honolulu for both residents and
visitors.
3.1.1   GENERAL POLICIES
Open space will be used to:
•   Protect scenic views;
•   Provide and maintain recreational access to shoreline and mountain areas;
•   Meet the need for both passive and active open space;
•   Define the boundaries of communities;
•   Promote and support the long-term viability of agriculture;
•   Protect endangered species habitats;
•   Re-establish and restore native Hawaiian plant, animal, and invertebrate
species and habitats in open space areas;
•   Protect aesthetic and biological values of wetlands, beaches, nearshore
marine environments, natural streams, and other drainage ways;
•   Provide and maintain fire safety buffers where developed areas border
“wildlands” either in preservation areas within the Community Growth Boundary
or in the State Conservation District;
•   Create a linear system of landscaped pathways and bikeways along roadways
and drainage channels to visually enhance the different communities, create
more complete streets, and assist with stormwater retention;
•   Slow the rate of stormwater runoff into drainageways through increasing
ground absorption and reducing the amount of impermeable surfaces on both
public and private lands; and
•   Prevent development of areas susceptible to natural hazards such as soil
movement, rock falls, coastal erosion, and sea level rise.
3.1.2   PLANNING GUIDELINES
The following sections provide a description of regional open space resources
in East Honolulu, followed by their respective guidelines for implementing the
general policies. The open space system shall consist of areas in both active
and passive uses.
3.1.2.1   Mountain Areas
Access to mountain areas for passive uses and resource gathering, including
parking areas, should be made available in accordance with Hawai‘i Revised
Statutes (HRS) 115, 171, and 264.
“The absence of public access to Hawai‘i’s shorelines and inland recreational
areas constitutes an infringement upon the fundamental right of free movement
in public space and access to and use of coastal and inland recreational
areas.” HRS 115-1.
Passive areas include lands in the State Conservation District, drainage and
utility corridors, nature preserves, and lands undeveloped because of physical
constraints or hazards.
Seventeen major trails, inventoried by the State Department of Land and Natural
Resources (DLNR), provide access to the mountainous areas of East Honolulu.
Four of these trails (see Exhibit 3-1) are actively managed by the State’s Nā
Ala Hele program and are described below. Other trails that are not actively
managed by the DLNR Na Ala Hele Trail and Access Program, are included in Table
3-1. The DLNR State Parks also manages the two-mile Makapu‘u Point Lighthouse
Trail within the Kaiwi coast.
•   Wiliwilinui Ridge Trail – Half of the 3-mile trail to the crest of the
Ko‘olau Range is comprised of a dirt access road.
•   Hawai‘i Loa Ridge Trail – This trail begins at the top of the Hawai‘i Loa
community and extends 2 miles to the crest of the Ko‘olau Range.
•   Kuli‘ou‘ou Valley Trail – Beginning at the back of Kuli‘ou‘ou Valley, this
trail runs for 1.0 miles to approximately the 520-foot contour.
•   Kuli‘ou‘ou Ridge (Koko Head) Trail – This 2.5-mile trail is an extension of
the Kuli‘ou‘ou Valley trail, extending to the crest of the Ko‘olau.
Public access to trails in East Honolulu and in other urban fringe
neighborhoods is a source of controversy because community residents and large
landowners are concerned about liability, security, loss of privacy, and
parking congestion with the use of private roads by hikers and hunters.
Consequently, hikers driving to the trails have been subjected to certain
restrictions including signing of waivers of liability, parking at the base of
the ridge miles away from the trailhead, having to show a driver’s license, or
no access at all. Landowners, however, are protected from liability in making
their land and water areas available to the public for recreational purposes in
accordance with HRS 520.
Mountainous areas in East Honolulu are in the State Conservation District and
thus the State Board of Land and Natural Resources (BLNR) has the authority to
decide what uses are allowed in these areas. Landowners and residential
associations should cooperate with the BLNR to ensure that access to the trails
and visitor parking are provided to the public. If a suitable mechanism for
public access cannot be agreed upon, consideration should be given to acquiring
fee ownership or easements for public use either by a government agency or
third-party organization. Furthermore, the State and City should negotiate, in
advance, provision for public access easements and visitor parking near the
trailheads with the concerned property owners, with representative community
associations, and with Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs).
   Exhibit 3-1: Public Parks, Trails, and Open Space
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9242.png]
 
Table 3-1: East Honolulu Trails Not Actively Managed by the State DLNR
Trail Name Miles
Table 3-1: East Honolulu Trails Not Actively Managed by the State DLNR
Trail Name                                                                Miles
Wai‘alae Nui Ridge / Kalani Iki Ridge                                   3.0
Wailupe Nature Preserve                                                   1.5
Kulu‘ī Ridge                                                           2.3
Pia Valley / Niu Valley                                                   1.0
Niu Ridge / Kūlepiamoa Ridge                                             3.0
Kūpaua Valley                                                            2.0
Kuli‘ou‘ou Ridge - Diamond Head (Paikō Ridge)                        3.0
Kuli‘ou‘ou Center Ridge                                               4.0
Ka‘alākei Ridge                                                        2.0
Mauna‘ō‘ahi Ridge                                                    3.0
Haha‘ione Valley (Ka‘alākei Valley)                                  2.0
Mariners Ridge / Kaluanui Ridge                                           1.5
Kamilo Nui Valley                                                         2.0
Kamilo Iki Ridge                                                          1.8
Kamehame Ridge                                                            1.2
Ko‘olau Summit and Spine / Makapu‘u to Pu‘u Konahuanui              16
Tom-Tom Waimānalo                                                        1.0
Mau‘uwai (Kaiwi Mauka)                                                  1.0
Kaiwi Shoreline Trail                                                     1.4
Koko Crater Botanic Garden (City maintained)                              2.2
Koko Crater Railway Line (Kohelepelepe)                                   1.0
Koko Crater Blowhole                                                      1.5
Lāna‘i Lookout to Bamboo Ridge and Hanauma Bay                         1.5
Koko Head / ‘Ihi‘ihilauākea Preserve (within Hanauma Bay Nature Prese4.0)
 
Demand for outdoor recreational activities in maintained and unmaintained and
undeveloped areas will continue to increase. Action is needed at the City and
State level to:
•   Protect important natural resources in the State Conservation District;
•   Control the number and range of feral animals and other alien species;
•   Prevent overuse and misuse of natural resources;
•   Prevent the destruction of habitats of native and endangered species;
•   Mitigate erosion; and
•   Mitigate the social impacts of congestion.
Guidelines pertaining to mountain areas are as follows:
•   Access – Make access to mountain areas (including provision of parking
areas) readily available for passive uses and resource gathering, in accordance
with HRS 115, 171, and 264.
•   Access Easements – Acquire and maintain public access easements, or
encourage the transfer of easements to the State or NGOs that preserve access
to open space areas.
•   Parking – Provide public parking for trail users near the trailhead.
•   Native Upland Forests – Maintain, protect, and/or restore upland native
forests in the State Conservation District.
•   Lowland Forests and Vegetation – Maintain, protect, and/or restore native
Hawaiian plant communities in lowland native grasslands and scrublands and dry
forests.
•   Utility Impacts – Avoid disturbances caused by utility corridors and other
uses on areas with high concentrations of native species.
•   Habitat – Identify and protect endangered species habitats and other
important ecological zones from threats such as fire, alien species, feral
animals, and human activity.
•   Alien Species – Control the number and range of feral animals and other
alien species which could lead to the destruction of habitats of native or
endangered species and erosion. Prevent the establishment of new alien species.
•   Resource Management – Create a City Resource Management Program to address
the demands from outdoor recreational activities and the associated stresses to
the natural and built environment.
•   Trail Maintenance – Increase trail maintenance to mitigate the impacts from
hikers on the natural environment and improve safety.
•   More Trails – Balance trail demands across East Honolulu and alleviate
overcrowding at residential trailheads through the opening and sanctioning of
additional trails, particularly in Mariners Ridge, Niu Valley, Kamilo Nui
Valley, and the Wailupe Nature Preserve.
•    Wildfire Hazards – Implement the findings and recommendations from the
Kamilo Nui – Mariner’s Cove Firewise Hazard Assessment.
3.1.2.2   Shoreline Areas
East Honolulu’s shoreline extends for approximately 13 miles between Wai‘alae
and Makapu‘u Head. The shoreline provides residents and visitors with
significant active and passive recreational value. Existing beach access and
rights-of-way should be preserved, and new shoreline access ways should be
provided as the opportunities arise. Prior to the issuance of permits that may
affect public access to the ocean, the shoreline, or any coastal or inland
public recreational areas, there should be assurance that a public right-of-way
is available to access all public recreational areas, including beaches, the
shoreline, parks, and trails.
Shoreline access is protected under HRS 115-1, referenced in Section 3.1.2.1.
The absence or loss of mauka-makai access to the shoreline is largely the
result of the intensity of urban development and policy decisions in
maintaining remaining access routes.
Over the Plan’s long-term horizon, East Honolulu will face increased threats
from coastal hazards and flooding as a result of climate change. While the
causes of climate change are global, its impacts – sea level rise, ground water
inundation, and increased rainfall intensity – will occur locally. Impacts from
high tide flooding will be observed  decades before permanent inundation by sea
level rise. Tidal flooding will become more frequent and more damaging as ocean
levels rise. A number of residential neighborhoods bordering Maunalua Bay and
portions of Kalaniana‘ole Highway will become more vulnerable to routine
flooding and coastal erosion as a result of sea level rise, particularly around
Paikō Drive and makai areas of Kuli‘ou‘ou (see Exhibit 2-3, above).
In addition to recreational and ecological value, shoreline areas in East
Honolulu, particularly along the Kaiwi coastline, offer unparalleled scenic
value. As such, views from Kalaniana‘ole Highway to the shoreline should be
preserved.
The East Honolulu shoreline is characterized into two distinct regions:
•   Wai‘alae to Koko Head – Few areas along this shoreline are accessible to
the public due to residential development along Kalaniana‘ole Highway. Access
points to the shoreline along this stretch include Wailupe, Kawaiku‘i,
Kuli‘ou‘ou, and Maunalua Bay Beach Parks and a few maukamakai public pedestrian
easements.
Physical and visual access to the shoreline is limited because of rather
continuous residential development and the erection of sound barrier walls to
screen traffic noise. However, there are a few points where public pedestrian
easements to the shoreline could be expanded as properties are redeveloped or
subdivided.
Vertical seawalls and revetments have been constructed along many of the
properties between Wai‘alae and Koko Head. Seawalls and revetments have caused
beach narrowing and loss in nearby unhardened areas which disrupt natural
processes. Beach loss will accelerate in the coming decades with sea level
rise, especially if widespread coastal armoring is permitted.
According to research published by the University of Hawai‘i School of Ocean
and Earth Science and Technology, the following shorelines erode up to one foot
per year: near the Kāhala Resort beach, just east of Wailupe Peninsula, Paikō
Peninsula and in the Portlock area between the Hawai‘i Kai Marina entrance
channel and the former Henry Kaiser Estate. Additional minimum shoreline
setbacks for structures have been recommended as a management strategy to
protect remaining sandy beaches in these segments. With the projected rate of
sea level rise by 2050 and 2100, and the compounding effects that sea level
rise has on shoreline erosion, shoreline setbacks will have to be reviewed and
increased routinely to mitigate further damages.
In the residential area near Koko Head, there are numerous points of public
access to the shoreline from Portlock Road, which occur approximately every 200
linear feet. These access routes occur along privately owned, shared driveways.
Members of the Portlock Community Association have said the association is
dedicated to ensuring the existing 19 driveways remain open to the public for
shoreline access.
Lateral shoreline access along this stretch of coastline is a desirable goal
but difficult to achieve because of physical constraints, land ownership
patterns, the extent of urban development, and geophysical changes that are a
result of beach erosion and sea level rise.
It is also important in this area to retain and, if possible, expand visual
access to the shoreline from the coastal highway. Presently, the most
significant makai views are from the H-1 Freeway viaduct looking across the
Wai‘alae Country Club golf course and from Kalaniana‘ole Highway fronting the
Wailupe, Kawaiku‘i, and Maunalua Bay Beach Parks.
•   Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline – Mauka-makai and lateral shoreline access is more
prevalent between Koko Head and Makapu‘u Head, particularly beginning at Sandy
Beach. The shoreline between Koko Head Regional Park and Makapu‘u Head is
frequented by residents and visitors for various recreational and educational
activities. The 354-acre Kaiwi Coast area is located along the Maunalua-
Makapu‘u State Scenic Byway Corridor, which was nominated by the Livable
Hawai‘i Kai Hui in addition to the Hawai‘i Kai Neighborhood Board, and
designated by the State of Hawai‘i Department of Transportation as a State of
Hawai‘i Scenic Byway in 2013. The State Scenic Byway Corridor extends from
Hawai‘i Kai Drive to Makai Research Pier. A Corridor Management Plan focused on
preserving and protecting the resources along Kaiwi coastline was prepared in
2018 by Livable Hawai‘i Kai Hui and the Ka Iwi Coalition (see Section 3.2.1.2).
The Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline was established to preserve the area’s natural and
scenic resources and to provide educational and passive recreation
opportunities. There are continuous views of the ocean and mountains from
Kalaniana‘ole Highway between Koko Head and Makapu‘u Head as well as shoreline
access. This segment of Kalaniana‘ole Highway is the highlight of a continuous
visual sequence of the coastline extending from Hawai‘i Kai (Maunalua) to
Waimānalo.
Guidelines pertaining to shoreline areas are listed below:
•   Makai Views – Maintain makai view channels along the H-1 Freeway or
Kalaniana‘ole Highway between Wai‘alae and Koko Head. Avoid obstructions such
as walls and landscaping, designed to screen out traffic noise.
•   Natural Landscape – Maintain the natural landscape quality of the Kaiwi
coast, mauka to makai, as a high priority viewshed. Limit recreational vehicle
operations which could cause degradation to the dunes, vegetation, and beach at
Wāwāmalu Beach. Any modification to this shoreline area will be done in a
manner that preserves the aesthetic values of the undeveloped xerophytic
landscape (plants adapted to a dry environment). Work with the State on efforts
to protect and maintain or recover distressed shoreline environments, and
encourage natural dunes, native vegetation, and natural shoreline rock
formations.
•   Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline – Protect and preserve the long-term recreational
and scenic value of the shoreline between Koko Head and Makapu‘u Head through
responsible maintenance.
•   Lateral Access – Improve, protect, and maintain lateral shoreline access.
•   Shoreline Access – Pursue opportunities to secure additional pedestrian
rights-of-way from the nearest street or highway to the shoreline in sections
that have high recreational value, but no similar public access within at least
a quarter of a mile, particularly in the areas of Kai Nani, Wailupe Peninsula,
and Niu Peninsula.
•   Feedback – Encourage citizen reporting of shoreline access issues to the
DLNR Office of Conservation and Coastal Lands. DLNR should report back to the
communities of East Honolulu the status of oceanfront issues.
•   Vegetation – Landowners along the shoreline shall maintain vegetation so as
to not encroach into the public right-of-way, particularly as the shoreline
erodes, pushing the right-of-way inland.
•   Sea Level Rise Impact on Lateral Access – Include sea level rise and
shoreline erosion projections when establishing protections for lateral
shoreline access.
•   Codify Access – Recognize and codify mauka-makai shoreline access into the
Revised Ordinances of Honolulu (ROH).
•   Setbacks – Increase minimum shoreline setbacks and implement other
management strategies to account for anticipated impacts from climate change
and coastal erosion. Revise and amend shoreline rules and regulations to
incorporate sea level rise into the determination of shoreline setbacks and
Special Management Area (SMA) use requirements.
•   Armoring – Conserve and enhance a natural, dynamic shoreline wherever
possible. Restrict shoreline hardening. Shoreline hardening should only be
considered as a last resort where it supports significant public benefits and
will result in insignificant negative impacts to coastal resources and natural
shoreline processes.
•   Protect Infrastructure – Mitigate impacts to critical public and private
infrastructure subject to sea level rise exposure through elevation,
relocation, or other adaptation measures.
•   Sea Level Rise Impact on New Projects – Analyze the impact of sea level
rise for new public and private projects in shoreline and low-lying areas. If
it is likely that sea level rise will increase the risk of flooding during the
lifespan of the project, incorporate, where appropriate and feasible, measures
to reduce risks and increase resiliency to impacts of sea level rise.
•    Current Information – Use the most current versions of the City Climate
Change Commission’s Sea Level Rise Guidance, Climate Change Brief, and the
State of Hawai‘i Sea Level Rise Vulnerability and Adaptation Report and
associated Viewer for managing assets, reviewing permitting requests, and
assessing project proposals.
•   Building Codes – Work cooperatively to develop design and construction
standards that mitigate and adapt to the impacts of climate change and sea
level rise.
•   Hazard Assessment – Incorporate assessments of all hazards into the land
development application process.
•   Redevelopment District – Form a community-based redevelopment district,
similar to a business improvement district, that would protect, adapt, and
relocate residential and commercial structures, public facilities, and natural
and cultural resources vulnerable to sea level rise impacts, including coastal
flooding, inundation, and erosion.
•   “Build Back Better and Smarter” – Map repetitive loss areas and develop and
implement a “build back better and smarter” strategy to mitigate future damage
costs.
•   Disaster Plans – Develop short- and long-term resiliency and recovery plans
to:
°   Develop a network of Community Resilience Hubs;
°   Designate evacuation routes;
°   Increase coordination with neighborhood emergency preparedness groups and
create a liaison between City agencies and NGOs;
°   Encourage residents to have their own emergency supplies and be
knowledgeable about what they will do in the event of a disaster;
°   Expedite the recovery of East Honolulu; and
°   Outline the vision and methods for how East Honolulu can “build back better
and smarter” following disasters.
3.1.2.3   Agricultural Areas
The physical and economic conditions and suburban development pattern of East
Honolulu preclude large-scale agricultural operations. There are two
concentrations of small-scale diversified agricultural operations – the larger
one in Kamilo Nui Valley and the other above Kaiser High School on the slopes
of Koko Crater – which should be preserved as being consistent with the overall
community vision underlying this Plan. In both areas, individual farm lots on
long-term leases are used for nursery and vegetable production and have
remained commercially viable due to low lease rents and by serving a mostly
East Honolulu market.
When lease terms end for the agricultural areas, their continued commercial
viability will likely depend upon revision of lease rents and the leaseholders
continued interest in farming. An economic feasibility study would assist in
determining the continued viability of agriculture in Kamilo Nui Valley and
identify potential arrangements that would be suitable and acceptable to
concerned parties. Community groups are working to protect agricultural lands
in perpetuity through fee purchase, easements, or land swaps.
Prior to the adoption of the 1999 Plan, approximately 17 acres of agricultural
lands located outside the Community Growth Boundary in Kamilo Nui were rezoned
from the general agricultural district to the low-density apartment district.
The 1999 Plan did not reflect this change as the project, now known as Leolani,
did not receive its final approvals until June 2000, after the adoption of the
Plan. The 17-acre Leolani development is displayed within the Community Growth
Boundary since the development was approved and is now complete. Other existing
agricultural use and preservation lands in Kamilo Nui Valley will remain
outside the Community Growth Boundary.
Water supply is sufficient in Kamilo Nui Valley, although short winter days are
a limitation on the types of crops that can be grown. There is also the
potential for conflict between farming in Kamilo Nui Valley, where agriculture
existed prior to adjacent urban development, and nearby suburban residential
areas. This has resulted in complaints from neighbors about nuisance dust,
noise, chemical overspray, odors, and other normal impacts of farming. In turn,
this can lead to operational changes that may be required by the enforcement of
public health regulations and that adversely affect the feasibility of
agriculture. The most effective way to avoid this conflict is to provide
adequate separation between agricultural and residential uses.
Guidelines relating to agricultural areas are listed below:
•   Accessory Uses – Design and locate buildings and other facilities that are
accessory to an agricultural operation in a way that minimizes the impact on
nearby urban areas and the street system.
•   Existing Uses – Encourage continued use of small lots for agricultural
uses, and promote compatibility of nearby residential areas with those uses.
Maintain the existing buffer between agricultural lands and residential
development.
•   Kamilo Nui Valley – Designate undeveloped areas in Kamilo Nui Valley which
are on the ‘Ewa side of the existing farm lots for agricultural use.
•   Agricultural Leases – Encourage continued long-term agricultural leases at
reasonable rates consistent with feasible agricultural use by having such areas
remain outside the Community Growth Boundary.
•   Community Growth Boundary – Preserve the Community Growth Boundary through
the foreseeable future to prevent further residential encroachment around the
two active farm areas and to mitigate potential nuisances associated with
farming from impacting new residential development.
•   Runoff – Implement agricultural best management practices (BMPs) to
mitigate stormwater, sediment, and toxic pollutant runoff from agricultural
uses and stockpiling from adversely impacting downstream water quality.
•   Food Sufficiency – The existing agricultural lots should be maintained to
support State and County goals.
3.1.2.4   Runoff, Natural Gulches, and Drainage Corridors
Water springs sustain life in this low rainfall region. Springs are found at
Ka‘alawai, Wai‘alae, Wailupe Beach Park, Kalauha‘iha‘i Fishpond at Niu,
Kawaiku‘i Beach Park, Kanewai Spring and Elelupe Spring at Kuli‘ou‘ou, Keawāwa
Wetland, and Kawaiakane at Kawaihoa Point. Smaller seeps are located along the
shoreline.
Streams in the region also play an important role in the traditional
sustainability of the region. Kapakahi Stream was once rich with o‘opu. Many of
East Honolulu’s streams have lost their essential functions when they were
concreted and channelized. Nevertheless, they retain potential for restoration.
Wailupe Stream is one of the only streams that has not been concreted
completely.
The ridges and valleys in East Honolulu form a series of drainage ways
extending across the region. All but two of the streams have been channelized
as a means for conveying stormwater from valley watersheds to the sea as
quickly as possible. These stream channels are capable of handling stormwater
runoff from normal rainfall amounts if properly maintained. During periods of
intense rainfall, however, a number of these drainage ways have experienced
flooding problems (see Chapter 4).
The swift conveyance of stormwater through the channelization of streams in
East Honolulu impacts downstream water quality, particularly when those waters
reach Maunalua Bay. If stormwater is not given time to settle, it will often
carry sedimentation and other particulate matter downstream leading to the
deterioration of nearshore waters and reefs. Dechannelization, or restoration
of natural stream beds, can improve downstream water quality, increase
groundwater recharge, and help in re-establishing habitats for native species.
Restoration of upland areas and reestablishment of native vegetation can also
assist in controlling and absorbing precipitation and lengthen the period of
discharge potentially reducing flood rates.
Wetlands play a vital ecological role in providing habitat and holding and
filtering stormwater and sediment runoff. Wetlands are difficult to replace or
reconstruct in their entirety and will be preserved where possible. A map of
the National Wetlands Inventory is shown in
Exhibit 3-2.
Guidelines concerning natural gulches and drainage ways are as follows:
•   Drainage Ways – Preserve and restore the aesthetic values and biological
functions of significant streams, wetlands, natural gulches and other drainage
ways by requiring setbacks, where appropriate and feasible, as part of the open
space system. These include:
°   Perennial streams identified in the Hawai‘i Stream Assessment prepared by
the State Commission on Water Resource Management;
°   Wetlands identified by the Army Corps of Engineers and/or identified on the
Fish and Wildlife Service’s National Wetland Inventory maps;
   Exhibit 3-2: Wetland Areas
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9246.png]
 
°   Other drainage ways identified by the Department of Design and Construction
or the Department of Planning and Permitting;
°   For other streams, including intermittent streams, require applicants for
development to show that the open space system will not be significantly
impacted and that biological values will not be significantly disturbed if
setbacks are not provided; and,
°   Improve drainage channels, not just to convey runoff downstream as quickly
as possible, but to increase permeability and retention.
•   Low-Impact Development – Implement low-impact development standards and
other green infrastructure to restore ecological function to the area,
particularly along and adjacent to stream channels, and reduce the amount of
stormwater, sediment, and toxic pollutant runoff entering Maunalua Bay.
•   Green Incentives – Provide incentives for owners of existing homes,
particularly those adjacent to drainage ways, to develop rain gardens,
permeable driveways, and other strategies that hold stormwater on-site instead
of discharging it into storm drains or streams.
•   Preservation – Preserve the remaining natural gulches within the Community
Growth Boundary that are necessary to provide flood protection in a way which
protects aesthetic values and biological functions and avoids degradation of
stream, coastline and near shore water quality.
•   Remediation – Clean up contaminated areas that pose hazards to soil and
downstream water quality, particularly any properties adjacent or directly
upland of a stream channel.
•   Recreation Corridors – Incorporate landscaped pathways and bikeways
adjacent to stream channels and drainage corridors, where appropriate and
feasible.
•   Retention – Retain stormwater, sediment, and toxic pollutant runoff through
the installation of linear landscaping features and permeable pavement along
roadways, particularly Kalaniana‘ole Highway, which should be used to visually
enhance the different communities.
•   Preservation Lands – Use preservation lands, located within and outside of
the Community Growth Boundary to prevent further degradation of nearshore water
quality.
•   Natural Improvements – Identify potential natural improvements to park and
preservation lands within the Community Growth Boundary to improve its
ecological function and retain an open, undeveloped character, particularly on
lands near Hawai‘i Kai Marina and Maunalua Bay, including along Keāhole Street.
3.1.2.5   Natural Resources and Preserves
East Honolulu is home to the following recognized wildlife preserves (see
Exhibit 3-3):
•   Kānewai Spring and Fishpond – The freshwater spring is located makai of
Kalaniana‘ole Highway and feeds freshwater into the adjacent fishpond which
flows into Paikō Lagoon and Maunalua Bay. The spring was purchased for
protection with public and private funds.
•   Paikō Lagoon Wildlife Sanctuary – Paikō Lagoon, formerly a coastal
fishpond, is fed by a freshwater spring and Kuli‘ou‘ou Stream and is managed by
the DLNR. The lagoon’s water level varies with the tides and occasionally
exposes the saline mudflats. This wildlife sanctuary provides habitat to the
endangered Hawaiian Stilt as well as other migratory water birds. The proximity
of residential uses may threaten the sanctuary due to intrusions by humans and
domesticated animals.
•   ‘Ihi‘ihilauākea and Nono‘ula Preserves – These preserves are located on the
southern rim of the Hanauma Bay ridgeline on land owned by the City and County
of Honolulu, and managed by the Nature Conservancy of Hawai‘i (NCH) through a
cooperative agreement with the City. The preserves maintain a pool for the
endangered ‘Ihi‘ihi (Marsilea villosa), an ephemeral plant appearing only
during periods of rainfall. The preserves include mixed herbland and shrubland,
the moisture regime, and subcanopy and understory native plant species.
   Exhibit 3-3: Natural Areas and Preserves
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9252.png]
 
•   Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline – An undeveloped natural area between Koko Head and
Makapu‘u Head located makai of Kalaniana‘ole Highway. The Kaiwi coast contains
one of O‘ahu’s last undeveloped, rugged coastlines. These lands contain
beaches, dunes, trails, rocky cliffs, historic sites, and viewpoints.
•   Kaiwi Mauka Lands – Kaiwi mauka lands contain lands between Koko Head and
Makapu‘u Head located mauka of Kalaniana‘ole Highway. The Kaiwi Mauka Lands
were acquired with public and private funds for the purpose of preserving the
undeveloped region as an open, rugged landscape.
•   Keawāwa Marsh and Wetlands – Keawāwa Wetlands and adjacent Hawea Heiau
complex are located on the mauka corner of Hawai‘i Kai Drive and Keahole
Street. The wetlands provide refuge for the native, endangered Hawaiian moorhen
in addition to other migratory birds and insects. The Hawea Heiau complex
contains ancient walls, petroglyphs, terraces, a coconut grove, and heiau. The
property is preserved in perpetuity through the purchase of the land by the
Livable Hawai‘i Kai Hui. Keawāwa Marsh and Wetlands are located outside of the
Community Growth Boundary.
•   Kuli‘ou‘ou and Honolulu Watershed Forest Reserves – The upper ranges of the
Kuli‘ou‘ou Mountains fall within into two forest reserve systems, both of which
are located within the State Conservation District and managed by the DLNR. The
reserves are host to designated critical habitats for endangered species
including the O‘ahu ‘Elepaio. Two public trails, the Kuli‘ou‘ou Ridge Trail and
the Wiliwilinui Trail, traverse the Kuli‘ou‘ou and the Honolulu Watershed
Forest Reserves, respectively.
•   Hanauma Bay Marine Life Conservation District (MLCD) – Established in 1967
by the Department of Land and Natural Resources, the Hanauma Bay MLCD was once
a popular site for fishing and throw netting. State law now protects wildlife
within Hanauma Bay. The adjoining Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve is part of Koko
Head Regional Park, administered by the City. In order to protect the marine
resources and limit crowding of this popular visitor destination, the City
restricts the daily number of visitors that have access to the bay. The City
closes the Nature Preserve once per week for maintenance. The City also
collects entry and parking fees used to fund maintenance and capital projects
at Hanauma Bay.
•   Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve – The nature preserve was established to
protect and preserve one of Hawai‘i’s most spectacular natural resources. The
preserve includes the Marine Education Center which opened in August 2002 where
residents and visitors are welcomed to Hanauma Bay and taught how to respect
and safeguard the fragile marine life found in the Hanauma Bay MLCD.
•   ‘Āina Haina Nature Preserve – In 2000 the City purchased land in the back
of the residential neighborhood of ‘Āina Haina, below the Honolulu Watershed
Forest Reserve, for the purposes of preserving the land from further suburban
development.
•   Maunalua Bay – Although the Bay is not listed as a preserve, it serves as a
defining scenic, recreational, and marine resource for East Honolulu. The bay
has many users including fishermen, cultural practitioners, surfers and
boaters, and supportive commercial uses for these activities. With its unique
mixture of fresh and salt water, Maunalua Bay provides a unique near shore
habitat for various aquatic species. Community groups conduct studies, organize
community events, and develop plans in order to restore Maunalua Bay.
There are a few other areas located within the Community Growth Boundary that
could be preserved other than for the sake of protecting wildlife:
•   Great Lawn – The “Gateway to Hawai‘i Kai” is an unimproved grassy space
bounded by Hawai‘i Kai Drive, Kalaniana‘ole Highway, Keahole Street, and the
marina. The lawn primarily serves as open space, and, for two weeks a year, a
carnival. Natural improvements could improve ecological function to the
preservation area.
•   Rim Island 2 – An area previously used for dredging spoils in the upper
Hawai‘i Kai Marina, comprised of approximately 3.25 acres, has become an
additional established habitat for several species of endangered Hawaiian
waterfowl. However, there have been studies regarding the viability of the fill
lands as being unable to support the birds attracted there. Continued use of
this site for dredging spoils should be further evaluated, especially if
alternative spoils dumpsites are available.
Guidelines relating to wildlife preserves in East Honolulu are as follows:
•   Encroachment – Avoid encroachment or intensification of residential or
other urban uses near preservation lands.
°   Prohibit the reduction in preservation zoning in the vicinity of the Paikō
Lagoon or intensification of residential use in this zone.
°   Designate any property with an existing residential use for low-density
residential use and to an appropriate residential zone.
•   Management – Implement management programs in areas where intense human
activity threaten the sustainability of the resources. This could include, for
example, impact monitoring studies, limits on the number of visitors, and
admission fees such as at Hanauma Bay.
•   Biological Study – Conduct a biological study to determine if Rim Island 2
is eligible for declaration as a recognized endangered species habitat.
3.1.2.6   Marina
The 260-acre Hawai‘i Kai Marina provides protected water for small sail and
motor craft, water skiing, and fishing. Residences fronting the marina have
launching ramps and mooring facilities. In addition, there are boating
facilities adjacent to the Koko Marina Shopping Center that can accommodate
boats up to 40 feet in length.
The Hawai‘i Kai Marina also serves as the focal point for commercial activity
in Hawai‘i Kai (Maunalua). East Honolulu’s three largest commercial centers,
the Hawai‘i Kai Towne Center, Hawai‘i Kai Shopping Center, and Koko Marina
Shopping Center, front the marina on the east and west sides.
The Hawai‘i Kai Marina contributes to the open space system by providing
recreational value and visual relief from adjacent urban uses. It also has a
cooling effect and thus offers climatic benefits for commercial and residential
uses that front the water.
Guidelines concerning the Hawai‘i Kai Marina are listed below:
•   Recreational Boating – Enhance the recreational value of this open space
feature by improving facilities in support of boating.
•   Pedestrian Access – Improve access to and along the marina’s edge by way of
a multi-use path for people walking and biking.
•   Waterfront – Ensure that marina and commercial waterfront uses do not
present a barrier for pedestrians desiring to visit more than one destination
along the waterfront.
•   Bridge – Link the Hawai‘i Kai Towne Center and the Hawai‘i Kai Shopping
Center with a pedestrian bridge in order to provide convenient access between
the two commercial centers.
•   Viewshed – Maintain and improve views across the marina, especially from
Kalaniana‘ole Highway and other major roadways.
•   Screening – Install and maintain landscaping, where appropriate, to screen
areas of the marina not intended for public views and to intercept stormwater,
sediment, and toxic pollutant runoff.
•   Best Management Practices – Utilize BMPs for marina uses to mitigate
degradation of water quality to both the marina and Maunalua Bay.
3.1.3   RELATIONSHIP TO MAP A-1, OPEN SPACE
The following components of the regional open space system are shown on Map A-
1, Open Space Map in Appendix A:
•   Mountain and Agricultural Areas – These areas are to remain outside the
Community Growth Boundary, and are not intended for development.
•   Shoreline Areas – All beaches and shoreline areas with high scenic or
wildlife value, especially areas along the Kaiwi Scenic coast and at Paikō
Peninsula, are designated for preservation and are located outside the
Community Growth Boundary. Construction of seawalls and rock revetments has had
a severe negative impact on beaches in the Plan area, particularly between
Wai‘alae and Portlock.
•   Parks – Areas designated as island-based and district parks are shown, as
well as the general location of community and neighborhood parks. Additions to
the community-based park system are determined more by community facility
design considerations (see Section 3.3) than by their relationship to the
regional open space network.
•   Golf Courses – The three golf courses in East Honolulu are shown because of
their recreational value and visual contribution to the open space landscape.
•   Hazard Areas – Certain undeveloped lands within the State Urban District
that have either experienced significant damage from soil movement or potential
rock falls, or are highly susceptible to such problems, particularly in ‘Āina
Koa, ‘Āina Haina, and Kuli‘ou‘ou; are located outside the Community Growth
Boundary and designated for preservation.
•   Marina – Hawai‘i Kai Marina is located within the Community Growth
Boundary.
•   Streams – Major channelized and unchannelized stream channels which may
provide habitat and convey water from upland areas.
3.2   ISLAND-BASED PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS
This section presents an overview of island-based parks and recreational areas
in East Honolulu. This is followed by general policies and guidelines for the
recreational development of these resources. The location of the region’s
island-based parks and recreational areas are shown in Appendix A, Maps: A-
1 Open Space, A-2 Urban Land Use, and A-3 Public Facilities.
3.2.1   OVERVIEW
The City and County of Honolulu Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR)
develops and maintains a system of park and recreation facilities that it
classifies in a hierarchical manner. The largest and most specialized parks are
classified as island-based parks since they serve the needs of all O‘ahu
residents. This group includes regional parks, beach/shoreline parks, beach/
shoreline right-of-ways, nature parks/reserves, botanical gardens, golf
courses, and zoological parks (see
Table 3-2). The locations of public parks and recreation areas in East Honolulu
are shown in
Exhibit 3-1.
 
Table 3-2
Types of Island-Based Parks
                      Large areas that may serve the entire island or a region
Regional Parks        of the island and may include a variety of recreation
                      park types and facilities, natural and cultural sites.
                      Areas and sites along the shoreline that may include
Beach/Shoreline Parks facilities and support services for water activities,
                      hiking, sunbathing, picnicking, and other passive
                      activities.
Beach/Shoreline       Access lanes to beaches and the shoreline where
Rights-of-Way         residential or other uses prevent development of a beach/
                      shoreline park.
Nature Parks/Reserve  Areas maintained primarily to preserve or conserve unique
                      natural features.
                      Areas to plan, develop, curate, maintain, and study
Botanical Gardens     documented dryland plants for the purposes of
                      conservation, botany, horticulture, education, and
                      passive recreation.
 
As shown in
Table 3-3, East Honolulu contains 10 island-based parks that are maintained by
the DPR. A brief description of East Honolulu’s regional parks, various beach
parks, and three privately operated golf courses, two of which offer public
play, is provided below.
Table 3-3
DPR Island-Based Parks and Preserves in East Honolulu
Park Type/Name Acreage
Table 3-3
DPR Island-Based Parks and Preserves in East Honolulu
Park Type/Name                                      Acreage
Regional Parks                                       
   Koko Head Regional Park1                      951.4
Beach/Shoreline Parks
   Maunalua Bay Beach Park                       5.4
   Sandy Beach Park (including Wāwāmalu Beach P22.6
   Kawaiku‘i Beach Park                        4.1
   Kuli‘ou‘ou Beach Park                     3.2
   Wai‘alae Beach Park                         4.4
   Wailupe Beach Park                            1.2
      Subtotal                                40.9
Nature Preserve/Reserves
   ‘Āina Haina Nature Preserve                85.2
   Hanauma Bay Nature Park                       50.0
Botanical Gardens
   Koko Crater Botanical Garden                  200.0
      Total                                   1,327.5
1 Acreage figure excludes Sandy Beach Park, Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve, Koko
Crater Botanical Garden (listed separately) and Koko Head District Park
(included in Section 3.3).
 
3.2.1.1   Koko Head Regional Park
The 1,264-acre Koko Head Regional Park encompasses the most popular recreation
areas in East Honolulu, including:
   •   Hālona Blowhole Lookout
   •   Koko Crater Stables
   •   Koko Head Rifle Range
   •    Sandy Beach Park
   •   Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve
   •    Koko Crater Botanical Garden
   •   Old Hawai‘i Job Corps Center
   •   Koko Head District Park
The park was established in 1928 when the City acquired the property from the
Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop for a fee of one dollar. In exchange for the
nominal charge, the City agreed to extend and maintain the municipal water
system through Maunalua. Further, the deed stipulated that use of the property
be restricted to public parks or rights-of-way. Other uses of the property
would require approval by the Bishop Estate Trustees.
In 1992, the Koko Head Park Master Plan was completed. The plan contains
elements regarding the preservation and enhancement of the park’s recreational
and educational resources that are generally consistent with the guidelines set
forth in this Plan (discussed in Section 3.2.4).
Expansion of Koko Head Regional Park through the City’s acquisition in 2002 of
the 32-acre parcel known as Golf Course 5 and 6 properties, located mauka of
Sandy Beach and Kalaniana‘ole Highway, completes the Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline.
The 38-acre park visually links the existing Koko Head Regional Park and the
Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline and provides a continuous stretch of open space with
recreational opportunities extending from Koko Head to Makapu‘u Head totaling
about 600 acres. This area is now used for active recreation with playfields
and open space for kite flying and other outdoor activities. There will be no
courts or paved areas.
3.2.1.2 Kaiwi Coast
A 354-acre scenic shoreline area has been established in the Queen’s Beach/
Makapu‘u Head region of East Honolulu adjacent to Koko Head Regional Park. The
Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline was established as a means to protect the area’s rich
recreational and scenic resources and natural environment. A master plan for
the Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline was prepared in October 1995 by the DLNR pursuant to
House Concurrent Resolution No. 261 (1988).
Hiking is a very popular form of recreation along the Kaiwi coast. Substantial
improvements have been made to parking, access, and trail amenities along the
Makapu‘u Point Lighthouse Trail. Further implementation of the master plan has
been halted due to community concerns that construction of comfort stations or
a visitor’s center will detract from the region’s undeveloped, wilderness
character.
In 2016, the region known as Queen’s Rise, or Kaiwi Mauka, located mauka of
Kalaniana‘ole Highway between Hawai‘i Kai Golf Course and Makapu‘u Head, was
purchased with public and private funds to set aside for preservation purposes.
Although the land is zoned for preservation, it is within the State Urban
District and should be redesignated for conservation. The preservation of mauka
lands from development will further preserve the scenic characteristics defined
by the adjacent, rugged landscape of the Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline.
3.2.1.3   Beach and Shoreline Parks
East Honolulu’s seven existing beach parks are Maunalua Bay, Sandy Beach
(including Wāwāmalu), Kawaiku‘i, Kuli‘ou‘ou, Wai‘alae, Joe Lukela Beach Park,
and Wailupe. The City has acquired lands comprising the Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline
at Queen’s Beach/Makapu‘u Head. Improvements to Wāwāmalu Beach as a nature park
would help to protect the natural dunes, native vegetation, beach rock, and
beach.
A mix of low- and medium-intensity recreational uses is envisioned along the
Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline. The primary purpose of the park is to preserve the
area’s natural resources and to provide educational and passive recreation
opportunities.
3.2.1.4 Aquatic Recreation
In addition to recreation lands under the jurisdiction of the DPR, another
asset of East Honolulu is its near shore waters which help to define much of
its character. Maunalua Bay extends from Kūpikipiki‘ō (Black Point) to Kawaihoa
Point spanning two ahupua‘a (Waimanalo and Waikīkī) and seven watersheds
(Wai‘alae Nui, Wailupe, Niu, Kuli‘ou‘ou, Kamilo Nui, Kamilo Iki, and Portlock).
Maunalua Bay hosts a variety of users including, but not limited to, fishermen,
boaters, kayakers, surfers, cultural practitioners, and stewardship
organizations. These user groups comprise residents and tourists for commercial
and non-commercial uses. Regulation of aquatic uses falls under State
jurisdiction.
3.2.2   GENERAL POLICIES
The following general policies relate to island-based parks and recreational
resources in East Honolulu:
•   Increase the inventory of island-based parks, where feasible and supportive
of open space general policies and guidelines, by expanding the boundaries of
existing parks and/or creating new parks.
•   Maintain and enhance, to the extent possible, existing island-based parks
by utilizing land area that has not been fully developed for recreation use.
Island-based parks are part of the region’s abundance of natural and scenic
resources and contribute to the attractiveness of East Honolulu to residents
and visitors.
•   Expand access to existing park lands by improving neighborhood linkages
along shared paths for people walking and biking, and blending park boundaries
through the transition of park space to adjacent paths or greenways.
•   Preserve the Kaiwi coast as one of O‘ahu’s last undeveloped, rugged
coastlines.
•   Prohibit alterations to the shoreline to avoid disrupting natural processes
and avoid the potentially adverse impacts armoring has on adjacent areas.
•   Develop additional trails and bike paths to balance trail demands across
East Honolulu and alleviate potential overuse at existing trails.
3.2.3   PLANNING GUIDELINES
The general policies for island-based parks and recreation complexes, including
golf courses, are supported and implemented by the following planning
guidelines:
•   Appropriate Screening and Siting – Carefully site active playfields and
supporting facilities intended for intensive use, and use generous landscape
screening to reduce the potential impacts on surrounding areas.
•   Environmental Compatibility – Construct park facilities in a manner that
avoids adverse impacts on natural resources or processes in the coastal zone or
any other environmentally sensitive area. In the design of recreation areas,
incorporate natural features of the site and use landscape materials that are
indigenous to the area where feasible in order to retain a sense of place.
•   Community Integration – Link recreational attractions that may be designed
to have distinct identities and entries, with surrounding areas through the use
of connecting roadways, bikeways, walkways, landscape features and/or
architectural design.
•   Irrigation – The Board of Water Supply (BWS) Rules and Regulations require
the use of non-potable water for irrigation of large landscaped areas. For
large landscaped areas, the feasibility of using non-potable water for
irrigation should be investigated. If non-potable water is either unavailable
or infeasible, a report of the investigation should be coordinated and
submitted to the BWS prior to considering the use of potable water.
3.2.3.1   Passive or Nature Parks
•   Kaiwi and Koko Crater – Preserve and enhance the Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline’s
recreational and educational resources by implementing the following:
°   Convert the portion of Kalaniana‘ole Highway between Lunalilo Home Road and
Wāwāmalu Beach Nature Park to a 25-mile per hour scenic roadway.
°   Maintain and facilitate access to the important fishing resources.
°   Develop new walking/hiking trails within Koko Crater Botanical Garden for
better viewing of plant collections.
°   Prohibit access to any trails or paths from outside of Koko Crater
Botanical Garden to the garden.
°   With community input, explore the possibility of reinstating the shared use
of Koko Crater Botanical Gardens and the Koko Crater Stables through a shared
use agreement that includes a plan for well-marked horseback-riding trails and
the prompt cleaning of horse droppings by stable employees.
°   Continue to develop Koko Crater Botanical Garden as a conservation site of
global importance for rare and endangered species from Hawai‘i and other
tropical dryland areas.
°   Maintain Koko Crater Botanical Garden with drought-tolerant plant species.
°   Minimize adverse lighting impacts on aquatic life and avifauna, as well as
adverse aesthetic impacts, particularly from stationary point lookouts and
along significant view planes.
•   Preservation and Recreation – Maintain the Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline in a
manner that preserves the area’s natural scenic quality and provides
educational and passive recreation opportunities.
•   Management – Protect fragile natural resources, such as the wildlife at
Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve, from overuse through continued management and
control of visitor numbers and impacts such as walking on the reef and
sunscreen pollution.
•   Wāwāmalu Beach Nature Park – Develop Wāwāmalu Beach as a nature park with
the addition of demarcated parking and installation of barriers to protect
natural dunes, native vegetation, beach rock, and beach.
3.2.3.2   Active Recreation Areas
•   Expansion – Expand the Koko Head Regional Park boundary to include the open
space/preservation lands mauka of Kalanianaole Highway (previously known as
Golf Courses 5 and 6), thereby increasing East Honolulu’s active recreation
areas.
•   Sport Venues – Locate areas designed for sporting events that attract high
numbers of people along major collector streets or accesses that are separated
as much as possible from residential areas and wildlife habitats.
•   Screening and Aesthetics – Minimize the visibility of perimeter fencing
along major collector streets, large recreation buildings or structures,
lighting, parking lots and other utilitarian elements through plantings or
other appropriate visual screens adjacent to residential areas and major
roadways, particularly to soften the view of the park from above at the
roadside vista point along Kalaniana‘ole Highway.
•   Transit – Locate bus stops and loading areas at principal entries and
adjacent to convenient pedestrian accesses to main activity areas within the
park.
•   Lighting – Reduce light pollution's adverse impact on wildlife and human
health, and its unnecessary consumption of energy by using, where sensible,
fully shielded lighting fixtures using lower wattage.
•   Access to Recreation Facilities – Public recreation facilities should be
available to users of all skill levels and incomes, particularly Koko Crater
Stables to continue horseback riding for public recreational use.
3.2.3.3   Golf Courses
There are three 18-hole golf courses in East Honolulu. The Hawai‘i Kai
Championship Golf Course and the Hawai‘i Kai Executive Golf Course and a
driving range are open to the public, while the Wai‘alae Country Club is a
members-only course (Table 3-4). These three golf courses are important
elements of East Honolulu’s open space system because they provide areas for
active recreation and offer visual relief from adjacent urban uses. No
additional golf courses are proposed.
 
Table 3-4: East Honolulu Golf Courses
Golf Course Name                               Use and Ownership Acreage
Hawai‘i Kai Championship Course              Open to Public    129.1
                                               Privately Owned
Hawai‘i Kai Executive Course and Driving RangOpen to Public    54.9
                                               Privately Owned
Wai‘alae Country Club                        Members Only      144.9
                                               Privately Owned
Total                                                            328.9
 
Guidelines relating to golf courses in East Honolulu are listed below:
•   Viewsheds – Maintain golf course designs to provide view amenities for
adjacent urban areas, especially from well-used public rights-of-way, parks and
vista points.
•   Retention – Optimize the function of golf courses as passive drainage ways,
maximizing their potential to retain or detain stormwater runoff.
•   Through Access – Provide and maintain safe access along golf courses for
regional continuity of pedestrian and bicycle systems.
•   Screening – When necessary for safety reasons, use screening, landscaping,
setbacks, and modifications to the course layout, where feasible, rather than
fencing or solid barriers.
•   Irrigation – Use of non-potable water for irrigation of large landscaped
areas in accordance with the BWS Rules and Regulations. If non-potable water is
either unavailable or infeasible, a report of the investigation should be
coordinated and submitted to the BWS prior to considering the use of potable
water.
3.3   COMMUNITY-BASED PARKS
The following section provides an overview and a list of general policies and
guidelines pertaining to community-based parks and recreation areas.
3.3.1   OVERVIEW
Park areas that serve more localized populations are classified as community-
based parks. There are 122.7 acres of community-based parks in East Honolulu.
This includes district, community, and neighborhood parks as well as other,
smaller park areas (see
Table 3-5). The main purpose of community-based parks is to provide active
recreation space for residents of the region in the form of playfields and
gyms, among others. In addition to meeting the active recreation needs of the
region, community-based parks also serve as open space elements and add
aesthetic value to the region by providing visual relief from urban land uses.
 
Table 3-5
Types of DPR Community-Based Parks
             Average Population
Park Type    Size    Service Size Typical Facilities
             (Acres)
District     20      25,000       Playfields, play courts, passive areas,
                                  gym/recreation complex, swimming pool
Community    10      10,000       Playfields, play courts, passive areas,
                                  recreation building
Neighborhood 6       5,000        Playfields, play courts, passive areas,
                                  comfort station
Mini Park    Varies  High Density Benches, picnic tables, children’s play
                     Area         area
 
The largest community-based park in East Honolulu is the 40-acre Koko Head
District Park (see
Table 3-6). Expansion of this park to 59 acres is possible by incorporating the
adjacent former Job Corps site. In East Honolulu, this is the most appropriate
location for sports and active recreation facilities designed for league play
and other major sporting events. This complex should also include passive use
areas for quiet enjoyment and nature learning activities. These areas can also
serve as buffers from adjacent residential areas or from natural features, such
as the slopes of Koko Crater.
Table 3-6
DPR Community-Based Parks in East Honolulu
Park Type/Name Acreage
Table 3-6
DPR Community-Based Parks in East Honolulu
Park Type/Name                                             Acreage
District Parks
   Koko Head District Park                              40.0
Community Parks
   Kalama Valley Community Park                         6.0
   Kamilo Iki Community Park                            18.5
   ‘Āina Haina Community Park                        6.2
      Subtotal                                       30.7
Neighborhood Parks
   ‘Āina Koa Neighborhood Park                       2.4
   Haha‘ione Neighborhood Park                        4.1
   Haha‘ione Valley Neighborhood Park                 6.2
   Kamilo Iki Neighborhood Park                         7.2
   Koko Head Neighborhood Park                          6.8
   Kuli‘ou‘ou Neighborhood Park                     4.4
   Nehu Neighborhood Park                               1.3
   Niu Valley Neighborhood Park                         2.1
   Wai‘alae Iki Neighborhood Park                     9.9
   Wailupe Valley Neighborhood Park                     2.5
      Subtotal                                       46.9
      Subtotal All Public Parks                      122.7
Dog Parks
   Hawai‘i Kai Dog Park                               1.8
      Subtotal                                       1.8
Mini Parks
   Koko Kai Park                                        0.6
   Kamole Mini Park                                     2.2
   Kōke‘e Park                                       0.5
      Subtotal                                       3.3
Private Recreation Facilities (not managed by the DPR)
   The O‘ahu Club                                     7.6
   The Peninsula                                        4.3
   Wai‘alae Iki V Pavilion                            3.1
   Hawai‘i Loa Ridge Clubhouse                        3.1
   Nā Pali Haweo Lookout Park                          1.4
   Queen’s Gate Recreation Center                     1.2
   Kuapā Isle Clubhouse                                0.8
   Mariners Village III Rec. Center                     0.5
   Koko Isle Clubhouse                                  0.5
      Subtotal                                       22.5
Grand Total Public Parks and Private Recreation Facilities 145.2
 
Private recreation facilities in Hawai‘i Kai (Maunalua) also meet some of the
demand for neighborhood parks such as at Mariner’s Cove, the Esplanade and
others. While private facilities may not be accessible to the general public,
they have the ability to reduce demands on nearby public recreation facilities.
In evaluating community-based recreational park needs, the DPR uses a general
standard of two acres per 1,000 persons, with one acre per thousand needed for
district parks and one acre needed for community parks, neighborhood parks, and
mini-parks. Even if these standards are met, there may still be unmet park
needs due to demographic, topographic, or other community conditions. Based on
this general park area-to-population standard and East Honolulu’s 2010
population of 49,900, the community-based park area of 122.7 acres is
approximately 22.9 acres above the minimum requirement. Based on population
stabilization anticipated by 2040, there is not a need for new community-based
parks in East Honolulu.
There is only one District Park in the region, while DPR’s population service
ratio (see
Table 3-5) would suggest the need for two such parks in East Honolulu. However,
the land area for Koko Head District Park is twice as large as DPR’s standard
for District Parks. Moreover, as noted previously, this park can be expanded to
59 acres by incorporating the adjacent Job Corps site.
As suggested in the discussion of Koko Head District Park, the distribution of
community-based parks within East Honolulu is slightly uneven. The Hawai‘i Kai
Neighborhood Board area has approximately 36 acres above the minimum
requirement for community-based parks, while the Kuli‘ou‘ou-Kalani Iki
Neighborhood Board area has a deficit of approximately 10 acres according to
DPR’s population ratios.
However, as mentioned previously, population is not the only factor to consider
when evaluating community-based park needs. Other factors, such as the
demographic composition and maturity of a neighborhood, should also be taken
into account. In East Honolulu, the Kuli‘ou‘ou-Kalani Iki Neighborhood Board
area has a higher share of residents over the age of 65, an older housing
stock, and fewer households with related children compared to the Hawai‘i Kai
Neighborhood Board area. As such, the Kuli‘ou‘ou-Kalani Iki community does not
currently have a strong demand for park facilities such as children’s play
areas, but conversely, may develop a need for more facilities supporting
passive recreation.
There is the potential for an increase in “multi-generation” households (i.e.,
aging parents living with adult children and pre-school or school-age
grandchildren), particularly in the Kuli‘ou‘ou-Kalani Iki community, as
children of elderly residents either move in to care for their aging parents or
are unable to live on their own due to economic pressures and high housing
costs. These trends may play an important role in the life cycle of the
Kuli‘ou‘ou-Kalani Iki community and may increase the requirements, by amount
and type, and mixture of active and passive recreation facilities over time.
(Also see related discussion on housing in Section 3.5)
DPR has no current plans to acquire additional land for community-based park
development in the region. Expansion of community-based parklands is possible
in Hawai‘i Kai (Maunalua), but is limited in the Kuli‘ou‘ou-Kalani Iki
Neighborhood Board area by the lack of available land. However, there are
opportunities to expand the availability of recreational facilities oriented to
a younger population in the Kuli‘ou‘ou-Kalani Iki area by jointly, with the
Department of Education (DOE), using and improving elementary and intermediate
school recreational facilities as community-based parks to overcome the current
shortfall.
3.3.2   GENERAL POLICIES
General policies pertaining to community-based parks are as follows:
•   Provide adequate parks to meet the recreational needs of the neighborhood
residents, particularly community gardens.
•   Observe the DPR standard for community-based parks of a minimum of two
acres of community-based parks per 1,000 residents, with one acre for district
parks and a total of one acre for community parks, neighborhood parks, and
mini-parks.
•   Expand active recreational facilities at Koko Head District Park by
incorporating and developing the adjacent Job Corps Center site.
•   Modify recreational facilities in existing parks and increase access to
public school facilities in areas where there is limited opportunity to expand
park space to respond to changing demographic profiles or recreational needs.
•   Expand access to existing park lands by improving neighborhood linkages for
non-motorized transportation modes and disguising park boundaries through the
transition of park space to paths or greenways.
•   Continue efforts to co-locate Neighborhood or Community Parks with
elementary or intermediate schools and coordinate the design of facilities when
efficiencies in the development and use of athletic, recreation, meeting, and
parking facilities can be achieved.
•   Develop additional trails and bike paths to balance trail demands across
East Honolulu and alleviate potential overuse at existing trails.
3.3.3   PLANNING GUIDELINES
The following guidelines implement the general policies for community-based
parks:
•   Connectivity – Provide and improve linkages with bikeways and walking paths
off-site with the redevelopment of existing parks.
•   Residents’ Needs – Modify community-based parks in areas where recreational
needs of residents are not being adequately met.
•   Aesthetic Improvements – Design and site structural improvements and
landscaping in community-based parks to create or add to the aesthetic value of
these open space elements.
3.4   HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
The following sections provide an overview and a listing of policies and
guidelines for the preservation of historic and cultural resources in East
Honolulu.
3.4.1   OVERVIEW
Much of East Honolulu is defined by the old Maunalua Fishpond. Maunalua
Fishpond, referred to traditionally as Loko I‘a o Maunalua or Keahupua o
Maunalua, was 523 acres and the largest ancient fishpond of the Hawaiian
Islands. The Maunalua Fishpond was reportedly connected via a tunnel to
Ka‘ele‘pulu Pond, now known as Enchanted Lake, in Kailua. In the 1960s,
Kamehameha Schools leased much of what is now Hawai‘i Kai (Maunalua) to Henry
J. Kaiser who dredged and filled the fishpond to create a subdivision and the
private marina.
While many of the ancient fishponds have been filled, wall remnants of large
fishponds remain visible. At Wailupe is the 41-acre Loko Nui o Wailupe with its
2,500-foot-long wall. Niu Peninsula is the former Kupapa Fishpond with its
2,000-foot-long wall.
Cultural and natural resources were carefully conserved by Hawaiian konohiki,
or land managers. An advanced system of land and ocean management once fed the
regional population sustainably. ‘Uala (sweet potato), ama‘ama (mullet) and
limu (seaweed) were among the foods cultivated in East Honolulu. Feral pigs are
another traditional food source. Community subsistence hunters continue to hunt
the large population in the valleys and mauka areas.
Fish catches were historically shared with kupuna from the Lunalilo Home for
elderly Hawaiians. The Home is a historic landmark that has been in the
Maunalua region since the 1920s. Fish and limu were also sold and bartered
within the community. Kapu or rest periods for fishing were instituted during
fish spawning and managed by the konohiki. In Maunalua Bay konohiki used a flag
system to alert boaters when fish were spawning. Muliwai (stream estuaries that
meet the ocean), umu (nearshore fish houses) and ko‘a (ocean fish gathering
areas) were part of the sustainable aquacultural production system.
While unmarked today, these historic fish gathering sites remain high value
areas for community sustainability. Named ko‘a were Keahupua o Maunalua located
near the bridge at Kuli‘ou‘ou Beach Park. Pali‘alaea and Huanui were shrines
where mullet gathered, while Hina was for akule. These now destroyed sites were
located along the Portlock shoreline. Traditional muliwai sites are located at
Kapakahi Stream in Kāhala, near Wailupe Beach Park, Niu Stream, Kuli‘ou‘ou
Stream, Kamilonui Valley and Kaloko at Wāwāmalu. Hanauma Bay also was favored
greatly by the ali‘i for its fishing grounds.
Today, Native Hawaiians and the community at large are working to access,
perpetuate, and steward East Honolulu’s resources. Invasive species currently
envelop large acreages and active management is necessary. Historic trails and
mauka to makai pathways should be restored and maintained. Well known examples
of these can be found in the ahupua‘a trail in the back of Wailupe Valley,
recently purchased by the City as the Wailupe Nature Preserve, and the
Kealaikapapa paved roadway near Makapu‘u. Access to traditional resource
gathering should also be preserved. In particular, the former salt making area
at the bridge mauka of Joe Lukela Beach Park should be restored and maintained.
Access for surfing, fishing, hunting and diving should be maintained and
improved to reopen more customary paths to resources. Buffer and kapu areas
also play a role in managing sensitive resources within the landscape.
Large scale ranching and numerous dairies were active in the 19th and first
half of the 20th centuries. Piggeries and poultry operations were also part of
the agricultural production. The latter part of the 20th century saw a shift
away from agricultural sustainability with rapid urbanization. The farms at
Kamilonui Valley and Koko Head as well as the Koko Head Stables retain the
historic legacy of the area and should be perpetuated. The Koko Crater Stables
has been a community resource since its inception in 1962, after the City and
County of Honolulu closed a municipal stable located at Kapiolani Park. The
Koko Head Regional Park, which encompasses the Koko Crater Stables, was deeded
to the City by the Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop for one dollar in exchange
for the City's agreement to extend and maintain the municipal water system
through Maunalua. The deed further stipulated that use of the property be
restricted to public parks or rights-of-way unless otherwise approved by the
Bishop Estate Trustees. The Koko Crater Stables has contributed to the
community for decades by providing equestrian education and recreation for
riders of all ages and levels, and perpetuating East Honolulu’s paniolo
history. Efforts should be made to preserve the Koko Crater Stables for public
recreational use.
In 1930, an archaeological survey of O‘ahu documented approximately 60 sites in
the area now defined as East Honolulu. Many of these sites, however, have since
been destroyed by land-altering activities such as ranching, development, and
construction, as well as by erosion and the 1946 tsunami. Numerous
archaeological sites do remain though they have not been formally recorded, and
lie in undeveloped areas.
Pohaku markers and stone boundary walls distinguish resource districts. Many
remain today on hillsides and play a part in water management in addition to
their historic value. Exceptional dry stack walls can still be found along the
slopes above Kahala, Wailupe, and Niu as well as scattered eastward.
Coconut groves that were planted in traditional times remain today. Near
Wai‘alae Beach Park are the remnants of what was once the second largest grove
on O‘ahu. The shoreline retains groves near Kahala, Kawaiku‘i Beach Park and
Kanewai Spring in Kuli‘ou‘ou.
Traditional burials remain throughout the region. Cliff sides and caves in each
valley as well as sand dunes are known burial grounds. Many of these sites have
been looted or had the iwi removed to the Bishop Museum. Burial sites retain
cultural significance for the descendants and community and should be preserved
without disturbance. Lava tubes often contain burials as well as act as
conduits for freshwater. They are of great age and care should be taken to
maintain their integrity whenever possible. One noted lava tube was said to be
a fish passage between Ka‘ele‘pulu Fishpond in Kailua and the Maunalua
Fishpond.
Within the Koko Head Regional Park, a survey conducted in 1988 located one of
five sites identified in the 1930 archaeological study. This site, the Koko
Head Petroglyphs, was discovered in 1899 and is situated near the Lana‘i
Lookout. The petroglyphs have been extensively altered by erosion and vandals
since the 1930 survey, but nevertheless remain significant examples of
petroglyph art.
Similarly, in the Queen’s Beach area, approximately 20 sites were documented in
the 1930 survey. The features included fishing shrines, house platforms, and a
habitation cave. Although survey work done in 1984 found none of these sites,
the large quantity of sites recorded earlier make it likely that subsurface
cultural deposits and scattered human burials remain in the areas within and
surrounding Koko Head Regional Park.
West of Koko Head, archaeological sites consist of shelters, shrines, heiau,
burial caves, and burial cliffs. A system of heiau were once found often at
ridge elevations overlooking Maunalua Bay. While many have been destroyed,
these sites remain worthy of preservation and restoration when appropriate.
Many of the sites require a line of sight view plane to the next heiau as well
as to the ocean. Often elevations were used as kilo or fish spotting points
where a spotter would find fish schools and signal to the fisherman out in the
ocean. Kilo points include Kawaihoa Point and Hawai‘i Loa Ridge.
The Hāwea Heiau complex contains ancient walls, petroglyphs, terraces, a
coconut grove, and heiau and is located near the intersection of Hawai‘i Kai
Drive and Keahole Street. Pahua Heiau, located at the end of Makahū‘ena Place,
underwent restoration work during the 1980s. Besides its significance as a
fourteenth to eighteenth century heiau, Pahua Heiau is also noted as the Office
of Hawaiian Affairs’ first landholding.
Makani‘olu Shelter in Kuli‘ou‘ou is on the Hawai‘i Register of Historic Places
and is one of two such registered sites in East Honolulu. Makani‘olu is a pre-
contact cave in good condition and is a good representative of its class.
Makani‘olu is where the first radiocarbon dating in the Pacific was done. The
U.S. Coast Guard Makapu‘u Point Lighthouse is also on the National Register of
Historic Places.
There are also archaeological sites on undeveloped parcels located along cliff
faces and deep within the region’s valleys. These areas have not been impacted
by the tsunami of 1946 or by previous development activity. Some of these
areas, however, have been subject to intensive agricultural use in the past.
For example, a privately initiated pedestrian survey of surface and possible
subsurface material remains was conducted on a parcel located in Kamilo Nui
Valley. Three archaeological sites were identified: a single, isolated rock
pile feature; a small bedrock cavity containing a human molar; and a historic
wall which was probably a remnant of a larger complex. Of these sites, only the
bedrock cavity was recommended for in-situ preservation.
3.4.2   GENERAL POLICIES
General policies pertaining to historic and cultural resources are as follows:
•   Emphasize physical references to East Honolulu’s history and cultural
roots.
•   Protect existing visual landmarks and support the creation of new,
culturally appropriate landmarks.
•   Preserve and actively maintain significant historic features from earlier
periods.
•   Retain, whenever possible, significant vistas associated with
archaeological features.
3.4.3   PLANNING GUIDELINES
The treatment of a particular historic or cultural site should depend upon its
characteristics and preservation value. The following planning guidelines
should be used to implement the general policies and determine appropriate
treatment:
•   Preservation and Protection – Determine the appropriate preservation
methods on a site-by-site basis in consultation with the State Historic
Preservation Officer and cultural practitioners of the area.
°   Require preservation in-situ only for those features for which the State
Historic Preservation Officer has recommended such treatment.
°   Recommend in-situ preservation and appropriate protection measures for
sites that have high preservation value because of their good condition or
unique features.
•   Compatible Setting – Determine the appropriate treatment for a historic
site by the particular qualities of the site and its relationship to its
physical surroundings in consultation with the State Historic Preservation
Officer. The context of a historic site is usually a significant part of its
value and care should be taken in the planning and design of adjacent uses to
avoid conflicts or abrupt contrasts that detract from or destroy the physical
integrity and historic or cultural value of the site. Include sight lines that
are significant to the original purpose and value of the site in criteria for
adjacent use restrictions.
•   Accessibility – Determine the degree of access that would best promote the
preservation of the historic, cultural and educational value of the site in
consultation with the State Historic Preservation Officer, Hawaiian cultural
organizations, and the landowner, recognizing that economic use is sometimes
the only feasible way to preserve a site. Public access to a historic site can
take many forms, from direct physical contact and use to limited visual
contact. In some cases, however, it may be highly advisable to restrict access
to sites to protect their physical integrity or sacred value.
3.5   RESIDENTIAL USE
An overview of residential development in East Honolulu is presented below.
This is followed by a description of general policies and guidelines that are
to be applied to existing and planned residential developments.
3.5.1   OVERVIEW
With the establishment of the Community Growth Boundary to contain the spread
of development, housing capacity in East Honolulu should only be increased
through infill development. This will occur through development of the few
remaining scattered vacant parcels on the relatively level valley floors and on
previously developed ridges; through minor subdivisions of some larger
residential lots at scattered locations throughout the region; and expansions
of existing homes.
The development of ‘ohana units, or accessory dwelling units (ADUs), represents
a significant opportunity to provide smaller, affordable units as part of the
planned infill development. However, out of the approximately 1,800 eligible
parcels in East Honolulu, at the current rate of construction, there will be
approximately only 50 ‘ohana units or ADUs built in East Honolulu by 2040.
Increasing the number of ‘ohana units or accessory dwelling units has the
potential to:
•   Enable long-term rental housing opportunities affordable to low- and
moderate-income, gap group, elderly, and single person households; and
•   Assist in making more housing affordable by providing the potential for a
built-in (rental) income stream that could partially offset housing and
mortgage costs.
This would be particularly advantageous for ADUs within a convenient walking
distance (1/4 mile) of shopping centers served by city bus lines. This would
increase transit accessibility and reduce reliance on automobiles for
households in the ‘ohana units.
While the development of large vacant parcels through the normal development
process is readily identified and their effects are more immediately apparent,
the physical changes wrought by incremental intensification of residential use
in existing built-up neighborhoods through minor subdivisions and home
expansions will be slower and more dispersed.
Effective residential lot design standards that limit building height,
coverage, paving, and removal of landscaping are implemented through the Land
Use Ordinance (LUO). These should be reviewed and if necessary modified to
minimize the long-term cumulative impact of this gradual transformation, which
could otherwise adversely affect the character of existing neighborhoods.
3.5.2   GENERAL POLICIES
The following general policies may be applied to existing and planned
residential developments to preserve and enhance the quiet bedroom communities
of East Honolulu:
•   Accommodate a slight increase of housing capacity in East Honolulu by:
°   Development of new homes on the few remaining vacant lots designated for
low-density residential use.
°   Expansion of existing homes (especially ‘ohana units on eligible parcels)
in built-up residential neighborhoods.
•   Respond to the special needs of an aging population by providing future
housing opportunities for a variety of living accommodations which are
affordable to low- and moderate-income, gap group, and other elderly
households. These accommodations could include several forms; such as houses
that can accommodate multi-generation households, ‘ohana units, home
expansions, group living facilities, adult residential care homes, assisted
living units, and continuing care retirement communities such as the Kāhala Nui
assisted living units and the Hawai‘i Kai retirement community.
°   Encourage the development of medical care facilities, including, but not
limited to, facilities that provide palliative and hospice care.
•   Modify residential neighborhood street design to provide greater emphasis
on safe, accessible, convenient and comfortable pedestrian routes, bus stops,
bike routes, and landscaping with shade trees. Methods include, but are not
limited to: slowing travel speeds, less direct routes, adding and improving
crosswalks, and converting on-street automobile parking spaces into seating
areas and shaded landscaping. Revision of City street standards, subdivision
regulations, and use of traffic calming measures may be required in order to
support these policies and the policies identified in the Complete Streets
Design Manual (2016). Policies that emphasize Complete Streets adhere to the
following key principles:
°   Safety;
°   Consistency of design;
°   Context sensitive solutions;
°   Energy efficiency;
°   Accessibility and mobility for all;
°   Health;
°   Use and comfort of all users; and
°   Green infrastructure.
•   Create an inclusive and accessible urban or suburban environment that
encourages active and healthy aging, specifically age-in-place principles and
the Universal Design Standards that address or include the following:
°   Equitable, flexibility, simple and intuitive, perception information,
tolerance for error, low physical effort, and size and space.
•   Suggest the formation of a community-based redevelopment district that
would protect, adapt, and relocate residential and commercial structures,
public facilities, and natural and cultural resources vulnerable to sea level
rise impacts, including coastal flooding, inundation, and erosion.
•   Adopt maps and regulations to incorporate the guidance from the City
Climate Commission and the Hawai‘i Sea Level Rise Vulnerability and Adaptation
Report on vulnerability to coastal erosion and flooding and other science based
projections of climate change impacts into land use regulations and permit
processes.
•   Encourage new structures to be designed to withstand the anticipated
impacts of sea level rise over the building’s lifespan.
•   Enforce regulations relating to the operation of transient vacation units
in residential neighborhoods.
3.5.3   PLANNING GUIDELINES
A summary of the guidelines to implement the general policies are provided
below with additional discussion in the following sections:
•   Physical Character and Definition of Neighborhoods – Establish design
guidelines to minimize long-term adverse impacts of new infill development on
surrounding neighborhoods. Encourage use of sloped roof forms with wide
overhangs. Enhance the boundaries of existing neighborhoods through the use of
landscaping, natural features, and building form and siting. Focus neighborhood
activity on the local street, common pedestrian rights-of-way, or recreation
areas.
•   Transit, Bicycle and Pedestrian-Oriented Residential Streets – Encourage
bus, pedestrian, and bicycle travel, particularly to reach neighborhood
destinations such as schools, parks, and convenience stores, by seeking to
reduce the number of vehicle miles traveled per person and recognizing the need
for accessible design and safe travel conditions for elderly and disabled
people. Implement passive and active automobile traffic calming measures on
residential neighborhood streets and add street trees to provide shading for
sidewalks and bus stops. Implement the policies and guidelines in the O‘ahu
Bike Plan, Bike Plan Hawai‘i, the Statewide Pedestrian Master Plan, and, when
completed, the O‘ahu Pedestrian Plan.
•   Environmental Compatibility – Encourage energy-efficient features, such as
the use of solar panels for generating electricity and heating water, and
passive solar design, such as the use of window recesses and overhangs and
orientation of openings to allow natural cross-ventilation.
•   Low-Impact Development and Stormwater Retention – Follow low impact
development standards as properties are redeveloped to encourage the capture of
stormwater, sediment, and toxic pollutant runoff on-site and reduce pollutant
loads into downstream water bodies. Provide incentives for owners of existing
homes to develop rain gardens, permeable driveways, and other strategies that
hold stormwater on-site instead of discharging it into storm drains or streams.
3.5.3.1   Residential Development
Three categories of urban residential development are recognized by this Plan:
Single-Family Residential, Low-Density Apartment and Medium-Density Apartment.
All of these categories are found only within the Community Growth Boundary.
•   Residential – Dwellings in this category consist of single-family detached
and attached homes or townhouses with individual entries. Density of
development may range from 5-12 dwelling units per acre. Building heights
generally do not exceed two stories.
•   Low-Density Apartment – This category consists of predominantly two and
three-story townhouse complexes, stacked flats, or low-rise apartment
buildings; parking provision may comprise a separate story. Overall building
height should not exceed 40 feet. Buildings may have elevators and common
entries for multiple dwellings. Density of development may range from 10-30
dwelling units per acre. The Low-Density Apartment designation will be applied
only to sites that have already been developed in a manner that is consistent
with the density and building height guidelines for this category, and to
undeveloped areas zoned for the Apartment District as of the effective date of
this Plan.
•   Medium-Density Apartment – This category of residential development takes
the form of multi-story apartment buildings with densities in the range of 25-
90 dwelling units per acre. Medium-Density Apartment designation is applied
only to sites that have already been developed in a manner that is generally
consistent with the density and building height guidelines for Medium-Density
Apartment use, or are collocated on a site designated for commercial use and
proposed mixed-use development.
For all existing developments in the Medium-Density Apartment category:
°   Maintain building height setbacks and landscaping to reduce the direct
visibility of taller buildings from lower density residential areas and from
the street front. Possibly add low-rise accessory buildings within the height
setback areas to provide a visual transition from the high-rise apartment
building to adjacent areas. Building height should not exceed 90 feet.
°   Consider mixed-use zoning to permit limited commercial uses, primarily to
serve residents of an apartment complex and the immediate neighborhood,
depending on site characteristics and adequate justification for the need for
such commercial uses based on demand and convenience to residents.
3.5.3.2   Special Needs Housing and Senior Housing
Special Needs Housing comprises facilities designed for certain segments of the
population, such as elderly and disabled persons. Often such housing includes
special features, such as: congregate dining and social rooms; laundry,
housekeeping and personal assistance services; shuttle bus services for
residents; skilled nursing beds, and physical therapy clinics.
Group living facilities are allowed in all residential areas. Special needs
housing for the elderly can be located in apartment, apartment mixed use, and
business mixed use districts. Both types of facilities require a Conditional
Use Permit Major (CUP-Major), which requires a public hearing.
The guidelines for special needs housing and senior housing are as follows:
•   Proximity to Transit – Locate special needs housing near transit services
and commercial centers.
•   Universal Design – Apply the seven principles of Universal Design to
projects to support the seniors who wish to age-in-place, as articulated in the
Making Honolulu an Age-Friendly City: An Action Plan.
°   The seven principles of universal design, intended to make products or
environments accessible to everyone in society, incorporate or address the
following: equitable, flexibility, simple and intuitive, perception
information, tolerance for error, low physical effort, and size and space.
•   Density – Accommodate an allowable building density of 10-40 units per
acre, not including beds in skilled nursing facilities. Allow designated
affordable housing projects of up to 40 units per acre.
•   Design – Utilize building and roof form, orientation, location of entries,
landscape screening, and height to maintain compatibility with the existing
residential uses and scale.
•   Map – This land use is not specifically designated on Map A-2, Urban Land
Use as it is an allowable use inclusive in residential areas.
3.5.4   Other Uses in Residential Areas
The following uses are not specifically designated on Map A-2, Urban Land Use,
but are allowed in all residential areas: elementary schools, parks, churches,
community centers, child care centers, and public facilities and utilities
serving the area.
3.6   NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
This section provides an overview of nonresidential development in East
Honolulu followed by general policies and planning guidelines for the location,
expansion or renovation of such uses. Nonresidential use includes retail
commercial, office, service-oriented industrial, visitor accommodations, and
institutional uses.
3.6.1   OVERVIEW
East Honolulu has seven commercial centers. Hawai‘i Kai Towne Center, the
largest retail complex in East Honolulu, provides parking for approximately
1,010 vehicles and attracts shoppers from outside the region with big box
stores as anchor tenants.
Koko Marina Shopping Center, the second largest complex, includes ocean
recreation related services such as boating equipment and repair and dive tour
headquarters; restaurants and entertainment attractions; and retail shops that
serve the needs of both visitors and residents in the area. The other
commercial centers located in the Plan area include the Hawai‘i Kai Shopping
Center, Niu Valley Shopping Center, ‘Āina Haina Shopping Center, Haha‘ione
Valley Center, and Kalama Village Center.
The market areas for other commercial centers listed above are limited mostly
to the communities for which they are named, emphasizing food, household
products and personal services. In all of these smaller centers, additional
floor area could be developed within their existing land areas with more
efficient site design. However, demand for expansion has not been strong, and
given the minimal anticipated population growth, there is little prospect for
commercial expansion.
Only the first phase of Kalama Village, occupying less than a third of the land
area that had been designated for this project, has been developed, and it has
struggled to lease the developed floor area.
Some commercial activities in the Niu Valley Center are anticipated to be
displaced and their functions moved to nearby neighborhood commercial centers.
A religious community, which has moved into the shopping center, is diminishing
the original commercial function.
Expansion of Costco and the addition of a storage facility has increased the
commercial square footage in Hawai‘i Kai (Maunalua). Commercial zones in East
Honolulu appear sufficient in view of the projected population stabilization.
However, an opportunity still exists for additional commercial space within
existing commercial-zoned parcels.
There is approximately 468,000 square feet of office space supply in the Plan
area, a majority of which is located in Hawai‘i Kai (Maunalua). Historically,
East Honolulu’s vacancy rate for office space has been one of the lowest on
O‘ahu, with some of the highest asking base rent.
With the exception of the Japan-America Institute of Management Science
(JAIMS), which is a private institute, most of East Honolulu’s office inventory
is located within and adjacent to the Koko Marina Shopping Center in two
buildings, Hawai‘i Kai Corporate Plaza and Hawai‘i Kai Executive Plaza, that
are located along Kalaniana‘ole Highway makai of the Hawai‘i Kai Towne Center.
These areas provide a combined total of nearly 200,000 square feet of office
floor area.
Table 3-7 lists the locations and gross leasable area.
Table 3-7
Office Inventory in East Honolulu
Office Building Year Opened Gross Leasable Area
                            (Approximate)
Table 3-7
Office Inventory in East Honolulu
Office Building                                Year Opened Gross Leasable Area
                                                           (Approximate)
Japan-America Institute of Management Science  1972        257,000
(JAIMS)
Koko Marina Office Space                       1963        47,760
Hawai‘i Kai Executive Plaza                  1990        41,582
Hawai‘i Kai Corporate Plaza                  1987        39,355
‘Āina Haina Professional Building           1982        22,550
Koko Head Plaza                                1975        21,226
Hawai‘i Kai Medical/Office Center            1987        16,598
 
There is a probable demand for certain light industrial uses that are oriented
to the East Honolulu communities. Such uses could include, among others, small
warehousing facilities, and appliance and automobile repair shops. However, the
anticipated demand for space in this region is not sizable and the type and
scale of such uses that may be needed could be conveniently located in a large
commercial center with appropriate environmental and aesthetic controls to
promote compatibility with adjacent uses. Many of these types of uses are in
fact already located within some of East Honolulu’s commercial centers.
East Honolulu has only one resort hotel – the Kahala Hotel and Resort – which
was developed in the 1970s, and continues to serve visitors and residents.
3.6.2   GENERAL POLICIES
For purposes of this Plan, the various types of nonresidential uses are defined
and designated in four categories: Neighborhood Commercial Center, Regional
Town Center, Resort and Institutional. The policies pertaining to each of these
categories are as follows:
•   Neighborhood Commercial Center – The existing centers in ‘Āina Haina, Niu
Valley, Kalama Village, and Haha‘ione Valley will continue to function as
Neighborhood Commercial Centers. There is no need to designate additional land
for expansion of the Neighborhood Commercial Centers. In fact, market response
suggests that land that was originally designated for expansion of the site
area of Kalama Village Center should be redesignated for residential or mixed-
use (residential and commercial/office). Modest additions of floor area and
parking could be made to these centers through redesign of the sites they
presently occupy, if needed. These centers should be oriented to serve the
local community.
•   Regional Town Center – Create a “Regional Town Center” in the Hawai‘i Kai
Marina area by strengthening the relationship between the existing commercial
uses in this area, increasing the mix of uses and types of services and
activities in this commercial zone, and providing more convenient
transportation access and improved amenities and connections for people who
walk and bike.
•   Resort and Institutional – Prohibit new or expanded land areas for resorts
and institutional campuses. A new or expanded resort destination in East
Honolulu would be contrary to General Plan policy. The population forecast for
2040 in East Honolulu does not warrant major new schools, hospitals, or similar
institutions to serve these communities, and establishment of a large
institution in East Honolulu for the purposes of creating additional employment
in the region would be contrary to the General Plan policy to direct job growth
to the Primary Urban Center, ‘Ewa, and Central O‘ahu.
•   Mixed Uses in Business Districts – Allow low-rise, multi-family residential
use as a permitted accessory use above the first floor in the B-1 Neighborhood
Business District and the B-2 Community Business District.
In addition to the policies pertaining to the specific uses above, the
following general policy may be applied to existing and planned nonresidential
development:
•   Sea Level Rise – Protect, adapt, or relocate commercial structures, public
facilities, and natural and cultural resources vulnerable to sea level rise
impacts, including coastal flooding, inundation, and erosion as feasible.
3.6.3   PLANNING GUIDELINES
The following planning guidelines apply to neighborhood and community
commercial centers. They should apply to the expansion or renovation of
existing commercial centers, as well as to the development of new neighborhood
commercial centers.
•   Scale and Purpose of Neighborhood Commercial Centers – Neighborhood
Commercial Centers are located on 5 to 10 acres or less, within or adjacent to
a residential area, and whose primary access and frontage is from a collector
street. The center may have up to 100,000 square feet of floor area. These
centers emphasize retail stores, personal services, and public facilities
designed to serve the needs of the surrounding community; i.e., typically
residents within a one- to two-mile radius. If redeveloped, Neighborhood
Commercial Centers should take into account the potential impacts of climate
change and sea level rise over the life of the center. Building heights must
conform to development standards of the underlying zoning district.
•   Mix of Uses in the Regional Town Center – The Regional Town Center serves
as the regional hub for commercial activity serving both neighborhood residents
and visitors. This center comprises four components:
°   The Hawai‘i Kai Towne Center, given its size and location relative to
principal travel routes in the region, is the de facto focal point for regional
shopping and services. Enhance the Hawai‘i Kai Towne Center as a focus of
activity by offering a greater diversity of uses potentially including: long-
term apartment uses, public uses, and indoor small- to medium-size “service-
industrial” establishments.
°   The Koko Marina Shopping Center, while physically separated from the
Hawai‘i Kai Towne Center, plays a complementary role with a focus on marina and
ocean recreation services, specialty shops and entertainment attractions.
Enhance the Koko Marina Shopping Center as a recreation/entertainment oriented
commercial complex with the addition of more services for ocean recreation,
restaurants, and similar attractions.
°   The two office buildings are the third component of the Regional Town
Center. Convert excess ground or second-floor space in office buildings to
retail or other commercial uses if there is a demand for other uses.
°   The fourth component of the Regional Town Center is the Hawai‘i Kai
Shopping Center. Its size and tenant mix is similar to that of a Neighborhood
Commercial Center. The Hawai‘i Kai Shopping Center continues to play a
supporting role in the Regional Town Center through improvements in physical
linkages.
•   Resorts and Institutional – If redeveloped, the resort area in Kāhala needs
to take into account the projected impacts of climate change and sea level rise
over the length of the building’s lifespan.
°   Limit building heights generally to not exceed 60 feet for Institutional
use and 70 feet for Resort use. Height setback transitions will be provided
from street frontages, the shoreline, and adjacent residential areas.
°   Signage will be non-illuminated or indirectly illuminated. Appropriately
shield high-intensity lighting downward to minimize impact on adjoining or
affected uses and wildlife.
•   Physical Linkages and Accessibility – Incorporate site design and
facilities to promote pedestrian, bicycle, and transit access in Neighborhood
Commercial Centers and the Regional Town Center.
°   Provide at least one pedestrian access way from the public sidewalk or
other off-site pedestrian pathway to the entrance of establishments in the
commercial center that does not require crossing a traffic lane or parking lot
aisle or driveway.
°   Place parking and service areas behind the buildings or otherwise visually
screened from streets and residential areas.
°   Prioritize pedestrian and bicycle access as more important for the
Neighborhood Commercial Centers, while transit access is more significant for
the Regional Town Center.
°   Achieve efficiencies and other improvements in traffic and parking
conditions by redesigning or re-siting parking lots, driveways and walkways and
providing shuttle bus services between the components of the regional Town
Center.
°   Develop a pedestrian route along the marina and bridges to link the
adjacent components to provide convenient access between the two commercial
centers and enhance the recreational value of the marina.
°   Encourage businesses to develop evacuation plans and guidelines in the
event of a disaster.
•   Appropriate Scale and Architectural Style – Maintain consistency between
the building mass of a commercial center and its urban and natural setting.
°   Strive to have Neighborhood Commercial Centers reflect a residential
architectural character.
°   Allow the Regional Town Center to reflect a more varied, urban
architectural character. Future additions or renovations to the Hawai‘i Kai
Towne Center, in particular, will reflect a more positive orientation to its
Marina frontage.
°   Provide a landscaped screen of trees and hedges for parking areas in
setbacks with shade trees throughout the parking lot for aesthetics and
stormwater retention.
°   Use only low-level or indirect lighting, appropriately shielded and pointed
downward, which meets safety and security requirements in parking lots.
°   Ensure compatibility between the type, size, design, placement, and color
of signage and the context of adjacent facilities and uses.
°   Avoid blank facades on portions of buildings visible from a street or the
Hawai‘i Kai Marina by using texture, articulation, color, and fenestration to
create visual interest.
•   Environmental Compatibility – Encourage energy-efficiency features, such as
the use of solar panels for generating electricity and heating water, and
passive solar design, such as the use of window recesses and overhangs and
orientation of openings to allow natural cross-ventilation.
°   Incorporate resource conservation measures, such as water constrictors and
facilities for the sorting of waste materials for recycling, in the design of
new development.
°   Require the use of low-impact development standards for any significant new
construction or redevelopment, particularly in areas that may have large
impervious surfaces, in order to hold stormwater on-site instead of discharging
it into storm drains or stream channels.
°   Provide incentives for owners to develop rain gardens, permeable parking
lots and driveways, and other strategies that hold stormwater on-site instead
of discharging it into storm drains or streams.
°   Projects shall comply with the Clean Water Act.
3.6.4   OTHER USES IN NONRESIDENTIAL AREAS
Other uses in nonresidential areas are shown on Map A-2, Urban Land Use in
Appendix A as follows:
Elementary schools, churches, child care centers, fire stations, and other
public facility and utility uses serving the area are not specifically
designated on the Urban Land Use Map, but are allowed in all residential and
commercial areas, subject to appropriate zoning controls to assure
compatibility with surrounding uses. The general locations of existing larger
institutions, such as high schools, are indicated by special symbols.
4.   PUBLIC FACILITIES AND INFRASTRUCTURE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
The vision for East Honolulu will be implemented in part through application of
the general policies and guidelines for public facilities and infrastructure
that are presented in the following sections.
4.1   TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
This section describes the existing road, transit, and bikeway network in East
Honolulu as well as plans for future improvements. These elements are shown in
the Public Facilities Map in Appendix A. The section concludes with general
planning policies and guidelines to direct future transportation system
development in East Honolulu.
4.1.1   EXISTING AND PLANNED ROADWAY NETWORK
4.1.1.1   Existing Roadways
The only major roadway arterial in East Honolulu is Kalaniana‘ole Highway
(State Highway 72), which links the Primary Urban Center to the communities of
East Honolulu and is also a scenic, secondary route between Kailua/Waimānalo
and Honolulu.
Kalaniana‘ole Highway consists of six lanes (three lanes in each direction).
One of the lanes is designated as a High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) contra-flow
lane, thus providing four Honolulu-bound lanes during the morning peak between
West Halema‘uma‘u Street and ‘Āinakoa Avenue. This HOV lane is restricted to
buses, vanpools, motorcycles, and carpools. Other improvements made to this
section of the highway include left turn lanes, bus turnouts, improved traffic
control systems, and improved lighting.
Major roadway collectors in East Honolulu are those leading from Kalaniana‘ole
Highway into the ridge and valley neighborhoods. Important intersections
include, but are not limited to, ‘Āinakoa Avenue, Kalani Iki Street, West Hind
Drive, Hawai‘i Kai Drive, Keahole Street, and Lunalilo Home Road. Hawai‘i Kai
Drive runs parallel to Kalaniana‘ole Highway through parts of Hawai‘i Kai
(Maunalua).
American commuting habits, and therefore their parking needs, are changing.
People are increasingly leaving their cars behind in favor of riding transit,
ridesharing, walking, biking, and even scootering. Additionally, as the
population of East Honolulu continues to age, there will be fewer commuters
resulting in potentially less congestion during peak hours.
4.1.1.2   Planned Roadways
Planning and development of roadways are the responsibility of the State
Department of Transportation and the City Department of Transportation
Services. Roadway projects using federal transportation funds also involve the
O‘ahu Metropolitan Planning Organization (OMPO), a joint City-State agency.
In April 2016, OMPO published the 2040 O‘ahu Regional Transportation Plan
(ORTP). The 2040 ORTP recognizes the impact of the transportation and land use
cycle which has resulted in the urban fringe development pattern found in East
Honolulu. According to the 2040 ORTP, no major projects are planned for East
Honolulu’s roads. Therefore, it is not anticipated that there will be an
increase in pressure for development.
4.1.2   TRANSIT SYSTEM
East Honolulu is served by 11 bus routes. Bus service in Hawai‘i Kai (Maunalua)
is complemented by the Hawai‘i Kai park and ride facility on Keahole Street
across from the Hawai‘i Kai Towne Center. Park and ride facilities, which serve
as a central access point for buses and autos, are ideal for lower-density
areas such as Hawai‘i Kai (Maunalua).
There are no plans to extend or expand the number of routes, but the frequency
and capacity of transit service may be increased by switching to a hub-and-
spoke system, potentially freeing up existing buses. Additional service
enhancements are also possible by adding more bus stops, shifting to smaller
vehicles for upper valley neighborhoods, and making highway and street
improvements designed to make bus travel more efficient, convenient, and
comfortable.
4.1.3   BIKEWAY SYSTEM
As of 2013, O‘ahu had at least 134 miles of bikeways, including at least 40
miles of new bikeways since 1994. Bike Plan Hawai‘i (2013), the current State
master plan for bikeways, proposes another 13 miles for East O‘ahu. In addition
to the State’s Bike Plan Hawai‘i, the City and County of Honolulu Department of
Transportation Services also publishes the O‘ahu Bike Plan, published in August
2012, and updated in 2019. Both plans contain timetables for development
dependent upon construction feasibility (including right-of-way acquisition)
and funding. The O‘ahu Bike Plan defines the various types of bikeways as
follows:
•   Shared Use Paths – Shared use paths are two-way facilities that are
physically separated from motor vehicle traffic and used by bicyclists,
pedestrians, and other non-motorized users. Shared use paths are often located
in an independent alignment, such as a greenbelt or abandoned railroad right-
of-way, and are used for recreation, leisure, and commuting.
•   Protected Bike Lanes – Protected bike lanes (also known as separated bike
lanes or cycletracks) are an exclusive bikeway facility that combines the user
experience of a shared use path with the on-street infrastructure of a
conventional bike lane. They are physically separated from motor vehicle
traffic and distinct from the sidewalk.
•   Buffered Bike Lanes – Buffered bike lanes are created by painting a flush
buffer zone between a bike lane and the adjacent travel lane. While buffers are
typically used between bike lanes and motor vehicle travel lanes to increase
bicyclists’ comfort, they may also be provided between bike lanes and parking
lanes to discourage bicyclists from riding too close to parked vehicles.
•   Bike Lanes – Bike lanes provide an exclusive space for bicyclists in the
roadway through the use of lines and symbols. Bike lanes are for one-way travel
and are normally provided in both directions on two-way streets, and on one
side of a one-way street. When roadway width is limited and the road is sloped,
a bike lane may be provided in only the uphill direction. This is referred to
as a climbing lane.
•   Shoulder Bikeways – Shoulder bikeways are typically reserved for rural road
cross-sections. Paved shoulders provide a range of benefits: they reduce motor
vehicle crashes; reduce long-term roadway maintenance; ease short-term
maintenance, such as debris clearing; and provide space for bicyclists and
pedestrians.
•   Shared Roadways – Shared roadways are bikeways where bicyclists and motor
vehicles are expected to share the same travel lane. They are denoted by
pavement marking (sharrows) and/or signage. They are typically used in
locations with low traffic speeds and volumes or as a temporary solution on
constrained higher-traffic streets.
In East Honolulu, the existing bikeway system consists of a bike lane along
Kalaniana‘ole Highway from Kāhala (‘Āinakoa Street) to Hawai‘i Kai (Keāhole
Street); a signed shared roadway along Kalaniana‘ole Highway from Keāhole
Street to Lunalilo Home Road; a signed roadway along Lunalilo Home Road to
Hawai‘i Kai Drive; and a bike lane along Wailua Street between Hawai‘i Kai
Drive and Lunalilo Home Road. (see
Exhibit 4-1).
The State’s Bike Plan Hawai‘i proposes substantial additions to East Honolulu’s
bikeway system. Proposed signed shared roadways would be included on various
roadways extending into ‘Āina Haina, Niu Valley, Haha‘ione Valley, and Hawai‘i
Kai (Maunalua). A signed shared roadway is proposed along the Hawai‘i Kai
Drive-Kealahou Street corridor and along ‘Anali‘i Street and Po‘olā Street.
Kalaniana‘ole Highway from Lunalilo Home Road, past Hanauma Bay and Sandy
Beach, to Makapu‘u is recognized as a candidate for a shared-road shoulder
bikeway. Such a bikeway would take advantage of the State's scenic Maunalua-
Makapu‘u Scenic Byway.
   Exhibit 4-1: Bikeway System
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9270.png]
 
4.1.4   GENERAL POLICIES
The following general policies support the vision for complete streets, age-
friendly communities, and a multi-modal transportation system in East Honolulu:
•   Maintain East Honolulu’s role as a predominantly residential urban fringe
area with limited future growth by designing a transportation system that
provides:
°   Adequate and comfortable access between communities, shopping, and
recreation centers in East Honolulu.
°   Improved access to adjacent areas.
°   Adequate person-carrying capacity for peak-period commuting to and from
work in the Primary Urban Center for all modes of travel.
•   Reduce reliance on the private passenger vehicle through the implementation
of the findings and recommendations found in the Statewide Pedestrian Master
Plan, the Honolulu Complete Streets Design Manual, the Bike Plan Hawai‘i, the
O‘ahu Bike Plan, the O‘ahu Pedestrian Plan, and the Honolulu Age-Friendly City
Action Plan.
4.1.5   PLANNING GUIDELINES
•   Commuter Travel – For commuter trips the objective is to minimize the
impact of population growth on travel times and improve safety of all
commuters.
°   Provide improved services and facilities for express buses, such as more
frequent and more comfortable vehicles.
°   Expand improved park-and-ride facilities, including possible relocation and
provision of compatible accessory uses.
°   Promote ridesharing and vanpooling.
°   Increase person-carrying capacity on Kalaniana‘ole Highway for commuter
travel without expanding automobile rights-of-way by constructing facilities to
increase the safety and comfort of users of active modes of travel.
°   Decrease the use of single-occupant, or even zero-occupant, automobile
trips during commute times by:
-Converting regular automobile lanes into additional HOV lanes during regular
or rush hour times.
-Increasing the vehicle occupancy requirement of the use of the HOV lane.
°   Improve pedestrian and bicycle conditions along Kalaniana‘ole Highway to
improve safety and mobility, consistent with the Statewide Pedestrian Master
Plan.
•   Local Trips – For local trips, the objective is to promote alternative
modes of travel and less automobile travel.
°   Modify rights-of-way design in selected areas, particularly along
designated bike lanes and routes, principal pedestrian routes and street
crossings, and near bus stops. Change travel way widths or curb radii, pavement
texture, introduce appropriate signage, and provide generous landscaping for
both aesthetics and stormwater retention. Implement lane restriping during
repaving projects.
°   Design on-street and off-street parking facilities more efficiently to
encourage joint use of parking in ways that ensure public safety and better
manage stormwater, sediment, and toxic pollutant runoff.
•   Streetscape – Roadway design should be altered to encourage greater bicycle
and pedestrian use and support users of all ages.
°   Provide more convenient pedestrian paths within commercial centers, transit
stops, parks, beaches, schools, senior living facilities, and other high-
activity areas to encourage people to walk short distances for multi-purpose
trips instead of moving the vehicle to another parking facility.
°   Ensure street furniture is comfortable and does not impede sidewalk
movement. See the Complete Streets Design Manual.
°   Ensure all lighting is shielded and pointed downward to protect the night
sky, reduce light pollution, and protect wildlife, particularly in key areas
such as along the Kaiwi coastline. Any additional lighting or changes to
existing lighting should maintain or improve night sky visibility while also
creating places that feel safe and secure.
°   Discourage the use of gated communities and encourage existing gated
communities to improve adjacent streetscape and disguise the public-private
boundary.
°   Support the Safe Routes to School program and projects to improve
pedestrian and bicycle links around schools.
°   Preserve and enhance existing crosswalks. Install additional enhanced
crosswalks, especially near open spaces, parks, shopping centers, and other
public gathering places.
°   Include more landscaping along roadways to improve aesthetics, to manage
stormwater, sediment, and toxic pollutant runoff, and to filter oils and
sediment from the roadway improving downstream water quality.
°   Implement a pedestrian system around the Hawai‘i Kai Marina to improve
accessibility to various waterfront locations (see Section 3.1.2.6).
°   Implement traffic-calming measures in appropriate residential areas to
reduce average motor vehicle speeds and make vehicular routes less direct,
thereby increasing safety and enjoyment for pedestrians and bicyclists.
°   Design on-street and off-street parking facilities more efficiently to
encourage joint use of parking in ways that ensure public safety and better
manage stormwater, sediment, and toxic pollutant runoff.
•   Resiliency – Roadway design, particularly along Kalaniana‘ole Highway in
the vicinity of Kuli‘ou‘ou, should take into account the anticipated impacts of
sea level rise to ensure safe and efficient access between neighborhoods is
maintained.
4.2   WATER ALLOCATION AND SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT
4.2.1   OVERVIEW
In 1987, the State enacted the Water Code (HRS Chapter 174C) in order to
protect, control, and regulate the use of the State’s water resources. This
Code is implemented through the Hawai‘i Water Plan, which addresses water
conservation and supply issues on a statewide level by incorporating county
water plans and water-related project plans.
The O‘ahu Water Management Plan (OWMP), last published in 2008, is the City and
County of Honolulu’s component of the Hawai‘i Water Plan. The OWMP sets forth
strategies to guide the State Commission on Water Resource Management (CWRM) in
planning and managing O‘ahu’s water resources. The BWS’s Water Master Plan was
adopted by the Board in October 2018. The Water Master Plan is a comprehensive
“living” document that will guide future water system improvements.
Another component of the Hawai‘i Water Plan is the Water Resource Protection
Plan (2019). According to the CWRM, “the objective of the Water Resource
Protection Plan is to protect and sustain ground and surface water resources,
watersheds, and natural stream environments statewide. Such protection requires
a comprehensive study of occurrence, sustainability, conservation,
augmentation, and other resource management measures.”
The BWS has begun the development of the East Honolulu Watershed Management
Plan, one of eight district water management plans that comprises the O‘ahu
Water Management Plan. The East Honolulu Watershed Management Plan will detail
any new water source development or redistribution changes that would impact
East Honolulu’s water importation from Primary Urban Center or Windward water
sources.
In East Honolulu, potable water is primarily supplied by the BWS. Between 2013
and 2017, East Honolulu consumed about 6 percent of the island wide potable
water, a total 8.4 mgd, down from 9.3 in 2010. According to the BWS, by 2040
East Honolulu will continue to experience a similar average demand for potable
water of approximately 8.6 mgd due to continued conservation efforts and little
to no anticipated population growth.
Previously, BWS identified several potential well sites in the Wai‘alae East
and West aquifers that could provide sufficient water supply for East Honolulu.
The Wai‘alae West aquifer has a sustainable yield of 2.5 mgd, of which 2.797
mgd is permitted and 1.75 mgd is used. The Wai‘alae East aquifer has a
sustainable yield of 2 mgd, of which 0.79 mgd is permitted and 0.16 mgd is
used. The balance of available supply consists of low-yield, very expensive
wells.
For the near term, BWS does not have plans to develop any groundwater sites in
East Honolulu due to decreasing demand and economic feasibility. Other
management strategies identified in the OWMP include water conservation,
groundwater development in outlying areas, surface water development,
desalination, and water recycling. Although the BWS would be responsible for
the development of any new wells, the State CWRM has final authority in all
matters regarding administration of the State Water Code.
Projected decreases in rainfall due to climate change will also encourage
adaptations and redevelopments which conserve potable water and develop
alternative non-potable water sources.
4.2.2   GENERAL POLICIES
General policies pertaining to East Honolulu’s potable and non-potable water
systems are as follows:
•   Integrate management of all potable and non-potable water sources,
including groundwater, stream water, stormwater, and effluent, following State
and City legislative mandates.
•   Adopt and implement water conservation and stormwater management practices,
in the design of redevelopment projects and the modification of existing uses,
including landscaped areas.
•   Research and prepare for the potential impacts of sea level rise on ground
water aquifers and water supply infrastructure.
4.2.3   PLANNING GUIDELINES
•   Development and Allocation of Potable Water – BWS will coordinate
development of potable water sources and allocation of all potable water
intended for urban use on O‘ahu.
•   Certification of Capacity – BWS will certify that adequate potable and non-
potable water is available in order for a new residential or commercial
development to be approved.
•   Water Conservation Measures – Conserve potable water by implementing the
following measures, as feasible and appropriate:
°   Encourage the use of low-flush toilets, flow constrictors, and other water-
conserving devices in commercial and residential redevelopments.
°   Encourage the use of indigenous, drought-tolerant plants and drip
irrigation systems in landscaped areas and promote stormwater retention and
infiltration on-site.
°   Encourage timely leak repair for distribution systems.
°   Encourage the use of tertiary-treated recycled water for the irrigation of
golf courses and other landscaped areas where this would not adversely affect
potable groundwater supply.
°   Expand use of reclaimed water in State and County Facilities in accordance
with HRS 174C-31.
°   Encourage use of reclaimed water in redevelopment projects.
°   Require the use of low-impact development standards for any significant new
construction or redevelopment in order to hold stormwater on-site instead of
discharging it into storm drains or stream channels.
°   Provide incentives for owners of existing homes to develop rain gardens,
permeable driveways, and other strategies that hold stormwater on-site instead
of discharging it into storm drains or streams.
4.3   WASTEWATER TREATMENT
East Honolulu is divided into two wastewater service areas:
•   The western portion of the region, from Kāhala to Niu Valley, is part of
the East Māmala Bay service area. Wastewater from this service area is pumped
to the Sand Island Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) via the Ala Moana
wastewater pump station.
•   From Kuli‘ou‘ou eastward, sewage is pumped to the privately operated East
Honolulu Wastewater Treatment Plant.
4.3.1   SAND ISLAND WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT
The Sand Island WWTP had an original design capacity of 82 mgd average flow. In
2000, expansion projects were begun that will increase the daily average plant
capacity from 82 mgd to 90 mgd and will increase wet weather capacity from 210
mgd to 270 mgd. Some components of the collection system, including sewer lines
and pump stations, are at or close to 100 percent capacity. Between 2016 and
2040, the Department of Environmental Services (ENV) projects that nearly all
of the increase in wastewater flows at the Sand Island WWTP will be from the
Sand Island sewer shed.
Wastewater flow generated in East Honolulu, specifically from the Kāhala-Niu
Valley sewer shed, is only a very small portion of the total flow to Sand
Island and is projected to increase by less than 3 percent between 1995 and
2020. Therefore, the projected increase from East Honolulu flows will have a
negligible impact on capacity demand at the Sand Island WWTP. In order to meet
future demand throughout the area served by the Sand Island WWTP, the East
Māmala Bay Final Wastewater Facilities Plan (1993) recommends a combination of
increasing capacity and reducing flows via water conservation and
rehabilitation projects.
During resurfacing of Kalaniana‘ole Highway, a temporary emergency sewer line
was placed above ground within the median. This temporary line has been
replaced with a new permanent underground line.
4.3.2   EAST HONOLULU WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT
The privately owned East Honolulu WWTP opened in 1965 and is located on the
mauka side of Kalaniana‘ole Highway near Sandy Beach. The State Public
Utilities Commission requires that the plant accept wastewater from public or
private sources in the service area.
The plant primarily collects wastewater from homes in the Hawai‘i Kai
(Maunalua), Kuli‘ou‘ou, Paikō, and Portlock communities. Some wastewater is
also received from commercial users around Koko Marina. The plant serves about
37,000 people, or 74 percent of East Honolulu’s 2010 population.
The East Honolulu WWTP is a partial-tertiary treatment facility. The plant’s
design capacity is 5.2 mgd with average flows at approximately 4.5 mgd. The
plant processes about 80 gallons per capita per day and removes up to 97
percent of biological oxygen demand effluents. Pipes along Lunalilo Home Road
have been relined and the treated effluent is discharged via a 36-inch outfall,
1,400 feet off Sandy Beach at depths between 29 and 45 feet. The receiving
waters are classified as “Class A” (generally dry, open coastal water) and
“Class II” (marine bottom type) by the State Department of Health (DOH).
Biosolids from the plant are dried and taken to the Waimānalo Gulch landfill.
Flows from Kuli‘ou‘ou Valley are pumped via the Kuli‘ou‘ou Wastewater Pump
Station (WWPS) to the Hawai‘i Kai system under an existing agreement between
the City and East Honolulu Community Services, the private company that owns
and operates the Hawai‘i Kai system and the East Honolulu WWTP. The average
daily flow from the Kuli‘ou‘ou WWPS is about 0.50 mgd and is not projected to
increase over the next 25 years. An engineering study prepared by ENV in 1999
recommended that the current system for disposal of Kuli‘ou‘ou sewage flows
should continue with the wastewater pumped to the Hawai‘i Kai disposal system.
Some tributary collection pipes have been rehabilitated. A primary objective is
to prevent wastewater spills and provide adequate collection and transmission
capacity to accommodate projected high rainfall/peak flow conditions.
Under the State of Hawai‘i’s rules and guidelines for wastewater systems and
the treatment and use of reclaimed water, recycled water from the wastewater
facility can be used for irrigation purposes. A 2 mgd filtration and
disinfection facility has been built to produce tertiary treated R-1 rated
recycled water, which can be used without restriction for irrigation purposes.
The State authorized the Hawai‘i Kai Golf Course to use this recycled water
from the East Honolulu WWTP for irrigation. However, recycled water is not
currently being used for golf course irrigation due to its high salinity, but
this problem may be mitigated in the future, thereby enabling the use of
recycled water.
4.3.3   CESSPOOLS
In addition to the majority of homes that are connected to the two sewer
systems, there are many homes in East Honolulu which are served by cesspools or
septic tanks with leaching fields. Many locations that host cesspools in East
Honolulu feature critically narrow depths to groundwater and/or are located
within 200 feet of a shoreline.
Cesspools do not treat sewage effluent and inject raw sewage into groundwater,
which has the potential to spread disease and contaminate recreational waters.
The DOH has identified limited vertical and horizontal distances to water as
being one of the main factors that increase the potential of contamination.
This is because unsaturated soil provides the primary method of filtering
cesspool effluent. Further, as sea level continues to rise, this method of
effluent filtration will be progressively hindered as vertical and horizontal
distances to water decrease or are lost altogether.
State rules implemented in 2015 incentivize the upgrade of cesspools to sewer
or septic systems. However, in areas that feature narrow depths to groundwater,
septic tanks are known to buoy, which causes structural damage to the septic
system and mixing of effluent with surrounding waters.
4.3.4   GENERAL POLICIES
The following general policies apply to wastewater treatment in East Honolulu:
•   Connect all wastewater produced by urban uses in East Honolulu to a
publicly regulated or municipal sewer service system.
•   Implement, where feasible, water recycling as a water conservation measure.
•   Provide buffer zones and landscape elements between the East Honolulu WWTP
and adjacent residential designated areas in order to mitigate possible visual,
noise, and odor impacts.
•   Connect homes to one of the two existing sewer systems. Support conversion
efforts and upgrades to individual wastewater systems where connections are not
feasible.
4.3.5   PLANNING GUIDELINES
•   Water Recycling – Encourage or require, as feasible and appropriate, the
use of recycled water from the East Honolulu WWTP as a source for irrigating
golf courses and other uses compatible with the Board of Water Supply’s rules
and guidelines for the treatment and use of recycled water.
•   Private Operation of the East Honolulu WWTP – Unless there is a compelling
reason and a mutually satisfactory agreement between the City and the private
operator to incorporate this treatment plant within the municipal wastewater
treatment system, keep the East Honolulu WWTP under private operation and under
the regulatory supervision of the State Public Utilities Commission and the
State Department of Health.
•   Buffer Zones and Landscape Elements – Provide adequate horizontal
separations and landscape elements (e.g. berms and windrows) between the East
Honolulu WWTP and adjacent residential designated areas. Site-specific studies
should be conducted to determine the width of the buffer zone and specific
types of landscaping elements to use.
•   Water Quality – Reduce groundwater contamination that may be exacerbated by
climate change and sea level rise through cesspool conversion and wastewater
system improvements in East Honolulu.
4.4   ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS
Hawaiian Electric Company forecasts that increased demand will create a need
for additional island wide power generation capacity by 2020. Growth policies
in the General Plan direct significant residential growth to the Primary Urban
Center DP, ‘Ewa DP, and Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan Areas. East
Honolulu is designated as an urban fringe area and is projected to have limited
future population growth. As such, East Honolulu will not be a major source of
island wide future power demand.
In 2014 Hawai‘i became the first state in the nation to commit to having a 100
percent renewable portfolio standard by the year 2045. Part of this goal will
be achieved by reducing electric energy consumption statewide by 4,300
gigawatt-hours by 2030. Petroleum use accounts for two-thirds of the state’s
overall energy usage. Strategies shall focus on redevelopment projects that
increase residential densities in and around town centers which will help
minimize automobile use and thereby support people who choose to walk, bike,
and use public transit.
Antennas have been around as long as we have had radio and television services.
Antennas associated with communication purposes have grown tremendously,
especially since the U.S. introduction of mobile communication devices in the
early 1980s. While the telecommunications industry has provided more convenient
communication capabilities for individuals, it has also increased public
agencies’ ability to provide faster and more efficient response to those in
need, particularly on an emergency basis.
While the benefits of the telecommunications industry cannot be disputed,
communities have opposed the antennas due to aesthetic impacts, particularly on
public views and on the neighborhood character. Their visibility has increased,
especially where antennas are mounted on free-standing towers.
The public has also raised concerns about the environmental effects of
electromagnetic field exposure associated with radio transmissions, as
evidenced by the presence of antennas. However, the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) is responsible for evaluating the human environmental effects
of radio frequency (RF) emissions from FCC-regulated transmitters. The federal
guidelines specifically preclude local decisions affecting environmental
effects of radio frequency emissions, assuming that the provider is in
compliance with the Commission’s RF rules.
4.4.1   GENERAL POLICIES
The following general policies pertain to electrical and communications
systems:
•   Design system elements such as sub-stations and transmission lines to avoid
or mitigate any potential adverse impacts on scenic and natural resource
values.
•   Encourage co-location of antennas; towers should host the facilities of
more than one service provider to minimize their proliferation and reduce
visual impacts.
•   Mount antennas onto existing buildings or structures so that public scenic
views and open spaces will not be negatively affected. However, except for the
occupant’s personal use, antennas on single-family dwelling roofs in
residential districts are not appropriate.
•   Use stealth technology (i.e. towers disguised as trees), especially on
freestanding antenna towers to blend in with surroundings.
•   Relocation of electrical and other overhead utility lines underground
wherever feasible.
°   The design in undergrounding utilities must account for the potential
adverse impacts of sea level rise impacting increases in the elevation of the
water table and other groundwater inundation.
4.4.2   PLANNING GUIDELINES
•   Facility Routing and Siting Analysis – If any new or relocated substations
or transmission lines are necessary, site such routes or facilities to avoid or
mitigate potential adverse impacts on scenic and natural resources. (Although
these facilities are not shown on the Public Facilities Map, their routes and
sites are reviewed and permitted by administrative agencies of the City.)
Utility lines should be located underground wherever feasible.
4.5   SOLID WASTE HANDLING AND DISPOSAL
Solid waste collection, transport and disposal operations on the island are
provided by the City Department of Environmental Services, Refuse Collection
and Disposal Division (primarily single-family curbside pickup) and private
haulers (primarily commercial and multi-family pickup). In addition,
individuals can haul their own trash to one of six convenience centers around
O‘ahu. The collected refuse is ultimately disposed of either in a waste-to-
energy incineration facility or sanitary landfill. Incineration, accounting for
approximately 50 percent of the island’s waste disposal, is done at the H-POWER
plant, located in ‘Ewa. The City has instituted recycling and other waste
diversion programs in an effort to extend the useful life of this landfill.
The City is in the process of determining the site of a new landfill to
supplement or replace the Waimānalo Gulch Sanitary Landfill in ‘Ewa, O‘ahu's
only landfill for municipal solid waste. A Landfill Site Advisory Committee
identified and ranked 11 potential landfill sites in 2012, including Upland
Hawai‘i Kai, ranked 10th. Since the publication of the 2012 report, the Upland
Hawai‘i Kai area was purchased to be used for preservation and protection in
contribution to the Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline.
East Honolulu has no convenience centers where residents may dispose of large
bulky items, although curbside pickup of bulk items is available. The Ke‘ehi
Transfer Station will accept household rubbish and yard waste. For East
Honolulu residents, the closest facilities for the disposal of bulky items are
at Kapa‘a and the Waimānalo Convenience Center. There are no plans to locate a
convenience center, another transfer station, or a landfill operation in East
Honolulu. There is currently a recycling service station that accepts HI-
5 beverage containers and other non-HI-5 material near the Hawai‘i Kai Park and
Ride.
4.5.1   GENERAL POLICIES
The following general policy applies to solid waste handling and disposal in
East Honolulu:
•   Promote East Honolulu‘s role in the City's long-term efforts to establish
more efficient waste diversion and collection systems as waste management and
technological innovations occur. However, the region is not expected to
contribute significantly to future increases in O‘ahu’s solid waste management
demands and the only site in East Honolulu deemed suitable for the processing
or disposal of solid waste on an island wide scale has been purchased for the
purpose of preservation.
4.5.2   PLANNING GUIDELINES
Planning guidelines related to solid waste handling and disposal are as
follows:
•   Recycling Programs and Facilities – Promote the recycling of waste
materials by providing expanded collection facilities and services, and public
outreach and education programs.
•   Efficient Solid Waste Collection – Expand the use of automated refuse
collection in residential areas to ensure provision of adequate solid waste
collection. Have residents pay their fair share of all costs needed to ensure
provision of adequate solid waste collection facilities.
4.6   DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
The streams that drain the valleys of East Honolulu include Wai‘alae Iki
Stream, Wiliwilinui Stream, Wailupe Stream, Niu Stream, and Kuli‘ou‘ou Stream.
These streams begin in the Ko‘olau Range and discharge into Maunalua Bay. The
drainage basins are long and narrow and range from 0.3 to 3.2 square miles in
area. The upper reaches of the basins are very steep, while the lower reaches
are almost flat.
Several drainage ways have been prone to flooding during more intense
rainstorms. Niu Valley, Kuli‘ou‘ou Valley, and Haha‘ione Valley, in particular,
experienced severe flooding during the New Year’s Eve flood of 1987. Heavy
rainfall at the head of the valleys, combined with falling rocks and debris,
overwhelmed the capacities of the concrete-lined stream channels. Flooding has
been exacerbated by residents dumping items into drainageways as well as
overgrown vegetation. Along the Niu and Haha‘ione drainage ways, debris-clogged
bridges and culverts contributed significantly to the flooding problems.
A federal reconnaissance study found that the Wailupe Stream faces similar
drainage problems. According to the study, the Wailupe drainage basin’s
existing flood control system is unable to accommodate debris flows.
Furthermore, the existing stream channel is incapable of handling clear water
flood discharges greater than about a 20- year recurrence interval. Among the
preliminary improvement alternatives under consideration are channeling 8,900
feet of Wailupe Stream from the mouth to the existing boulder basin, enlarging
the existing boulder basin, and constructing a new debris basin in Kulu‘i
Gulch.
In 2003, the U.S. Senate appropriated $300,000 for a Wailupe Stream Flood
Control Study to be undertaken by the Army Corps of Engineers. In 2004, the
State House of Representatives approved $200,000 for flood control
Preconstruction Engineering and Design for Wailupe Stream. In 2005, the U.S.
House of Representatives approved $400,000 to support a study into reducing the
size of the Wailupe Stream flood plain. The Congressional Appropriations
Committee recommended $860,000 in 2006 for investigative planning of flood
problems related to Wailupe Valley Stream.
In the area between Kamehame Ridge and the Hawai‘i Kai Golf Course, a 40-foot-
wide concrete channel alters the natural drainage pattern. Water collected from
this area is carried along the drainage way that passes under Kalaniana‘ole
Highway and into Ka‘ili‘ili Inlet.
4.6.1   GENERAL POLICIES
General policies pertaining to East Honolulu’s drainage system are as follows:
•   Complete the proposed study of local flooding and drainage problems as soon
as possible. The study should include the potential impacts to drainage systems
from climate change and sea level rise.
•   Include a phased plan and implementation program for drainage system
improvements.
•   Promote drainage system design that emphasizes control and minimization of
non-point source pollution.
•   Keep drainage ways clear of debris to avoid the flooding problems.
•   Join with Federal, State, and City agencies and local landowners and
stakeholder organizations to create a Watershed Partnership to effectively
manage the East Honolulu ahupua‘a to retain stormwater and keep sediment and
pollutants from entering streams and being transported to the ocean.
•   Improve downstream water quality, particularly in sources leading to
Maunalua Bay, through the restoration of channelized streams and wetlands, the
installation of upland detention basins, implementation of low-impact
development standards, and the encouragement of planting and maintenance of
vegetation along drainage ways. Where possible, drainage ways should also
provide passive recreation benefits.
•   Identify repetitive loss areas from flooding and implement greater
restrictions to rebuilding in these areas.
4.6.2   PLANNING GUIDELINES
Guidelines to direct the maintenance and improvement of East Honolulu’s
drainage systems include:
•   Debris Basins – Conduct maintenance of boulder and debris basins at least
twice a year and after major storms to prevent the blocking of downstream
channels during major storm events.
•   Recreational Areas – Integrate planned improvements to the drainage system
into the regional open space network by emphasizing the creation of passive
recreational areas, and recreational access for pedestrians and bicycles
without jeopardizing public safety.
•   Drainage Improvements – Design and execute drainage improvements in a
manner which protects natural resource and aesthetic values of the stream to
the greatest extent possible, consistent with the guidelines expressed in
Section 3.1.2.4.
•   Drainage Management – Keep drainage corridors clear of debris to avoid the
flooding problems that have occurred in the past.
4.7   SCHOOL FACILITIES
Public schools in East Honolulu are part of the Department of Education’s (DOE)
Honolulu District. There are four public elementary schools in East Honolulu,
one intermediate school (Niu Valley Intermediate), and two high schools (Kalani
High School and Kaiser High School). 2015-2016 enrollment figures for these
schools show that they are operating under capacity (see
Table 4-1). Wailupe Valley Elementary School has closed while enrollment at
other elementary schools in East Honolulu has remained constant or declined.
For this reason, the DOE does not have plans for new school construction in
East Honolulu. Additional demand generated by future residential developments
can be absorbed by the existing facilities. If necessary, school boundaries
could be adjusted to allocate additional demand to schools that have the most
available capacity.
Although new public school construction is not anticipated for East Honolulu,
new demand will still create associated expenses. At some schools, such as Koko
Head Elementary, excess space is utilized for DOE offices. Reclaiming this
space for classroom use would involve renovation expenses in addition to
expenses related to relocating the DOE office personnel to other facilities.
Table 4-1
Public School Enrollment, 2018-2019
Facility Enrollment Capacity (2017)
Table 4-1
Public School Enrollment, 2018-2019
Facility       Enrollment Capacity (2017)
Elementary                
   ‘Āina 465na      664
   Haha‘io523        448
   Koko Head281        442
   Kamilo Ik385        404
Intermediate
   Niu Valle858        682
High School
   Kalani   1,422      1,015
   Kaiser   1,161      1,057
Total          5,095      4,712
Source: DOE, Facilities Development Branch (2019)
 
While the demand for classroom space has been declining in some sections of
East Honolulu, needs could change significantly, even with a relatively slow
rate of population growth if there is a future shift in household
characteristics as younger adults with school-age children replace or move in
with elderly residents in single family dwellings. To make more efficient use
of these facilities, as well as DOE fiscal resources, some of the unneeded
classroom space could be converted for temporary use as administrative office
space for DOE personnel. This largely reflects a strategy that DOE has already
adopted. The DOE can collect school impact fees from new residential
development to mitigate expenses related to a change of facilities.
There are also several independent schools in East Honolulu, listed in
Table 4-2, which are either religious-affiliated or based on a particular
educational philosophy. While such schools will probably continue their
presence in East Honolulu, they are not expected to increase significantly in
number or size. Holy Trinity School and Koko Head Prep and Technical Academy
have closed. The scale and location of existing campuses are generally
compatible with the residential character of the region.
Table 4-2
Private School Enrollment, 2019-2020
Facility pre-K K-8 9-12
Table 4-2
Private School Enrollment, 2019-2020
Facility                       pre-K K-8 9-12
Holy Nativity School           -     135 -
Honolulu Waldorf School        39    92  4
Star of the Sea Early Learning 190   159 -
Center and Elementary School
   Subtotal                 229   386 4
Grand Total                    619
Source: DPP Phone survey in October 2019 to the respective schools.
 
4.7.1   GENERAL POLICIES
General policies relating to school facilities are listed below:
•   Approve new residential developments only after the DOE provides assurance
that adequate school facilities, either at existing schools or at new school
sites, will be available when the development is completed.
•   Encourage more efficient use of DOE facilities with year-round scheduling.
•   Require developers to comply with DOE school impact fee requirements and
pay their fair share of all costs needed to ensure provision of adequate school
facilities for the children living in their developments.
4.7.2   PLANNING GUIDELINES
The following guidelines should be followed in planning and operating schools
in East Honolulu.
•   Adaptive Reuse – Encourage the DOE to continue its strategy of converting
unneeded classroom space to temporary use as administrative office space for
its personnel. This would make more efficient use of these facilities, while
maintaining classroom space if there is a future shift in household
characteristics as younger adults with school-age children replace, or move in
with, elderly residents in single-family dwellings.
•   Shared Facilities – Encourage the Department of Parks and Recreation to
coordinate with the DOE on the development and use of athletic facilities such
as playgrounds, play fields and courts, swimming pools, and gymnasiums where
the joint use of such facilities would maximize use and reduce duplication of
function without compromising the schools’ athletic programs (see also Section
3.3.3). The DOE should coordinate structural design of school buildings with
the Hawai‘i Emergency Management Agency and the Department of Emergency
Management so that these facilities may also be used as public hurricane
shelters capable to minimally withstand winds from a Category 3 hurricane.
•   New Facilities – Apply the guidelines for institutions in Section 3.6.3 if
a new public or private school campus or a significant increase in enrollment
capacity at one of the existing campuses is proposed.
4.8   CIVIC AND PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES
The City and County of Honolulu operates 10 Satellite City Halls island wide.
These facilities offer many basic services for residents, including bus pass
sales, bicycle and auto registration, and driver’s license renewals. A
Satellite City Hall to serve East Honolulu was established in the Hawai‘i Kai
Corporate Plaza in 2002.
The Honolulu Police Department (HPD) services East Honolulu out of the Main
station on Beretania Street. Police protection for East Honolulu is provided
largely through regular police patrols as required and is not directly related
to the proximity of a police station. A new substation will not necessarily
translate into an increased level of police presence or a more rapid response
to calls; therefore, no new substation is recommended.
The Honolulu Fire Department (HFD) operates fire stations in Hawai‘i Kai
(Maunalua) and Wailupe. The Hawai‘i Kai station is equipped with five-person
engine and ladder trucks and a rescue boat. The Wailupe station also has a
five-person engine. In addition, the Kaimukī station also serves parts of the
Kāhala area. HFD has no immediate plans to establish any additional new
stations in East Honolulu. As land use changes occur through development or
redevelopment of older areas, as the demographic profile of the region changes,
and as aquatic recreational activities increase, the facilities and staff
needed by the HFD to serve East Honolulu may warrant reassessment.
Ambulance service, staffed by the City’s Emergency Medical Services Division,
is currently provided from each of the fire stations. As regional recreational
activities along this eastern corridor of O‘ahu increase, emergency medical
services may need to be re-evaluated.
There are 12 emergency shelters and refuge centers located in East Honolulu
which double as public buildings and parks when an evacuation is not in effect.
East Honolulu residents are encouraged to shelter in place unless they are
located within an evacuation zone, in an area that does not feel safe, or as
otherwise instructed. Many emergency shelters are not rated to withstand the
effects of intense windstorms and hurricanes and require upgrades. Public
refuges also are not rated to withstand the effects of storms as they are
merely designated areas setup to gather people temporarily displaced by an
emergency situation.
Climate change and sea level rise are two threats to existing infrastructure
which can cause disruption in a variety of services. Sea level rise can bring
increased storm surges and consequent coastal erosion. Thus the impact of sea
level rise will be felt well above the new mean sea level. It is prudent to
analyze the possible impact of sea level rise and design projects and buildings
that account for risk of sea level rise and its associated threats over their
lifespan.
4.8.1   GENERAL POLICIES
The following general policy pertains to public safety facilities:
•   Provide adequate staffing and facilities to ensure effective and efficient
delivery of basic governmental services and protection of public safety.
Analyze the possible impact of sea level rise for new public and private
projects in shoreline and low-lying areas and require, where appropriate and
feasible, measures to reduce vulnerability and increase resiliency.
•   Identify critical public and private infrastructure and important cultural
and natural resources vulnerable to historic coastal hazards and impacts of
climate change, and, working with local landowners, stakeholders, and State and
Federal agencies, begin the work of protecting, adapting, or relocating the
highest priority projects.
•   Coordination between community organizations, businesses, residents,
homeowners, and City, State and Federal agencies determine how to:
°   Mitigate the anticipated threats from sea level rise;
°   Plan for future infrastructure improvements; and
°   Maintain existing connections, especially along Kalaniana‘ole Highway where
future flooding is anticipated to occur.
•   The DPR coordinates with the DOE on the development and use of athletic
facilities such as playgrounds, play fields and courts, swimming pools, and
gymnasiums where the joint use of such facilities would maximize use and reduce
duplication of function without compromising the schools’ athletic programs
(see also Section 3.3.3).
•   Provide funding to support the structural design of school buildings, such
as the cafeteria, gym, or music rooms, so that these facilities may also be
used as public hurricane shelters capable of withstanding Category 3
hurricanes.
•   Supplement the public emergency shelters by identifying private structures
that could be used as public shelters, like churches, meeting the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) standards.
•   Ensure accessibility for senior populations to public shelters, or to
prioritize the restoration of services to where seniors and other vulnerable
populations are sheltering-in-place.
•   Develop a Community Resilience Hub in East Honolulu that will serve
critical roles during and immediately following an emergency as well as enhance
social resilience ahead of a disaster.
4.8.2   PLANNING GUIDELINES
These guidelines are intended to carry out the above public safety policies:
•   Staffing Capacity – Approve new development only if adequate staffing and
facilities for fire, ambulance and police protection will be provided. If the
development of any new substation is warranted, potentially near an entry to
Hawai‘i Kai (Maunalua), there is a preference that it be co-located with other
emergency medical and transportation services.
•   Community Resilience Hub – Establish and operate a center in East Honolulu
in accordance with the recommendations of the O‘ahu Resilience Strategy. In
addition to post-disaster response and recovery operations, the centers will
provide year-round community services.
5.   IMPLEMENTATION
Implementation of this Plan will be accomplished by:
•   Limiting residential and nonresidential development to areas within the
Community Growth Boundary to support the vision for East Honolulu, and protect
agricultural and preservation lands in East Honolulu;
•   Initiating zoning map and development code amendments to achieve
consistency with the Plan’s vision, and provide the means to implement the
general policies and guidelines;
•   Guiding public investment in infrastructure through functional plans that
support the vision and policies of the Plan;
•   Recommending approval, approval with modifications, or denial of
developments seeking zoning, boundary and/or other development approvals based
on how well they support the vision and policies of the Plan;
•   Implementing the Plan priorities through the Public Infrastructure Map and
the City's annual budget process;
•   Evaluating progress in fulfilling the vision of the Plan every two years
and presenting the results of the evaluation in the Biennial Report;
•   Developing a network of Community Resilience Hubs; and
•   Conducting a review of the vision, general policies, guidelines, and
Capital Improvement Program (CIP) priority investments of the Plan every ten
years and recommending revisions as necessary.
5.1   PUBLIC FACILITY INVESTMENT PRIORITIES
The vision for East Honolulu requires the cooperation of both public and
private agencies in planning, financing, and improving infrastructure. The City
must take an active role in planning infrastructure improvements, such as land
acquisition and site improvements for parks in the Kaiwi coast, increase public
access to the shoreline and mountain areas, provide for pedestrian, bicycle,
and other transportation options, as well as improvements to wastewater and
stormwater management systems.
5.2   DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES
Projects to receive priority in the approval process are those which:
•   Involve land acquisition and improvements for public projects that are
consistent with the Plan vision, general policies, and planning guidelines;
•   Respect the intent and purposes of the agriculture uses as described in
Section 2.2.1 and delineated in this Plan;
•   Have adequate required infrastructure in place before or upon completion of
the project;
•   Analyze the possible impact of sea level rise for new public and private
projects near shoreline and low-lying areas and incorporate, where appropriate
and feasible, measures to reduce risks and increase resiliency to impacts of
sea level rise and coastal hazards;
•   Involve applications for zoning and other regulatory approvals that are
consistent with the Plan vision, general policies, and planning guidelines;
•   Are located on vacant usable parcels and are consistent with the vision of
this Plan as illustrated on Map A-2: Urban Land Use.
5.3   SPECIAL AREA PLANS
Special Area Plans provide more detailed policies and guidelines than the
Sustainable Communities Plan for areas requiring particular attention. The form
and content of Special Area Plans depend on what characteristics and issues
need to be addressed in greater detail in planning and guiding development or
use within the Special Area.
Special Area Plans can be used to guide land use development and infrastructure
investment in Special Districts, Redevelopment Districts or Resource Areas.
Plans for Special Districts would provide guidance for development and
infrastructure investment in areas with distinct historic or design character
or significant public views. Plans for Redevelopment Districts would provide
strategies for the revitalization or redevelopment of an area. Plans for
Resource Areas would provide resource management strategies for areas with
particular natural or cultural resource values.
While there are no existing or proposed Special Area Plans within the Plan
area, the State Department of Land and Natural Resources published a Master
Plan for the 354-acre Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline. These parks, shown in light green
on Map A-3: Public Facilities in Appendix A, will be designated as a Resource
Area, given their rich recreational, educational and scenic resources.
The formation of a community-based redevelopment district would assist in
preparing East Honolulu’s infrastructure for the anticipated impacts of sea
level rise and disasters and pay for implementing services and infrastructure
similar to the way the Waikiki Business Improvement District formulates plans
specific for the residents, visitors, and businesses in Waikiki. A community-
based redevelopment district would develop special area plans to: direct
development prior to and after a disaster, mitigate future adaptation costs and
damages anticipated from climate change and disasters, and provide a mechanism
for payment for needed services and infrastructure.
5.4   FUNCTIONAL PLANNING
Functional planning is the process through which various City agencies
determine needs, assign priorities, phase projects, and propose project
financing to further implement the vision articulated in the Plan. This process
may take a variety of forms, depending upon the missions of the various
agencies involved, as well as upon requirements imposed from outside the City
structure, such as federal requirements for wastewater management planning.
Typically, functional planning occurs as a continuous or iterative activity
within each agency.
Through the functional planning process, City agencies responsible for
providing, developing and maintaining infrastructure and public facilities, or
for providing City services, review existing functional planning documents and
programs. As a result of these reviews, the agencies then update, if required,
existing plans or prepare new long-range functional planning documents that
address facilities and service system needs. Updates of functional planning
documents are also conducted to assure that agency plans will serve to further
implement the Plan, as well as to provide adequate opportunity for coordination
of plans and programs among the various agencies.
Agencies with functional planning responsibilities (and representative plans)
include:
•   Board of Water Supply (East Honolulu Watershed Management Plan and O‘ahu
Water Management Plan)
•   Department of Budget and Fiscal Services (Consolidated Plan for Housing and
Community Development Needs)
•   Department of Community Services
•   Department of Design and Construction
•   Department of Environmental Services (Solid Waste Management Plan and East
Maunalua Bay Facilities Plan)
•   Department of Parks and Recreation
•   Department of Planning and Permitting
•   Department of Transportation Services
•   Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
•   Honolulu Emergency Services Department
•   Honolulu Fire Department
•   Honolulu Police Department
•   O‘ahu Metropolitan Planning Organization (ORTP)
The number and types of functional planning documents will vary from agency to
agency, as will the emphases and contents of those documents. A typical agency
may develop a set of core documents such as:
•   A resource-constrained long-range capital improvement program with
priorities. A “resource-constrained” program is one that identifies the fiscal
resources that can be reasonably expected to be available to finance the
improvements.
•   A long-range financing plan, with identification of necessary new revenue
measures or opportunities.
•   A development schedule with priorities for areas designated for earliest
development.
•   Service and facility design standards, including level of service
guidelines for determining infrastructure adequacy.
Other documents may also be developed as part of an agency’s functional
planning activities, such as master plans for provision of services to a
specific region of the island. In some cases, functional planning activities
will be undertaken in cooperation with agencies outside the City structure,
such as the transportation planning activities that are conducted in
association with the O‘ahu Metropolitan Planning Organization (OMPO).
Functional planning is intended to be a proactive public involvement process
that provides public access to information about infrastructure and public
facility needs assessments, alternatives evaluations, and financing. Outreach
activities should involve Neighborhood Boards, community organizations,
landowners, and others who may be significantly affected by the public
facilities and infrastructure projects or programs to be developed to further
implement the policies of the Plan.
The functional planning process should be characterized by opportunities for
early and continuing involvement, timely public notice, public access to
information used in the evaluation of priorities, and the opportunity to
suggest alternatives and to express preferences. The functional planning
process provides the technical background for CIP and public policy proposals
that are subject to review and approval by the City Council.
5.5   REVIEW OF ZONING AND OTHER DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS
A primary way in which the vision of the Plan will guide land use will be
through the review of applications for zone changes and other development
approvals. Approval for all development projects should be based on the extent
to which the project supports, conforms to and carries out the purposes of the
respective policies and guidelines of the Plan.
Projects involving significant zone changes will require an Environmental
Assessment (EA) or Environmental Impact Statement (EIS), which must include a
Project Master Plan when 25 acres or more are involved. This is submitted to
the Department of Planning and Permitting (DPP) for review and acceptance prior
to initiation of the first zone change application for the project.
Zone change applications for zoning to permit urban uses on parcels outside the
Community Growth Boundary or on parcels identified as part of the Open Space
Network and zoned as Preservation Areas or Agriculture Areas, and indicated on
Map A-1: Open Space, are not likely to be supported by the Director since
development of such areas is not consistent with the Plan’s vision and policies
to retain these areas in non-urban uses.
A project will be considered to involve a significant zone change if:
•   The application involves a zone change of 25 acres or more to any zoning
district or combination of zoning districts, excluding Preservation and
Agricultural zoning districts; or
•   The project is more than 10 acres and involves a change from one zoning
district to a Residential or Country zoning district; or
•   The project is more than 5 acres and involves a change from one zoning
district to an Apartment, Resort, Commercial, Industrial, or Mixed Use zoning
district; or
•   The project would have major social, environmental, or policy impacts, or
cumulative impacts due to a series of applications in the same area.
The Director of the DPP will determine, based on review of the EA, whether an
EIS (prepared in compliance with procedures for Chapter 343, Hawai‘i Revised
Statutes) will be required or whether a Finding of No Significant Impact
(FONSI) should be issued. In applying for a zone change, the applicant must
either:
•   Receive a determination from the Director of the DPP that the project does
not involve a significant zone change, or
•   Submit an EA or EIS with the zone change application.
Before an application for a significant zone change can be accepted for
processing by the DPP, the Applicant must either:
•   Receive a FONSI from the Director of the DPP for a Final EA, or
•   Receive an acceptance of a Final EIS for the project from the Director of
the DPP.
All EA/EIS required for a significant zone change should include a Project
Master Plan. The scope of the EA/EIS must cover, at a minimum, the specific
development associated with a particular zone change application, but at the
option of the applicant, may cover subsequent phases of a larger project.
Zone change applications for a project already assessed under the National
Environmental Policy Act, Hawai‘i Revised Statutes Chapter 343, Revised
Ordinances of Honolulu Chapter 25 (Shoreline Management), or a preceding zone
change application, will not require a new EA when the Director of the DPP
determines that the desired zoning and land use generally conform to that
described in the existing EA/EIS provided it meets the visions of the Plan.
5.5.1   ADEQUATE FACILITIES REQUIREMENT
All projects requesting zone changes shall be reviewed to determine if adequate
public facilities and infrastructure will be available to meet the needs
created as a result of the development. Level of Service Guidelines to define
adequate public facilities and infrastructure requirements will be established
during the Capital Improvement Program.
In order to guide development and growth in an orderly manner as required by
the City’s General Plan, zoning and other development approvals for new
developments should be approved only if the responsible City and State agencies
indicate that adequate public facilities and utilities will be available at the
time of occupancy or if conditions the functional agency indicates are
necessary to assure adequacy are otherwise sufficiently addressed.
The Department of Planning and Permitting, as part of its report on the
consistency of a project with the Plan vision, general policies and guidelines,
will review and summarize any individual agency’s findings regarding public
facilities and utilities adequacy which are raised as part of the EA/EIS
process. The Department of Planning and Permitting will address these findings
and any additional agency comments submitted as part of the agency review of
the zone change application and recommend conditions that the Council may
consider for inclusion that should be included in any Unilateral Agreement or
Development Agreement to ensure adequacy of facilities.
5.6   TEN-YEAR SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN REVIEW
The Department of Planning and Permitting should begin a comprehensive review
of the Plan ten years after adoption and should report its findings and
recommended revisions to the Planning Commission and the City Council. It is
intended the Community Growth Boundary will remain fixed through the 2040
planning horizon.
In the Ten-Year review, the Plan will be evaluated to determine if the regional
vision, general policies, guidelines and implementing actions are still
appropriate.
5.6.1   DEVELOPMENT PLAN COMMON PROVISIONS AND EXISTING LAND USE APPROVALS
This Plan will go into effect upon adoption by ordinance. At that time, the
revised Plan will become a self-contained document. Land use approvals granted
under existing zoning, Unilateral Agreements, and approved Urban Design Plans
will remain in force and guide zoning decisions unless requests for amendments
are submitted. At that time, the request will be reviewed against the vision
and policies of the Plan. Otherwise, development can proceed in accordance with
existing zoning, Unilateral Agreements, and approved Urban Design Plans.
Projects will be evaluated against how well they fulfill the vision of this
amended Plan and how closely they meet the policies and guidelines established
to implement that vision.
5.6.2   RELATION TO GENERAL PLAN POPULATION GUIDELINES
As required by Section 6-1508 of the City Charter, the Plan implements the
General Plan population distribution policies of the proposed General Plan
(Population Objective C) as follows:
•   Policy 4: Total population in the East Honolulu Sustainable Communities
Plan area will account for approximately 5 percent of O‘ahu’s total population
in 2040. This relatively small share of the island wide population is
consistent with Population Objective C, Policy 1 and Policy 2, which is to
facilitate the full development of the Primary Urban Center and direct
development toward ‘Ewa and Central O‘ahu regions.
•   East Honolulu’s projected share of island wide population in 2040
implements Population Objective C, Policy 3, which is to manage physical growth
and development in the urban-fringe and rural areas so that an undesirable
spreading of development is prevented and that the suburban and country
character of these outlying areas can be maintained.
The General Plan population distribution policies will continue to be used as a
guide to direct the pattern of growth and development in the Plan area.
Assessments of this performance will be reported in both the Annual Report on
the Status of Land use on O‘ahu and in the Ten-Year Review of the Plan.
5.6.3   REVIEW AND REVISION OF DEVELOPMENT CODES
Current regulatory codes and standards should be reviewed and revised, as
necessary, to maintain their consistency and effectiveness as standards to
guide attainment of the objectives and policies envisioned for all Development
Plan and Sustainable Communities Plan areas.
At the time such reviews are conducted, the following regulatory codes and
standards may warrant further review and revision to ensure achievement of the
vision for the East Honolulu region, as identified in this Plan, as well as
consistency with the Plan:
•   Land Use Ordinance – (Department of Planning and Permitting, pursuant to
Chapter 21, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu). Zoning code standards and the
zoning map for East Honolulu may need to be revised to further implement the
policies and guidelines in the Plan.
•   Subdivision Rules and Regulations – (Department of Planning and Permitting,
pursuant to Chapter 22, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu). Public right-of-way
standards used for subdivision and consolidation of land need to be updated to
reflect transportation policies and guidelines in the Plan.
•   Traffic Standard Manual – (Department of Transportation Services, July
1976, revised April 1979). Standards which are applied to local and most
collector/connector streets need to be revised to reflect transportation
policies and guidelines in the Plan.
•   State Highways Division Procedures Manual – (State Department of
Transportation, Vol. 8, Chapter 5, Section 4) These State highway standards
need to be reviewed to identify provisions which may conflict with the
transportation policies and guidelines in the Plan.
•   Complete Streets Design Manual – (Department of Transportation Services,
September 2016) These State and City standards summarize design treatments and
application for streets and intersections and identify what areas need to be
improved to implement the transportation policies and guidelines in the Plan.
•   Standard Details for Public Works Construction – (Honolulu Department of
Public Works with Kaua‘i, Maui, and Hawai‘i County Departments of Public Works,
September 1984) Engineering standards for the dedication of public works
construction need to be revised to reflect policies and guidelines in the Plan.
•   Storm Drainage Standards – (Rules Relating to Water Quality of the
Administrative Rules, Title 20, Chapter 3, and Department of Planning and
Permitting Storm Drainage Standards, August 2017) Standards to incorporate
grassed swales, detention and retention basins, and streamside vegetation need
to be created to further implement the policies and guidelines for open space
in the Plan.
•   Park Dedication Rules and Regulations – (Department of Land Utilization,
pursuant to Chapter 22, Article 7, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu) Regulations
need to be reviewed to determine if passive drainage systems which are designed
for recreation use should count toward park dedication requirements, especially
in cases where the area would exceed the amount of land that would be required
under current rules and regulations.
•   Wastewater System Design Standards – (Department of Environmental Services,
Volumes I: July 2017, and Department of Wastewater Management, Volume II: 1984;
Department of Environmental Services, Wastewater System Standard Details: July
2017; pursuant to Chapter 14, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu) These standards
and ordinances may require review to further implement policies and guidelines
in the Plan.
In June 2006 the Department of Planning and Permitting initiated a study, the
Development Plans Implementation Program, to comprehensively review the rules,
regulations and development standards of the City and State that directly
affect land development. The purposes of this study were to:
•   Review the pertinent sections of the City’s Development Plan and
Sustainable Communities Plan (DP/SCP) policies and guidelines that imply
regulatory change to rules or regulations affecting land development and how
they relate to the DP/SCP visions.
•   Identify the specific elements of the rules and regulations that may
require change in order to enable implementation of the various DP/SCP policies
and guidelines.
•   Prepare recommendations for revisions to specific rules, regulations and
development standards that will support DP/SCP implementation.
•   For DP/SCP policies and guidelines that are not addressed by existing City
and State rules, regulations or development standards, make recommendations for
the type of regulatory mechanisms that could address these discrepancies.
•   Identify alternative regulatory approaches used by other comparable
municipalities.
•   Prepare regulatory alternatives and an approach to facilitate a transition
from existing regulations to new or revised regulations.
The DPP has been updating the 2006 study with a new Streamlining the DP/SCP
Update Process that will be finalized in 2020. Recommendations from that study
may not be detailed in this Plan but will help to implement some of the
findings and recommendations. Recommendations of that study will be
incorporated in future Plan updates.
Revision and updating of the implementation tools was previously a part of the
1999 Plan, as well as several other DPs/SCPs. This revision and updating will
now take place within the study noted above and, when enacted, will provide an
improved regulatory framework to support the plans in fulfilling their
respective vision.
5.7   IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
This section provides a summary of the Plan’s policies and guidelines from
Chapters 3 and 4 to help understand how the Plan will be implemented.
This implementation matrix presents the policies and guidelines as generalized
and consolidated statements, and is not meant to be used as a complete summary
of the vision, policies, and guidelines to be found in the body of the Plan.
Chapter 2 should be consulted for the specific language of the vision elements.
Chapters 3 and 4 should be consulted for the specific language of each policy
or guideline.
The focus of the matrix is on showing how the vision, policies, and guidelines
in the Plan relate to existing Federal, State, and City and County programs,
who has responsibility for those programs, and what the agency’s role is in
implementing the Plan.
For each policy and guideline statement, the matrix identifies:
•   The regulatory code or program for effecting implementation,
•   Agencies with responsibility for implementation, and
•   The role of each agency.
Implementation of the policies and guidelines will depend on each agency's
priorities and availability of resources.
The DPP is either a regulator or an implementer for many Plan components, while
simultaneously acting as the advocate for implementation of all the Plan vision
elements and policies.
 
KEYS TO ABBREVIATIONS
Programs                                                                      Agencies                                                                 Roles
• AHF: Affordable Housing Fund Program
• BC: Building Code, Ch. 16, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu (ROH)
• BID: Business Improvement District,                                       • BFS: Department of Budget and Fiscal Services
Ch. 34, ROH                                                                   • BWS: Board of Water Supply
• CDBG: Community Development Block Grant, HUD                              • CWB: Clean Water Branch, DOH
• CFD: Community Facilities Districts,                                      • CWRM: State Commission on Water Resource Management
Ch. 34, ROH                                                                   • BID Assoc.: Business Improvement district Association
• CIP: Capital Improvement Program (State or City)                          • DCS: Department of Community Services
• Conserv. Dist.: State Conservation District, Ch. 205, HRS                 • DDC: Department of Design and Construction
• Conserv Plan: Soil and Water Conservation District Conservation Plan      • DEM: Department of Emergency Management
• CRMP: City Resource Management Program                                    • DES: Department of Enterprise Services                               • Implementer: Manages programs and projects to implement policies and
• CZM: Coastal Zone Management, Ch. 205A, HRS                               • DFM: Department of Facility Maintenance                              guidelines
• Drain MP: Drainage Master Plan                                            • DLM: Department of Land Management                                   • Advocate: Analyzes policies, programs, and projects. Issues recommendatio
• EA/EIS: Environmental Assessment/Environmental Impact Statement, Ch. 343, • DLNR: Department of Land and Natural Resources                       ns to decision makers based on how well the policies, programs, and projects
HRS                                                                           • DOA: State Department of Agriculture                                 implement the Plan 
• ESA: Endangered Species Act                                               • DOD: U. S. Department of Defense                                     • Regulator: Reviews permit applications and activities and issues permits,
• Flood Plan: Hawai‘i General Flood Control Plan, DLNR                    • DOE: State Department of Education                                   notices, violations, and penalties based on adopted regulations, rules, and
• HOME: Home Investment Partnerships Act Program, HUD                       • DOH: State Department of Health                                      standards
• Hist. Pres.: Historic Preservation, Ch. 6E, HRS                           • DOT: State Department of Transportation
• INRMP: Integrated Natural Resource Master Plan                            • DPP: Department of Planning and Permitting
• LID: Low Impact Development Standards                                     • DPR: Department of Parks and Recreation
• LUO: Land Use Ordinance,                                                  • DTS: Department of Transportation Services
Ch. 21, ROH                                                                   • ENV: Department of Environmental Services
• MBTA: Migratory Bird Treaty Act                                           • EPA: Environmental Protection Agency
• NHTF: National Housing Trust Fund                                         • HECO: Hawaiian Electric Company
• NPDES: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System                    • HFD: Honolulu Fire Department
• Ops: City Operating Budget
• ORTP: O‘ahu Regional Transportation Plan
• OWMP: O‘ahu Water Management Plan
• Park MP: Park Master Plan
• Ped. Plan: O‘ahu Pedestrian Plan
• Proj. Review: Project Review
• PRU: Plan Review Use                                                      • HHFDC: Hawai‘i Housing Finance Development Corporation
• PUC: Public Utilities Commission, Ch. 269, HRS                            • HI-EMA: Hawai‘i Emergency Management Agency
• ROH: Revised Ordinances of Honolulu                                       • HPHA: Hawai‘i Public Housing Authority
• Sewer CP: Sewer Connection Permit                                         • HUD: U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
• Shore Stbk: Shoreline Setback,                                            • LUC: State Land Use Commission
Ch. 23, ROH                                                                   • NGO: Non-Governmental Organization
• SLUBDA: State Land Use District Boundary Amendment                        • NOAA: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
• SMA: Special Management Area,                                             • NRCS: U. S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation
Ch. 25, ROH                                                                   Service
• SRTS: Safe Routes to School                                               • OCCSR: Office of Climate Change, Sustainability, and Resiliency
• SWQ: Storm Water Quality                                                  • OHA: Office of Hawaiian Affairs
• State Parks: DLNR State Parks, Division of Forestry and Wildlife Camping  • OMPO: O‘ahu Metropolitan Planning Organization
Permits                                                                       • OP: State Office of Planning
• State Trails: DLNR Nā Ala Hele State Trails and Access Program           • PUC: State Public Utilities Commission
• SUB: Subdivision                                                          • SHPD: State Historic Preservation Division, DLNR
• SUP: Special Use Permit                                                   • SOEST: School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology, UH
• SWIMP: Solid Waste Integrated Management Plan                             • SLC: Sea Level Center, UH
• TIP: Transportation Improvement Plan                                      • SWCD: Soil and Water Conservation District
• State Water: State Water Code, Ch. 174C, HRS                              • UH: University of Hawai‘i
• Water MP: Water Master Plan                                               • USACE: U. S. Army Corps of Engineers
• Water PTP: Watershed Partnerships Program                                 • USFS: United States Forest Service
• WPFPA: Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act                      • USFWS: U. S. Fish and Wildlife Services
• WUP: Water Use Permit/Well Permit, CWRM
• WQP: State Water Quality Plan
• WQ Rules: Water Quality Rules
• ZC: Zone Change
Policies and Guidelines Programs Agencies Roles
Policies and Guidelines                                                            Programs    Agencies     Roles
SEC. 3.1   OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT
                                                                                   SLUDBA      LUC          Regulator
Provide both passive and active open space to meet demand. Prevent development of  ZC
areas susceptible to natural hazards such as soil movement, rock falls, coastal    LUO         DPP          Regulator
erosion, and sea level rise.                                                       BC
                                                                                   Cons. Dist. DLNR         Regulator
                                                                                                            Implementer
3.1.2.1   Mountain Areas
Make access to mountain areas readily available, including parking areas, while    State                    Implementer
balancing trail demands and alleviating congestion through additional trails,      Trails      DLNR         Advocate
particularly in Mariners Ridge, Niu Valley, and Kamilo Nui Valley.                 State Parks
                                                                                   Subdivision DPP          Regulator
Encourage the ownership or transfer and maintenance of public access easements to  State       DLNR         Implementer
trailheads to conservation groups or the State DLNR.                               Trails      NGOs         Advocate
Create a City Resource Management Program (CRMP) to address the demands from                   DPR
outdoor recreational activities and the associated stresses to the natural and     CRMP        DLM          Implementer
built environment.
Re-establish and restore native Hawaiian plant, animal, and invertebrate species
and habitats in open space areas. Protect and identify endangered species, their   ESA/MBTA    DLNR
habitats, and other important ecological zones from threats such as fire, weeds,   Project     USFWS        Implementer
feral animals, and human activity. Control the number and range of feral animals   Review      USACE        Regulator
and other alien species. Plan utility corridors and other uses to avoid                        PUC
disturbances to areas with high concentrations of native species.
3.1.2.2   Shoreline Areas
                                                                                   CZM         OP           Regulator
Maintain Makai view channels along Kalaniana‘ole Highway between Wai‘alae and  SMA         DPP          Regulator
Makapu‘u.                                                                        LUO
                                                                                   Scenic      DOT          Implementer
                                                                                   Byways
Avoid obstructions to access such as walls and landscaping. Landowners along the   LUO
shoreline maintain any vegetation so as to not encroach into the public right-of-  SMA         DPP          Regulator
way, particularly as the shoreline erodes pushing the right-of-way inland.         Shore                    Implementer
Increase minimum setbacks for structures near the shoreline and implement other    Setback
management strategies to account for anticipated impacts from climate change and   Conserv.    DLNR         Implementer
coastal erosion.                                                                   Dist.                    Advocate
Improve, protect, and maintain lateral shoreline access along reaches of the beach CZM         OP           Regulator
from Maunalua Bay to Wai‘alae Beach Park with consideration given to the
anticipated impacts from sea level rise and coastal erosion.                       Scenic                   Advocate
Encourage citizen reporting of shoreline access issues to the DLNR Office of       Byways      DOT          Implementer
Conservation and Coastal Lands. Conserve and enhance a natural, dynamic shoreline
wherever possible.
Pursue opportunities to secure additional pedestrian rights-of-way from the        Ops         DDC          Implementer
nearest street or highway to the shoreline in sections that have high recreational Parks MP    DPR          Advocate
value, but no similar public access within at least a quarter-mile.
Recognize and codify mauka-makai shoreline access into the ROH.                    ROH         DPR          Advocate
Analyze the potential impact of sea level rise for new public and private projects             DDC
in shoreline areas and low-lying areas. If it is likely that sea level rise will   EA/EIS      DFM          Implementer
increase the risk of flooding during the lifespan of the project, incorporate,     Project     DPP          Regulator
where appropriate and feasible, measures to reduce risks and increase resiliency   Review      OCCSR        Advocate
to impacts of sea level rise. Incorporate assessments of all hazards into the land CZM         OP
development application process.
3.1.2.2   Shoreline Areas
Identify critical public and private infrastructure subject to sea level rise      SOEST       UH           Advocate
exposure and to mitigate these impacts through elevation, relocation, or other     CZM         OP           Regulator
adaptation measures.                                                                          OCCSR        Implementer
Consider forming a community-based redevelopment district, similar to a business                            Advocate
improvement district, that would protect, adapt, and relocate residential and      Redev.      BID Assoc.   Implementer
commercial structures, public facilities, and natural and cultural resources from  Dist.       DDC          Regulator
impacts from sea level rise and coastal erosion.                                   (CFD, TIP,  DFM          Advocate
                                                                                   BIPD, etc.)
Use the most current versions of the City Climate Change Commission’s Sea Level
Rise Guidance, Climate Change Brief, and the State of Hawai‘i Sea Level Rise     Resiliency
Vulnerability and Adaptation Report and associated Viewer for managing assets,     and         OCCSR        Implementer
reviewing permitting requests, and assessing project proposals. Map repetitive     Recovery    DPP          Regulator
loss areas, develop short and long-term resiliency and recovery plans, and develop Plans                    Advocate
and implement a “build back better and smarter” strategy to mitigate future damage
costs.
Develop design and construction standards that mitigate and adapt to the impacts   BC                       Regulator
of climate change and sea level rise.                                              Project     DPP          Implementer
                                                                                   Review
Implement the recommendations of the O‘ahu Resilience Strategy, particularly the             OCCSR
development of a community resilience hub in East Honolulu, increase coordination  Disaster    NGOs         Implementer
with neighborhood emergency preparedness groups, and create a liaison between City Plans       Various      Advocate
agencies and NGOs.
Clean up contaminated areas, particularly properties adjacent or directly upland               DFM          Advocate
of a stream channel.                                                               CIP         DDC          Implementer
                                                                                               DOH- CWB
Retain stormwater, sediment, and toxic pollutant runoff through the installation   CWRM
of linear landscaping features and permeable pavement along roadways and highways. Conserv.    DLNR         Implementer
Incorporate landscaped pathways and bikeways along stream channels and drainage    Dist.
corridors where appropriate and feasible. Increase ground absorption and reduce    NPDES       DOH- CWB     Regulator
the amount of permeable surfaces.                                                                           Implementer
Implement low-impact development standards to capture stormwater, sediment, and    LUO         DPP          Regulator
toxic pollutant runoff on-site and reduce pollutant loads into downstream water    BC                       Implementer
bodies. Provide incentives for owners of existing homes to develop rain gardens,   Bike Plans  DTS          Advocate
permeable driveways, and other strategies that hold stormwater on-site instead of  Ops         DFM
discharging it into storm drains or streams.                                       CIP         DDC          Implementer
                                                                                               BWS
Incorporate potential natural drainage improvements in park and preservation       CIP         DPR          Implementer
lands.                                                                             Park MP     DFM          Advocate
                                                                                               DDC
3.1.2.5   Natural Resources and Preserves
                                                                                   Monitoring  DLNR
Implement management programs in areas where intense human activity threatens the  Visitor     DPR          Implementer
sustainability of the resources.                                                   Limits      NGOs         Advocate
                                                                                   Admin. Fees
Conduct a biological study to determine if Rim Island 2 is eligible for            Bio Study   NGOs         Advocate
declaration as a recognized endangered species habitat.                                        USFWs        Implementer
                                                                                   Hazard      NGOs
Implement the findings and recommendations from the Kamilo Nui – Mariner’s CoveAssessment  USFS         Advocate
Firewise Hazard Assessment.                                                        Conserv.    DLNR         Implementer
                                                                                   Dist.
3.1.2.6   Marina
                                                                                   Conserv.    DLNR         Regulator
Improve facilities in support of boating. Encourage Best Management Practices      Dist.
(BMPs) for marina uses to mitigate degradation of water quality to both the marina BMPs        USACE        Implementer
and Maunalua Bay.                                                                  Grading     DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   Permits     DOH           
                                                                                   NPDES
Maintain or improve views across the marina, especially from Kalaniana‘ole Highway
and other major roadways. Install and maintain landscaping, where appropriate, to  Scenic      DOT          Implementer
screen areas of the marina not intended for public views and to intercept          Byways
stormwater, sediment, and toxic pollutant runoff from entering into marina waters.
Improve pedestrian access to and along the marina’s edge by way of a path for
pedestrians and bikes. Construct a pedestrian bridge between the Hawai‘i Kai TownCIP         DTS          Implementer
Center and the Hawai‘i Kai Shopping Center.
SEC. 3.2   ISLAND-BASED PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS
Maintain and enhance, to the extent possible, existing island-based parks by       Park MP     DPR          Implementer
utilizing land area that has not been fully developed for recreation use.                                   Advocate
Expand access to existing park lands by improving neighborhood linkages along      Park MP     DPR          Implementer
shared paths for pedestrians and bicyclists.                                       Bike Plan   DTS          Implementer
                                                                                   CIP         DDC          Implementer
3.2.3.1   Passive or Nature Parks
Maintain and facilitate access to the area’s important fishing resources.        Conserv.    DLNR         Regulator
                                                                                   Dist.                    Implementer
                                                                                   Conserv.    DLNR         Regulator
                                                                                   Dist.                    Implementer
Provide educational and passive recreation opportunities to preserve the Kaiwi                 NGOs         Implementer
coast.                                                                             Byway Plan  DTS          Advocate
                                                                                               DOT
                                                                                   Park MP     DPR          Implementer
Expand Sandy Beach Park to include Golf Course 5 and 6 properties, thereby         Park MP     DPR          Implementer
increasing East Honolulu’s active recreation areas.
Minimize adverse lighting impacts on aquatic life and avifauna, as well as adverse CIP         DOT          Implementer
aesthetic impacts, particularly from stationary point lookouts and along                       DDC
significant view planes.                                                           LUO         DPR          Regulator
Develop new walking/hiking trails within Koko Crater Botanical Garden for better   Park MP     DPR          Implementer
viewing of plant collections, but prohibit access to/from trails or paths outside
the garden leading from/to the garden. With community input, explore the
possibility of reinstating the shared use of the Koko Crater Botanical Gardens and
the Koko Crater Stables through a shared use agreement that includes a plan for    OPS         DES          Implementer
well-marked horseback-riding trails and the prompt cleaning of horse droppings by
stable employees. Continue to develop Koko Crater Botanical Garden as a
conservation site of global importance for rare and endangered species from
Hawai‘i and other tropical dryland areas.
Protect fragile natural resources, such as Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve, from       Park MP     DPR
overuse through continued management and control of visitor numbers and impacts    Conserv.    DLNR         Implementer
such as walking on the reef and sunscreen pollution.                               Dist.       NGOs         Advocate
                                                                                   Bio Study
Develop Wāwāmalu Beach as a nature park with the addition of demarcated parking              DPR
and installation of barriers to protect natural dunes, native vegetation, beach    Park MP     DTS          Implementer
rock, and beach.                                                                               DDC
Use non-potable water for irrigation of large landscaped areas in compliance with
the BWS Rules and Regulations. If non-potable water is either unavailable or       CIP         DPR          Implementer
infeasible, a report of the investigation should be coordinated and submitted to   Park MP     BWS
the Board of Water Supply prior to considering the use of potable water.
3.2.3.2   Active Recreation Areas
Locate areas designed for sporting events that attract high numbers of people      Park MMP    DPR          Implementer
along major collector streets or accesses that are separated as much as possible
from residential areas and wildlife habitats. Locate bus stops and loading areas
at principal entries and adjacent to convenient pedestrian accesses to main        CIP         DPP
activity areas within the park. Provide amenities and service facilities to        Ops         DDC          Implementer
accommodate “tailgate” picnics in parking areas for sporting events, including
shading canopy trees within the parking lot as well as nearby picnic tables and
outdoor grills.
Minimize the visibility of perimeter fencing along major collector streets, large  Park MP     DPR          Implementer
recreation buildings or structures, lighting, parking lots and other utilitarian
elements through plantings or other appropriate visual screens adjacent to         LUO         DPP          Regulator
residential areas and major roadways, particularly to soften the view of the park
from above at the roadside vista point along Kalaniana‘ole Highway.
Reduce light pollution by minimizing the number of lighting facilities installed   LUO         DPP          Regulator
and ensuring that lights are shielded and pointed downward.                        CIP         DDC          Implementer
Public recreation facilities should be available to users of all skill levels and  Park MP     DPR          Implementer
incomes, particularly Koko Crater Stables.                                                     DES
3.2.3.3   Golf Courses
Optimize the function of golf courses as passive drainage ways, maximizing their   LUO         DPP          Implementer
potential to retain or detain stormwater runoff.
Provide view amenities for adjacent urban areas, especially from well-used public
rights-of-way, parks and vista points.                                             SUP         DPP          Implementer
Use screening, landscaping, setbacks, and modifications to the course layout,      LUO
where feasible, rather than fencing or solid barriers.
Provide and maintain safe access through these golf courses, as necessary, for     Bike Plans  DTS          Advocate
regional continuity of pedestrian and bicycle systems.                                                      Implementer
Use of non-potable water for irrigation of large landscaped areas in accordance
with the BWS Rules and Regulations. If non-potable water is either unavailable or  Rules and   BWS          Regulator
infeasible, a report of the investigation should be coordinated and submitted to   Regulations              Implementer
the BWS prior to considering the use of potable water.
SEC. 3.3   COMMUNITY-BASED PARKS
Modify recreation facilities in existing parks to respond to changing demographic  CIP         DPR          Implementer
profiles or recreational needs.                                                                DDC
Co-locate parks with elementary or intermediate schools. Coordinate design,        Park MP     DPR
development and use of athletic, recreation, meeting, and parking facilities with  CIP         DDC          Implementer
DOE where efficient and effective.                                                             DOE
Incorporate and develop the Job Corps Center site for active recreational          Park MP     DPR          Implementer
facilities.                                                                        CIP
Design and site structural improvements and landscaping in community-based parks   Park MP     DPR
to create or add to the aesthetic value of these open space elements. Blend park   CIP         DDC          Implementer
boundaries through the transition of park space to paths or greenways.
                                                                                   Bike Plans  DTS          Implementer
Improve neighborhood linkages for non-motorized transportation modes.              Ped. Plan   DPR          Advocate
                                                                                               DDC
                                                                                   State
                                                                                   Trails      DLNR         Implementer
Develop additional trails and bike paths to balance trail demands across East      Conserv.
Honolulu and alleviate potential overuse at existing trails.                       Dist.
                                                                                   Park MP     DPR          Implementer
                                                                                   CRMP        DLM
SEC. 3.4   HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
                                                                                   ZC
Emphasize physical references to East Honolulu’s history and cultural roots.     LUO         DPP          Regulator
Preserve significant historic features from earlier periods. Retain significant    Project
vistas whenever possible.                                                          Review
                                                                                   Hist. Pres. SHPD         Regulator
                                                                                               OHA          Implementer
Determine the appropriate preservation methods on a site-by-site basis in                      SHPD
consultation with the State Historic Preservation Officer and cultural                         OHA          Regulator
practitioner. Require preservation in-situ only for those features for which the   Hist. Pres. Cultural     Implementer
State Historic Preservation Officer has recommended such treatment. Recommend in-              Practitioner Advocate
situ preservation and appropriate protection measures for sites that have high                 s
preservation value because of their good condition or unique features.
Determine the degree of access that would best promote the preservation of the     LUO         DPP          Advocate
historic, cultural and educational value of the site in consultation with the                               Regulator
State Historic Preservation Officer, Hawaiian cultural organizations, and the
landowner, recognizing that economic use is sometimes the only feasible way to     Hist. Pres. SHPD         Implementer
preserve a site.
Protect existing visual landmarks and support the creation of new, culturally      CIP         DDC          Implementer
appropriate landmarks.                                                                         DFM
SEC. 3.5   RESIDENTIAL USE
Establish design guidelines to minimize long-term adverse impacts of new infill    LUO         DPP          Regulator
development on surrounding neighborhoods; encourage use of sloped roof forms with  BC          NGOs         Implementer
wide overhangs; enhance the boundaries of existing neighborhoods through the use               (e.g. AIA)   Advocate
of landscaping, natural features, building form and siting; focus neighborhood                 DTS
activity on the local street, common pedestrian rights-of-way, or recreation       Complete    DDC          Implementer
areas; and encourage energy efficient features, such as solar panels, and design,  Streets     DFM
such as window recesses, overhangs, and orientation of openings to allow natural               DPP
shade and cross-ventilation.                                                       Ped. Plan   DTS          Implementer
                                                                                               DOT
Encourage bus, pedestrian, and bicycle travel, particularly to reach neighborhood  Age         NGOs
destinations such as schools, parks, and convenience stores. Recognize the need    Friendly    UH           Advocate
for accessible design and safe travel conditions for elderly and/or disabled       Action Plan Various
people. Implement traffic calming measures on residential neighborhood streets and Bike Plan   DTS          Implementer
add street trees to provide shading for sidewalks and bus stops. Modify                        DOT
residential neighborhood street design, where appropriate and feasible, to provide
greater emphasis on safe, accessible, convenient and comfortable pedestrian
routes, bus stops, bike routes, and landscaping, even if this requires somewhat
slower travel speeds, less direct routes and fewer on-street parking spaces for                DDC
automobiles. Revise City street standards, subdivision regulations, and use of     Ops         DTS          Implementer
traffic calming measures to support these policies and the policies identified in
the Complete Streets Design Manual. Implement the policies and guidelines in the
O‘ahu Bike Plan, Bike Plan Hawai‘i, the O‘ahu Pedestrian Plan, and the Statewide
Pedestrian Master Plan.
Allow designated affordable housing projects up to 40 units per acre if designed
in a manner compatible with the character of the surrounding residential           LUO         DPP          Regulator
community.
Improve management and enforcement of regulations relating to the operation of     LUO         DPP          Regulator
transient vacation units (TVUs) in residential neighborhoods.
Provide housing opportunities for a variety of living accommodations which are     AHF         HPHA
affordable to low and moderate-income, gap group, and other elderly households     CDBG        HHFDC        Regulator
such as multi-generation households, ‘ohana units, home expansions, group homes, HOME        HUD          Implementer
assisted living units, and continuing care retirement communities such as the      Section 8   DPP          Advocate
Kāhala Nui assisted living units and the Hawai‘i Kai retirement community.      LUO
                                                                                   Storm       DPP
                                                                                  Drainage    DFM          Regulator
                                                                                   WQ Rules    OCCSR        Advocate
                                                                                   LUO
Implement LID practices as properties are redeveloped to encourage the capture of
stormwater, sediment, and toxic pollutant runoff on-site and reduce pollutant      NPDES                    Regulator
loads into downstream water bodies. Provide incentives for owners of existing      Water PTP   DOH-CWB      Advocate
homes to develop rain gardens, permeable driveways, and other strategies that hold
stormwater on-site instead of discharging it into storm drains or streams.
Allow designated affordable housing projects up to 40 units per acre if designed   LUO         DPP          Regulator
in a manner compatible with the character of the surrounding residential community
3.5.3.2   Special Needs Housing and Senior Housing
Locate special needs housing within close proximity to transit services and
commercial centers. Apply the seven principles of Universal Design to              ZC
redevelopment projects to support the seniors who wish to age-in-place.            LUO         DPP          Implementer
Accommodate an allowable building density of 10 to 40 units per acre, not          CDBG
including beds in skilled nursing facilities.
Utilize building and roof form, orientation, location of entries, landscape
screening, and height to maintain compatibility with the existing residential uses LUO         DPP          Regulator
and scale.
                                                                                              DOH          Regulator
Encourage the development of medical care facilities, including, but not limited                            Implementer
to, facilities that provide palliative and hospice care.                           LUO         DPP          Implementer
                                                                                              NGO          Advocate
Adhere to the key principles of Complete Streets: safety, consistency of design,   LUO                      Regulator
context sensitive solutions, energy efficiency, accessibility and mobility for     Setbacks    DPP          Implementer
all, health, use and comfort of all users, and green infrastructure.
                                                                                  Bike Plans  DTS          Implementer
                                                                                   Ped. Plan   DDC
Create an inclusive and accessible urban or suburban environment that encourages   BC          DOT           
active and healthy aging, specifically age-in-place principles and the Universal               DPP
Design Standards that address or include the following: equitable, flexibility,    Park Plan   DPR          Implementer
simple and intuitive, perception information, tolerance for error, low physical               NGOs         Advocate
effort, and size and space.
SEC. 3.6   NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Allow low-rise multi-family residential use above the first floor in B-1 and B-    LUO         DPP          Implementer
2 zoned districts.                                                                                          Advocate
Prohibit new or expanded land areas for resorts and institutional campuses         LUO         DPP          Implementer
including major new schools, hospitals, or similar institutions.                   ZC
                                                                                   Project
                                                                                   Review      DPP
Incorporate site design and facilities to promote pedestrian and bicycle access to Complete    DTS          Advocate
Neighborhood Commercial Centers and transit access to the Regional Town Center.    Streets     DDC          Implementer
                                                                                   Bike Plan   Various
                                                                                   Ped. Plan
Maintain consistency between the building mass of a commercial center and its      Project
urban and natural setting.                                                         Review      DPP          Implementer
                                                                                   LUO
Include at least one pedestrian access way from the public sidewalk or other off-  Project
site pedestrian pathway to the entrance of establishments in the commercial center Review      DPP
that does not require crossing a traffic lane or parking lot aisle or driveway.    LUO         DTS          Advocate
Improve efficiencies in traffic and parking conditions by redesigning or re-siting Complete    DDC          Implementer
parking lots, driveways, and walkways and by providing shuttle services between    Streets     Various
components of the Regional Town Center.                                            Ped. Plan
Strive to have Neighborhood Commercial Centers reflect a residential architectural Project
character.                                                                         Review      DPP          Implementer
                                                                                   LUO
Allow the Regional Town Center to reflect a more varied urban architectural        Project
character.                                                                         Review      DPP          Implementer
                                                                                   LUO
Create a Regional Town Center in the Hawai‘i Kai Marina area by strengthening theProject                  Advocate
relationship between the existing commercial uses, increasing the mix of uses, and Review      DPP          Implementer
providing more convenient access.                                                  LUO
Parking areas should include a landscape screen of trees and hedges in setbacks
with shade trees throughout the parking lot for aesthetics and stormwater          LUO         DPP          Regulator
retention. Place parking and service areas behind buildings or visually screen
from streets and residential areas.
Use only low-level or indirect lighting, appropriately shielded and pointed        Project                  Implementer
downward, which meets safety and security requirements in parking lots.            Review      DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   LUO
Ensure compatibility between the type, size, design, placement, and color of
signage and the context of adjacent facilities and uses. Avoid blank facades on    LUO         DPP          Implementer
portions of buildings visible from a street or the Hawai‘i Kai Marina by using   ZC                       Regulator
texture, articulation, color, and fenestration to create visual interest.
Designate land around Kalama Village Center for residential or mixed-use           ZC          DPP          Regulator
(residential, and commercial/office).
Incorporate resource conservation measures in new development. Require the use of  LID                      Implementer
low-impact development standards for any significant new construction or           LUO         DPP          Regulator
redevelopment in order to hold stormwater on-site instead of discharging it into   ZC          OCCSR        Advocate
storm drains or stream channels. Provide incentives for owners to develop rain     WQ Rules
gardens, permeable parking lots and driveways, and other strategies that hold      NPDES       DOH-CWB      Regulator
stormwater on-site instead of discharging it into storm drains or streams.
Strengthen the relationship between the existing commercial uses in the Hawai‘i  Project                  Regulator
Kai Marina area.                                                                   Review      DPP          Advocate
                                                                                   LUO
Increase the mix of uses and types of services and activities in the commercial
zone. Offer a greater diversity of uses including apartment uses, public uses, and
indoor small to medium-sized “service-industrial” establishments in the Hawai‘i
Kai Towne Center. Enhance the Koko Marina Shopping Center as a recreation/                                  Regulator
entertainment oriented commercial complex with the addition of more services for   ZC          DPP          Implementer
ocean recreation, restaurants, and similar attractions. Reorient Hawai‘i Kai TownLUO                      Advocate
Center as a focus of activity by diversifying uses such as apartment, public, and
indoor small to medium sized service industrial uses. Convert some additional
ground or second floor space to retail or other commercial uses if there is a
demand for additional office space.
                                                                                   CIP         DTS          Implementer
Provide more convenient transportation access for alternative modes of             Project
transportation including improved pedestrian amenities and connections.            Review      DPP          Advocate
                                                                                   LUO
                                                                                   Subdivision
Allow low-rise, multi-family residential use as a permitted accessory use above    LUO                      Advocate
the first floor in the B-1 Neighborhood Business District and the B-2 Community    ZC          DPP          Implementer
Business District.
Building heights should generally not exceed 60 feet for Institutional use and 70
feet for Resort use. Height setback transitions should be provided from street     LUO
frontages, the shoreline, and adjacent residential areas. Signage should be non-   Project     DPP          Regulator
illuminated or indirectly illuminated. High intensity lighting should be           Review
appropriately shielded downward to minimize impact on adjoining or affected uses
and wildlife.
                                                                                   SMA
Account for the projected impacts of climate change and sea level rise over the    Shoreline   DPP          Implementer
length of the building’s lifespan.                                               Setback     OCCSR        Advocate
                                                                                   LUO
Implement low-impact development, particularly in areas that may have large                    DPP          Regulator
impervious surfaces.                                                               LUO         OCCSR        Implementer
Provide incentives for owners to develop rain gardens, permeable parking lots and                           Advocate
driveways, and other strategies that hold stormwater on-site instead of            CZM         OP           Regulator
discharging it into storm drains or streams.                                                                Implementer
SEC. 4.1   TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
                                                                                   Various     See plans    See plans
Implement the Statewide Pedestrian Master Plan, the Honolulu Complete Streets      Plans
Design Manual, the Bike Plan Hawai‘i, the O‘ahu Bike Plan, the O‘ahu PedestriProject     DTS          Regulator
Plan, and the Honolulu Age-Friendly City Action Plan.                              Review      DPP          Implementer
                                                                                   ORTP        OMPO         Implementer
                                                                                   TIP
Provide improved services and facilities for express buses, such as more frequent  CIP         DTS          Implementer
and more comfortable vehicles. Expand and improve park-and-ride facilities,        Ops         DDC          Regulator
including possible relocation and provision of compatible accessory uses.          LUO         DPP
Promote ridesharing and vanpooling.                                                Ops         DTS          Implementer
Increase person-carrying capacity on Kalaniana‘ole Highway for commuter travel
without expanding automobile rights-of-way by constructing facilities to increase
safety and comfort for alternative modes of travel.                                CIP         DTS          Implementer
Decrease the use of single-occupant, or even zero-occupant, automobile trips       Ops         DOT          Regulator
during commute times by: converting regular automobile lanes into additional HOV               DDC
lanes during regular or rush hour times, and/or increasing the vehicle occupancy
requirement of the use of the HOV lane.
Ensure street furniture is comfortable and does not impede sidewalk movement. See  Ped. Plan   DTS          Regulator
the Complete Streets Design Manual.                                                            DDC          Implementer
Preserve and enhance existing crosswalks. Install additional crosswalks,                       DTS
especially near open spaces, parks, shopping centers, and other public gathering   Ped. Plan   DDC          Implementer
places.
Roadway design, particularly along Kalaniana‘ole Highway in the vicinity of      CIP         DOT          Implementer
Kuli‘ou‘ou, should take into account the anticipated impacts of sea level rise Ops         OCCSR        Advocate
ensure safe and efficient access between neighborhoods is maintained.
Modify rights-of-way design in selected areas, particularly along designated bike  CIP         DTS
lanes and routes, principal pedestrian routes and street crossings, and near bus   Ops         DOT          Implementer
stops.                                                                                         DDC
                                                                                   CIP         DOT
Implement lane restriping during repaving projects.                                Ops         DTS          Implementer
                                                                                               DDC
Change travel way widths or curb radii, pavement texture, introduce appropriate    Project     DPP          Regulator
signage, and provide generous landscaping for safety, aesthetics, and stormwater   Review
retention. Design on-street and off-street parking facilities more efficiently to  NPDES       DOH-CWB      Regulator
encourage joint use of parking in ways that ensure public safety and better manage WQ Rules
stormwater, sediment, and toxic pollutant runoff with improved BMPs. Include more              DOT
landscaping along roadways to improve aesthetics, to manage stormwater, sediment,  CIP         DTS          Implementer
and toxic pollutant runoff, and to filter oils and sediment from the roadway       Ops         DDC
improving downstream water quality.
Provide more convenient pedestrian paths within commercial centers, transit stops, LUO
parks, beaches, schools, senior living facilities, and other high-activity areas   SRTS        DPP
to encourage people to walk short distances for multi-purpose trips instead of     CIP         DOT          Regulator
moving the vehicle to another parking facility. Ensure street furniture is         Ops         DTS          Implementer
comfortable and does not impede sidewalk movement. Support the Safe Routes to      Complete    DDC          Advocate
School program and projects to improve pedestrian and bicycle links around         Streets
schools.
Reduce light pollution’s adverse impact on wildlife and human health and its                 DPP          Regulator
unnecessary consumption of energy by using, where sensible, fully shielded         LUO         DDC          Implementer
lighting fixtures using lower wattage.                                                         DOT
                                                                                   LUO
Discourage the use of gated communities and encourage existing gated communities   Project                  Advocate
to improve adjacent streetscape and disguise the public-private boundary.          Review      DPP          Implementer
                                                                                   Subdivisio
                                                                                   n
                                                                                   CIP         DOT
Implement traffic calming measures in appropriate residential areas to reduce      Complete    DTS          Implementer
average motor vehicle speeds and make vehicular routes less direct.                Streets     DDC
                                                                                   Ops         DPP
SEC. 4.2   WATER ALLOCATION AND SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT
Integrate management of all potable and non-potable water sources, including       WUP         CWRM         Regulator
groundwater, stream water, stormwater, and effluent, following State and City      OWMP        BWS          Advocate
legislative mandates.
Adopt and implement water conservation and stormwater management practices, in the LID         DPP          Implementer
design of redevelopment projects and the modification of existing uses, including  NPDES       DFM          Advocate
landscaped areas. Have the BWS certify that adequate potable and non-potable water WQ Rules    DOH-CWB
is available in order for a new residential or commercial development to be        Water PTP   NGOs         Advocate
approved. Encourage the use of low flush toilets, flow constrictors, and other     Project     BWS          Regulator
water conserving devices in commercial and residential redevelopments. Encourage   Review      ENV          Implementer
the use of indigenous, drought-tolerant plant material and drip irrigation systems
in landscaped areas and promote stormwater retention and infiltration. Encourage
timely leak repair for distribution systems. Provide incentives for owners of
existing homes to develop rain gardens, permeable driveways, and other strategies  BC          DPP          Regulator
that hold stormwater on-site instead of discharging it into storm drains or
streams. Require the use of Low-Impact Development standards for any significant
new construction or redevelopment in order to hold stormwater on-site instead of
discharging it into storm drains or stream channels.
Encourage the use of tertiary-treated recycled water for the irrigation of golf    WQP         DOH          Regulator
courses and other landscaped areas where this would not adversely affect potable   Project     BWS          Implementer
groundwater supply.                                                                Review      ENV
                                                                                               BWS
Research and prepare for the potential impacts of sea level rise on ground water              OCCSR        Implementer
aquifers and water supply infrastructure.                                                      OP
                                                                                               DDC
Expand use of reclaimed water in State and County Facilities in accordance with    CIP         DDC          Implementer
HRS 174C-31. Encourage use of reclaimed water in redevelopment projects.           BC          DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   LUO
SEC. 4.3   WASTEWATER TREATMENT
Connect all wastewater produced by urban uses to a publicly regulated or municipal Sewer CP    ENV          Regulator
sewer service system.                                                              CIP         DDC          Implementer
                                                                                   LUO         DPP
Keep the East Honolulu WWTP under private operation and regulatory supervision of  PUC         PUC          Regulator
the State PUC and the State DOH.                                                               DOH
Implement, where feasible, water recycling as a water conservation measure. Use    WQ Plan     DOH          Regulator
recycled water from the East Honolulu WWTP as a source for irrigating golf courses Project
and other uses compatible with the Board of Water Supply’s rules and guidelines  Review      BWS          Implementer
for the treatment and use of recycled water.
                                                                                   WP          DOH          Regulator
Provide buffer zones and landscape elements between the East Honolulu WWTP and     WQ Plan
adjacent residential designated areas in order to mitigate possible visual, noise, Ops         ENV          Implementer
and odor impacts.                                                                  CIP
                                                                                   Clean Air                
                                                                                   Noise Regs.
Connect homes to one of the two existing sewer systems. Support conversion efforts Wastewate r DOH          Implementer
and upgrades to individual wastewater systems where connections are not feasible.                           Regulator
SEC. 4.4   ELECTRIC POWER DEVELOPMENT
Design system elements such as sub-stations and transmission lines to avoid or     CIP         HECO
mitigate any potential adverse impacts on scenic and natural resource values and   LUO         DPP          Implementer
the potential impacts of sea level rise and associated impacts of the rising water Conserv.    DLNR         Regulator
table and groundwater inundation.                                                  Dist.       OCCSR
SEC. 4.5   SOLID WASTE HANDLING AND DISPOSAL
Provide expanded collection facilities and services including automated refuse     Ops         ENV          Implementer
collection in residential areas.
Establish public outreach and education programs.                                  SWIMP       ENV          Implementer
Have residents pay their fair share of all costs needed to ensure provision of
adequate solid waste collection facilities.
SEC. 4.6 DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
Complete the proposed study of local flooding and drainage problems as soon as     Flooding    NGOs         Advocate
possible.                                                                          Study       DLNR         Implementer
                                                                                   Water PTP
Include a phased plan and implementation program for drainage system improvements. Ops         DFM          Implementer
Promote drainage system design that emphasizes control and minimization of non-    NPDES       DOH-CWB      Implementer
point source pollution.
Restore channelized streams and wetlands.                                          CIP         DDC          Implementer
                                                                                   Ops         DFM
Install upland detention basins in upper valleys above urbanized areas and                     DDC
properly maintain them in order to prevent the blocking of downstream channels     CIP         DFM          Implementer
during major storm events. Keep drainage ways clear of debris to avoid the         Ops         DLNR
flooding problems that have occurred in the past.
                                                                                   Project                  Implementer
Implement Low-Impact Development (LID) standards.                                  Review      DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   Subdivision
                                                                                   LUO         DPP          Regulator
Encourage planting and maintenance of vegetation along drainage ways.              Project     OCCSR        Implementer
                                                                                   Review      DFM
Improve and protect natural resources and aesthetic values of the stream.                     DLNR         Advocate
Identify repetitive loss areas from flooding and implement greater restrictions to Flood Plan  OCCSR        Implementer
rebuilding in these areas.                                                                     DEM          Advocate
                                                                                   Project     DDC          Implementer
Integrate planned improvements to the drainage system into the regional open space Review      DPP          Regulator
network by emphasizing the creation of passive recreational areas, and             Bike Plan   DTS          Implementer
recreational access for pedestrians and bicycles without jeopardizing public                   DOT          Advocate
safety.                                                                            Park MP                  Implementer
                                                                                   Project     DPR          Regulator
                                                                                   Review
SEC. 4.7   SCHOOL FACILITIES
Approve new residential developments only after the DOE provides assurance that    Project     DPP          Implementer
adequate school facilities will be available when the development is completed.    Review      DOE
Require developers to comply with DOE school impact fee requirements and pay their Impact Fees DOE          Implementer
fair share of all costs needed to ensure provision of adequate school facilities   LUO                      Regulator
for the children living in their developments.                                     ZC          DPP          Implementer
                                                                                   BC
Encourage DPR and DOE to coordinate joint development and use of athletic          Park MP     DPR          Implementer
facilities such as playgrounds, play fields and courts, swimming pools, and
gymnasiums to maximize use and reduce duplication of function without compromising Ops         DOE          Implementer
school athletic programs.
Encourage the DOE to make more efficient use of their facilities with year-round   Ops         DOE          Implementer
scheduling.
Design school buildings and coordinate with the Department of Emergency Management             DOE
so that these facilities may also be used as public shelters capable of            CIP         DEM          Implementer
withstanding Category 3 hurricanes.                                                            HI-EMA
SEC. 4.8   CIVIC AND PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES
                                                                                   CIP         DEM
Approve new development only if adequate staffing and facilities for fire,         Ops         HFD
ambulance and police protection will be provided. If the development of any new    Project     HPD          Implementer
substation is warranted, potentially near an entry to Hawai‘i Kai (Maunalua), co-Review      EMS
locate it with other emergency medical and transportation services.                Subdivisio  DPP
                                                                                   n
Ensure accessibility for senior populations to public shelters, or to prioritize   Disaster    DEM          Implementer
the restoration of services to where seniors and other vulnerable populations are  Plan        NGOs         Advocate
sheltering-in-place.
Develop a Community Resilience Hub in East Honolulu that will serve critical roles Disaster    OCCSR
during and immediately following an emergency as well as enhance social resilience Plan        DEM          Implementer
ahead of a disaster.                                                               Ops         DPR          Advocate
                                                                                               DLM
                                                                                               DPP
                                                                                               DDC
                                                                                               DEM
Analyze the possible impact of sea level rise for new public and private projects              DLM
in shoreline areas and low-lying areas and require measures to reduce              Disaster    DLNR
vulnerability and increase resiliency. Identify critical public and private        Plan        DOT
infrastructure and important cultural and natural resources vulnerable to historic LUO         ENV          Implementer
coastal hazards and impacts of climate change, and, working with local landowners, SMA         DTS          Advocate
stakeholders, and State and Federal agencies, begin the work of protecting,        Hist. Pres. DOE
adapting, or relocating the highest priority projects.                             Ops         PUC
                                                                                               HFD
                                                                                               HPD
                                                                                               EMS
                                                                                               OCCSR
 
APPENDIX A: CONCEPTUAL MAPS
This appendix includes the three primary conceptual maps used to illustrate the
vision for East Honolulu’s future development. The maps include:
Map A-1: Open Space A-13
Map A-2: Urban Land Use A-15
Map A-3: Public Facilities A-17
These maps illustrate the long-range vision of the future of the Plan area and
the major land use, open space, and public facility policies that are
articulated in the Plan. In using these maps, the reader should keep in mind
that:
1.   These maps are general and conceptual, and are not intended to be used to
determine specific land use boundaries. Such boundaries are to be determined
during the review of specific land use or public facilities investment
decisions, and their exact locations are to be guided by the vision and
policies of this Plan.
2.   These maps illustrate the Plan's vision, policies and guidelines that are
presented in Chapters 2, 3, and 4. These policy statements and guidelines are
considered the most important elements of the Plan.
The maps are considered illustrations of the policies and guidelines. However,
the text should be consulted to determine the appropriate application of the
Plan vision, policies, and guidelines for any specific project or location. In
cases of disagreement, the text should prevail over the map depiction.
A brief explanation of the terms used in each of these maps follows.
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Descriptions of elements common to each of the three maps are presented in the
following section.
Descriptions of elements specific to each map (A-1: Open Space, A-2: Urban Land
Use, and A-3: Public Facilities) are presented in separate sections for each
map, which follow the section on Common Elements.
COMMON ELEMENTS
Agriculture Areas
Agricultural lands, previously lands within the Agricultural Boundary, are
established to protect the region’s agricultural lands for their economic and
open space values. The primary use of all lands within Agriculture areas are
agriculture or directly supportive of the agriculture industry.
Two areas in Hawai‘i Kai (Maunalua) are identified as agricultural lands and
located outside the Community Growth Boundary to recognize active agricultural
lots seeking a continuation of their use (i.e., the farm lot subdivisions in
Kamilo Nui Valley and those adjacent to Kaiser High School). In addition,
undeveloped areas in Kamilo Nui Valley which are adjacent to existing
agricultural uses are placed within the Agriculture area. Preventing the
encroachment of suburban residential development within and surrounding the
existing subdivisions supports active use of these lots for agricultural
purposes.
Community Growth Boundary
The Community Growth Boundary (CGB), previously the Urban Community Boundary in
the 1999 Plan, defines and contains the intended extent of developed or “built-
up” areas of East Honolulu’s urban fringe communities.
The purpose of the Community Growth Boundary is to:
•   Guide future development, redevelopment, and resource management within
existing zoning designations or future zoning designations;
•   Provide adequate lands for facilities or other groupings of built uses
needed to support established communities; and
•   Protect lands outside this boundary for agriculture and other resources and
open space values.
Areas within this boundary are generally characterized by extensive tracts of
residential or commercial development clearly distinguishable from undeveloped
or more “natural” portions of a region’s environment.
Within the Plan area, the Community Growth Boundary is generally coterminous
with the State Urban District boundary but excludes the following areas of the
State Urban District:
•   ‘Āina Haina Nature Preserve;
•   Areas committed to agricultural use by long-term leases (i.e., the farm lot
subdivisions in Kamilo Nui Valley and adjacent to Kaiser High School);
•   Undeveloped areas in Kamilo Nui Valley which are adjacent to existing
agricultural uses but zoned as preservation;
•   Large tracts of undeveloped lands at higher elevations that are prominently
visible from the coastal highway or other public areas and are desirable
natural scenic features;
•   Mauka lands along the Kaiwi coast are zoned as preservation and located
outside of the Community Growth Boundary to protect open space;
•   Significant undeveloped Urban District land areas identified as suspect
areas for land movement by the U.S. Geological Survey;
•   Keawāwa Marsh and Wetlands; and
•   Small inconsistencies as shown in Exhibit 2-1.
There have been no State Land Use District boundary amendments in East Honolulu
since the publication of the 1999 Plan. There are, however, areas where the
Community Growth Boundary has been expanded to reflect zone changes made prior
to the publication of the 1999 Plan which were not incorporated into the 1999
Appendix Maps. The two changes include the expansion of Niu Valley, which has
not been fully developed, and the Leolani development near Kamilo Nui Valley,
which was completed shortly after the publication of the 1999 Plan. The
Community Growth Boundary has also contracted to exclude and preserve Keawāwa
Marsh and Wetlands.
Golf Courses
The locations of the three existing privately owned golf courses are shown on
the maps because of their recreational value and visual contribution to the
open space landscape. There are no proposed golf courses.
Highways, Arterials, and Major Collector Streets
The maps show the locations of existing highways, arterials, and major
collector streets. No new highways, arterials, or major collector streets are
proposed at this time.
Parks
The maps show locations of existing public parks and recreational facilities,
including regional parks, district parks, shoreline parks, nature parks, and
the Kaiwi Scenic Shoreline area. Smaller community-based parks, including
community parks, neighborhood parks, and mini-parks are not shown.
Preservation Areas
Preservation lands, previously lands within the Preservation Boundary, include
those lands not valued primarily for agriculture, but which form an important
part of a region’s open space fabric. Such lands possess natural, cultural, or
scenic resource values, and include important wildlife habitat, archaeological
and historic sites, cultural sites, cemeteries, significant landforms or
landscapes over which significant views are available, or development-related
hazard areas.
The Preservation area includes undeveloped lands that:
•   Are necessary for the protection of watersheds, water resources and water
supplies;
•   Are necessary for the conservation, preservation and enhancement of sites
with scenic, historic, archaeological or ecological significance;
•   Are necessary for providing and preserving park lands, wilderness and beach
reserves, and for conserving natural ecosystems of endemic plants, fish and
wildlife, for forestry, and other activities related to these uses;
•   Are located at an elevation below the maximum inland line of the zone of
wave action, and marine waters, fishponds, and tide pools unless otherwise
designated;
•   Are generally characterized by topography, soils, climate or other related
environmental factors that may not be normally adaptable or presently needed
for urban or agriculture use;
•   Have general slopes of 20 percent or more which provide for open space
amenities and/or scenic values;
•   Are susceptible to floods and soil erosion, lands undergoing major erosion
damage and requiring corrective attention by the State or Federal government,
and lands necessary to the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the
public by reason of soil instability, rock fall hazards or the land’s
susceptibility to landslides and/or inundation by tsunami and flooding;
•   Are used for natural, state, or city parks outside the Community Growth
Boundary; or
•   Are suitable for growing commercial timber, grazing, hunting, and
recreation uses, including facilities accessory to such uses when said
facilities are compatible with the natural and physical environment.
Preservation areas exclude such features, sites, or areas located within the
Community Growth Boundary or Agriculture areas.
Urban Areas
The maps show areas which have been developed or are planned for development
for residential or commercial uses. Except when otherwise provided for, uses
within the urban areas include residential and low-density apartment, medium-
density apartment, neighborhood commercial center, regional town center, and
resort uses. Changes to the urban areas from the 1999 Plan include the
previously mentioned changes to the Community Growth Boundary in Niu Valley,
the Leolani Development, and Keawāwa Marsh and Wetlands, as well as the
construction of units in the Koko Villa neighborhood outside the entrance of
Koko Crater Botanical Garden. The Koko Villas development was interpreted to be
within the Community Growth Boundary. The ambiguity to the distinction between
urban and preservation areas for Koko Villas is a reminder that these maps are
only intended to be illustrations and where there are contradictions between
the map and the text, or with other entitlements such as zoning, other
regulatory tools will take precedent.
OPEN SPACE MAP
This map is intended to illustrate the region’s major open space patterns and
resources as outlined in Chapter 3. It highlights major open space elements and
resources, including agricultural and preservation lands, major recreational
parks and golf courses, the Hawai‘i Kai Marina, important panoramic views,
natural stream corridors and drainage ways, and important boundaries.
This map also indicates the general locations of community and neighborhood
parks, public access points along the shoreline, and major trails providing
mountain access.
Landscaped Boulevard/Greenway
Major arterials and major collector streets with landscaping, potentially
including a landscaped median strip, landscaped sidewalk, and/or bikeways.
Natural Drainage Ways/Gulches
Drainage ways and stream channels convey water as flood plains but also serve
as open space resources. These areas are protected from development,
disturbance, or channelization, except where absolutely necessary to protect
existing urban development from flooding.
Panoramic Views
Points or corridors within the public right-of-way where views and scenic
resources are highly valued with minimal obstruction. See
Exhibit 2-2 for areas that are identified as prominent land features, in
addition to views of the shoreline and ocean, which many of these views are
oriented to.
Trails
Unsanctioned maintained trails have been removed from the map with the
exception of the Mariners Ridge Trail. Mariners Ridge Trail and Koko Crater are
two trails that are not maintained by the City or State, but remain on the map
as both were identified in the 1999 Plan as trails offering unique and
spectacular scenic resources. The Koko Head Trail was added to the map because
of its contribution as a unique and spectacular scenic resource, being an
access point to Nono‘ula and ‘Ihi‘ihilauākea Preserves, and being located on
City-owned property as part of the Koko Head Regional Park.
URBAN LAND USE MAP
The Urban Land Use map illustrates the vision for the foreseeable future for
East Honolulu’s land uses within the Community Growth Boundary. This map
illustrates the desired long-range land use pattern for East Honolulu which
should result from implementation of the Plan’s vision and policies. The map
includes the following terms:
Residential and Low-Density Apartment
These uses are depicted as a single yellow tone. “Residential” generally refers
to single-family detached and attached houses or townhouses with individual
exterior entries. “Low-density apartment” generally refers to low-density, low-
rise multi-family residences, including townhouses, stacked flats and apartment
buildings. Dwelling units in these buildings may share a common exterior entry.
“Residential” housing types will generally be found in the residential zoning
districts, and “low-density apartment” housing types will generally be found in
the apartment zoning districts.
Medium-Density Apartment
These uses are depicted as a brown-orange tone. “Medium-density apartment”
generally refers to mid- to high-rise multi-family residential projects. In
East Honolulu, this designation will be applied only to areas developed
consistent with this pattern as of the effective date of the Plan. The map is
reflective zoning within the A-2 Medium-Density Apartment District.
Neighborhood Commercial Center
These centers are depicted with red dots, and generally represent clusters of
commercial establishments intended for neighborhood service. Uses typically
include grocery and sundry stores and other services and shops catering to
common household- or neighborhood-level convenience items.
Regional Town Center
The Regional Town Center for East Honolulu is comprised of the three commercial
centers adjoining Hawai‘i Kai Marina: Hawai‘i Kai Shopping Center, Hawai‘i Kai
Towne Center, and Koko Marina Shopping Center. These centers are depicted as
red shapes.
Resort
The region’s only resort use, the Kāhala Hotel and Resort, is depicted as a
pink shape.
Elementary School
Elementary schools have been added to the map to demonstrate the multi-purpose
uses they may contain including secondary uses as recreational facilities or
emergency shelters. Existing elementary schools include ‘Āina Haina, Haha‘ione,
Koko Head, and Kamilo Iki Elementary Schools.
High School
Existing high schools include Kalani High School and Kaiser High School.
Intermediate School
The only existing intermediate/middle school is Niu Valley Intermediate School.
Marina
The map depicts the Hawai‘i Kai Marina as a series of connected light blue
shapes indicating waterways and is not intended to be limited to the main
docks.
Wastewater Treatment Plant
The existing wastewater treatment plant is located on the mauka side of
Kalaniana‘ole Highway in proximity to Sandy Beach Park.
PUBLIC FACILITIES MAP
The Public Facilities Map illustrates major existing and future public
facilities and major privately owned facilities, including the golf course at
the Wai‘alae Country Club. Its purpose is to display the locations for some of
the public resources or assets available within the region.
The Public Facilities Map and corresponding text, as they appear in this Plan,
are not meant to be amended between revisions of the Plan and should not be
confused with amendments to the Public Infrastructure Map (PIM), which are used
as part of the approval of projects in the CIP budget process.
Major public facilities which are to be funded through the City’s CIP and
budget appropriation are shown on the PIM. The PIM is not part of the Plan and
is adopted and amended by resolution. Projects which are not listed in the Plan
or are not shown on its maps can still be added to the Public Infrastructure
Map by Council resolution if the Council finds them to be consistent with the
vision and policies of the Plan.
Terms that appear on the Public Facilities Map include the following:
Bike Lane
A bike lane provides an exclusive space for bicyclists in the roadway through
the use of lines and symbols. Bike lanes are for one-way travel and are
normally provided in both directions on two-way streets, and on one side of a
one-way street. When roadway width is limited and the road is sloped, a bike
lane may be provided in only the uphill direction. This is referred to as a
climbing lane.
Buffered Bike Lane
A buffered bike lane is created by painting a flush buffer zone between a bike
lane and the adjacent travel lane. While buffers are typically used between
bike lanes and motor vehicle travel lanes to increase bicyclists’ comfort, they
may also be provided between bike lanes and parking lanes to discourage
bicyclists from riding too close to parked vehicles.
Elementary School
Elementary schools have been added to the map to demonstrate the multi-purpose
uses they may contain including secondary uses as recreational facilities or
emergency shelters. Existing elementary schools include ‘Āina Haina, Haha‘ione,
Koko Head, and Kamilo Iki Elementary Schools.
High Occupancy Vehicle Lane
An exclusive lane on a roadway reserved for transit and vehicles with more than
one occupant, and which is developed to improve transit speed and to provide
incentives for commuters to opt for mass transit or carpooling. The only HOV
lane is a coned contra flow lane heading toward town along Kalaniana‘ole
Highway during morning rush hour.
High School
Existing high schools include Kalani High School and Kaiser High School.
Intermediate School
The only existing intermediate/middle school is Niu Valley Intermediate School.
Marina
The map depicts the Hawai‘i Kai Marina as a series of connected light blue
shapes indicating waterways and is not intended to be limited to the main
docks.
Park & Ride
Special parking lots where commuters park their cars and continue their commute
by mass transit.
Protected Bike Lane
A protected bike lane (also known as a separated bike lane or cycletrack) is an
exclusive bikeway facility that combines the user experience of a shared use
path with the on-street infrastructure of a conventional bike lane. Protected
bike lanes are physically separated from motor vehicle traffic and distinct
from the sidewalk.
Shared Roadway
A shared roadway is a bikeway where bicyclists and motor vehicles are expected
to share the same travel lane. Shared roadways are denoted by pavement marking
(sharrows) and/or signage. They are typically used in locations with low
traffic speeds and volumes or as a temporary solution on constrained higher-
traffic streets.
Shared Use Path
A shared use path is a two-way facility that is physically separated from motor
vehicle traffic and used by bicyclists, pedestrians, and other non-motorized
users. Shared use paths are often located in an independent alignment, such as
a greenbelt or abandoned railroad right-of-way, and are used for recreation,
leisure, and commuting.
Shoulder Bikeway
A shoulder bikeway is typically reserved for rural road cross-sections. Paved
shoulders provide a range of benefits: they reduce motor vehicle crashes;
reduce long-term roadway maintenance; ease short-term maintenance, such as
debris clearing; and provide space for bicyclists and pedestrians.
Wastewater Treatment Plant
The existing wastewater treatment plant is located on the mauka side of
Kalaniana‘ole Highway in proximity to Sandy Beach Park.
   MAP A-1: OPEN SPACE MAP
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9295.png]
 
   MAP A-2: URBAN LAND USE MAP
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9293.png]
 
   MAP A-3: PUBLIC FACILITIES MAP
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9562.png]
 
ARTICLE 5: CENTRAL OAHU*
Sections
   
24-5.1   Definitions
   
24-5.2   Applicability and intent
   
24-5.3   Adoption of the Central Oahu sustainable communities plan
   
24-5.4   Existing zoning and subdivision ordinances, approvals, and
applications
   
24-5.5   Consistency
   
24-5.6   Implementation
   
24-5.7   Review of development and other applications
   
24-5.8   Zone change applications
   
24-5.9   Annual capital improvement program review
   
24-5.10   Five-year review
   
24-5.11   Authority
   
24-5.12   Severability
   
24-5.13   Conflicting provisions
§ 24-5.1 Definitions.
   Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this
section govern the construction of this article and the Central Oahu
sustainable communities plan.
Central Oahu SCP. The revised Central Oahu Sustainable Communities Plan
attached hereto as Exhibit A and made a part hereof.
Department or Department of Planning and Permitting. The department of planning
and permitting of the city.
Development. Any public improvement project, or any public or private project
requiring a zoning map amendment.
Development Plan or Sustainable Communities Plan. A plan document for a given
geographic area which consists of conceptual schemes for implementing and
accomplishing the development objectives and policies of the general plan for
the several parts of the city.
Director. The director of the department of planning and permitting.
Environmental Assessment or EA. A written evaluation prepared in compliance
with the environmental council’s procedural rules and regulations implementing
HRS Chapter 343 to determine whether an action may have a significant
environmental effect.
Environmental impact statement or EIS. An informational document prepared in
compliance with the procedural rules and regulations of the environmental
council established in HRS § 341-3(c) for the implementation of HRS Chapter
343; and which discloses the environmental effects of a proposed action,
effects of a proposed action on the economic and social welfare of the
community and State, effects of the economic activities arising out of the
proposed action, measures proposed to minimize adverse effects, and
alternatives to the action and their environmental effects.
Finding of No Significant Impact or FONSI. A determination, based on an
environmental assessment, that the subject action will not have a significant
effect and, therefore, will not require the preparation of an environmental
impact statement.
Functional Plan. The public facility and infrastructure plans prepared by
public agencies to further implement the vision, policies, and guidelines set
forth in the revised Central Oahu SCP.
General Plan. The general plan of the city as defined by Charter § 6-1508.
Planning Commission. The planning commission of the city.
Project Master Plan. A conceptual plan that covers all phases of a development
project. The project master plan describes how the project conforms to the
vision for Central Oahu, and the relevant policies and guidelines for the site,
the surrounding lands, and the region.
Significant Zone Change. A zone change that involves at least one of the
following:
(1)   Changes in zoning of 25 or more acres of land to any zoning district or
combination of zoning districts, excluding preservation or agricultural zoning
districts;
(2)   Any change in zoning of more than 10 acres to a residential or country
zoning district;
(3)   Any change in zoning of more than five acres to an apartment, resort,
commercial, industrial, or mixed use zoning district; or
(4)   Any development that may have a major social, environmental, or policy
impact, or major cumulative impacts due to a series of applications in the same
area.
Special Area. A designated area within the Central Oahu SCP area that requires
more detailed planning efforts beyond what is contained in the Central Oahu
SCP.
Special Area Plan. A plan for a special area.
Unilateral Agreement. A conditional zoning agreement made pursuant to ROH §
21-2.80 or any predecessor or successor provision that imposes conditions on a
landowner or developer’s use of the property at the time of the enactment of an
ordinance for a zoning change.
Vision. The future outlook for the Central Oahu region extending out to the
year 2035 and beyond that encompasses the protection of agricultural lands and
open space, the revitalization of Waipahu and Wahiawa, the expectation of
master-planned residential communities designed to reduce automobile usage and
with identifiable town centers, the provision of adequate infrastructure, and
the protection of natural, historic, and cultural resources.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.1) (Added by Ord. 21-6)
§ 24-5.2 Applicability and intent.
(a)   The Central Oahu SCP area encompasses the upland plateau between the
Waianae and the Koolau Mountain Ranges. The area includes the towns of Waipahu,
Mililani, and Wahiawa and their surrounding communities.
(b)   It is the intent of the Central Oahu SCP to provide a guide for orderly
and coordinated public and private sector development in the Central Oahu SCP
area in a manner that is consistent with applicable general plan provisions,
including the designation of Central Oahu as an urban fringe area, which is to
be developed to relieve development pressures in the remaining urban fringe and
rural areas, and to meet housing needs not readily provided in the primary
urban center.
(c)   The provisions of this article and the Central Oahu SCP are not
regulatory. Rather, they are established with the explicit intent of providing
a coherent vision to guide resource protection and land use development for
Central Oahu, public investment in infrastructure, zoning and other regulatory
procedures, and the preparation of the city’s annual capital improvement
program budget.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.2) (Added by Ord. 21-6)
§ 24-5.3 Adoption of the Central Oahu sustainable communities plan.
(a)   This article is enacted pursuant to Charter § 6-1509 and provides a self-
contained sustainable communities plan document for Central Oahu. Upon
enactment of this article, all proposed developments will be evaluated against
how well they fulfill the vision for Central Oahu set forth in the Central Oahu
SCP, and how closely they satisfy the Central Oahu SCP policies and guidelines
to implement that vision.
(b)   The plan entitled, “Central Oahu Sustainable Communities Plan,” attached
as Exhibit A, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article.
(c)   
Chapter 24, Article 1, entitled “Development Plan Common Provisions,” in its
entirety is no longer applicable to the Central Oahu SCP area. This article and
the Central Oahu SCP, as adopted by reference in this article, supersede any
and all common provisions previously applicable to the Central Oahu SCP area.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.3) (Added by Ord. 21-6)
§ 24-5.4 Existing zoning and subdivision ordinances.
(a)   All existing subdivisions and zoning approved prior to March 30, 2021,
including but not limited to those subject to unilateral agreements, continue
to remain in effect following the enactment of this ordinance.
(b)   Subdivision and zoning ordinances applicable to the Central Oahu SCP area
enacted prior to March 30, 2021 continue to regulate the use of land within
demarcated zones of the Central Oahu SCP area until such time as those
subdivision and zoning ordinances may be amended to be consistent with the
Central Oahu SCP.
(c)   Notwithstanding adoption of the revised Central Oahu SCP, applications
for subdivision actions and land use permits accepted by the department for
processing prior to March 30, 2021 continue to be subject only to applicable
ordinances and rules and regulations in effect at the time the application is
accepted for processing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.4) (Added by Ord. 21-6)
§ 24-5.5 Consistency.
(a)   In the performance of their prescribed powers, duties, and functions, all
city agencies shall conform to and implement the policies and provisions of
this article and the Central Oahu SCP. Pursuant to Charter § 6-1511.3, public
improvement projects, and subdivision and zoning ordinances must be consistent
with the Central Oahu SCP.
(b)   Any questions of interpretation regarding the consistency of a proposed
development with the provisions of the Central Oahu SCP and the objectives and
policies of the general plan will ultimately be resolved by the council.
(c)   In determining whether a proposed development is consistent with the
Central Oahu SCP, the responsible agency shall primarily take into
consideration the extent to which the development is consistent with the
vision, policies, and guidelines set forth in the Central Oahu SCP.
(d)   Whenever there is a question regarding consistency between existing
subdivision or zoning ordinances, including any unilateral agreement, and the
Central Oahu SCP, the existing subdivision or zoning ordinances prevail until
such time as they may be amended to be consistent with the Central Oahu SCP.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.5) (Added by Ord. 21-6)
§ 24-5.6 Implementation.
   Implementation of this article relating to the Central Oahu SCP will be
accomplished by the following:
(1)   Initiating zoning and development code amendments to achieve consistency
with the policies, principles, and guidelines of the Central Oahu SCP;
(2)   Guiding development in the special areas of Waipahu and Wahiawa through
the special area plans for each area;
(3)   Guiding public investment in infrastructure through functional plans that
support the vision of the Central Oahu SCP;
(4)   Recommending approval, approval with modifications, or denial of
developments seeking zoning and other development approvals based on how well
the developments support the vision of the Central Oahu SCP;
(5)   Incorporating Central Oahu SCP priorities through the public
infrastructure map and the city’s annual budget process;
(6)   Evaluating progress in achieving the vision of the Central Oahu SCP
periodically and presenting the results of the evaluation in the biennial
report that is required by Charter § 6-1510.4; and
(7)   Reviewing the vision of the Central Oahu SCP every five years, and, if
necessary based on that review, revising the policies, guidelines, and capital
improvement program investments set forth therein.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.6) (Added by Ord. 21-6)
§ 24-5.7 Review of development and other applications.
   The review of applications for zone changes and other development approvals
will be guided by the vision of the Central Oahu SCP. Decisions on all proposed
developments must be based on the extent to which the project enabled by the
development approval supports the policies and guidelines of the Central Oahu
SCP.
   The director may review other applications for improvements to land to help
the responsible agency determine whether a proposed improvement supports the
policies and guidelines of the Central Oahu SCP.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.8) (Added by Ord. 21-6)
§ 24-5.8 Zone change applications.
(a)   All zone change applications relating to land in the Central Oahu SCP
area will be reviewed by the department for consistency with the general plan,
the Central Oahu SCP, and any applicable special area plan.
(1)   The director shall recommend either approval, approval with changes, or
denial. The director’s written review of the application must become part of
the zone change report that will be sent to the planning commission and the
city council.
(2)   A project master plan must be part of an EA or EIS for any project
involving 25 acres or more of land. The director shall review the project
master plan for its consistency with the Central Oahu SCP.
(3)   Any development or phase of development already covered by a project
master plan that has been fully reviewed under the provisions of this article
does not require a new project master plan provided that the director
determines the proposed zone change is generally consistent with the existing
project master plan for the affected area.
(4)   If a final EIS has already been accepted for a development, including one
accepted prior to March 30, 2021, then a subsequent project master plan is not
required for the development.
(b)   Projects that involve a significant zone change are required to submit an
EA to the department prior to an application for a zone change being accepted.
Any development or phase of a development that has already been assessed under
the National Environmental Policy Act (“NEPA”), HRS Chapter 343 (Hawaii
Environmental Policy Act, or “HEPA”),
Chapter 25, or the provisions of this article, and for which a FONSI has been
filed or a required EIS has been accepted, is not subject to further EA or EIS
requirements under this article unless otherwise required by NEPA or HEPA.
(c)   The department shall review the EA, and based on the review of the EA,
the director shall determine whether an EIS will be required or whether a FONSI
will be issued.
(d)   If an EIS is required, the EIS must be accepted by the director before a
zone change application may be initiated.
(e)   Zone changes must be processed in accordance with this section; Section
5.4 of the Central Oahu SOP;
Chapter 2, Article 24, Part A; and
Chapter 21.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.7) (Added by Ord. 21-6)
§ 24-5.9 Annual capital improvement program review.
   Annually, the director shall work jointly with the director of budget and
fiscal services and other city agencies to review all projects in the city’s
capital improvement program and budget for compliance and consistency with the
general plan, the Central Oahu SCP and other development plans, any applicable
special area plan provisions, and the appropriate functional plans. The
director shall prepare a written report of findings to be submitted to the
council in accordance with Charter § 6-1503.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.9) (Added by Ord. 21-6)
§ 24-5.10 Five-year review.
(a)   The department shall conduct a comprehensive review of the Central Oahu
SCP adopted by reference in §
24-5.3(b), every five years subsequent to March 30, 2021, and shall report its
findings and recommended revisions, if any, to the council.
(b)   The Central Oahu SCP will be evaluated to assess the appropriateness of
the plan’s regional vision, policies, guidelines, and implementing actions, as
well as its consistency with the general plan.
(c)   Nothing in this section should be construed as prohibiting the processing
of a revision to the Central Oahu SOP at any time in the event either the
director’s biennial report or the council recommends consideration of such a
revision, pursuant to the Charter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.10) (Added by Ord. 21-6)
§ 24-5.11 Authority.
   Nothing in this article should be construed as an abridgement or delegation
of the responsibility of the director, or of the inherent legislative power of
the council, to review or revise the Central Oahu SOP pursuant to the Charter
and the above procedures.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.12) (Added by Ord. 21-6)
§ 24-5.12 Severability.
   If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or
property or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity does not affect the
validity of the other provisions or applications of this article that can be
given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the
provisions of this article are declared to be severable.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.13) (Added by Ord. 21-6)
§ 24-5.13 Conflicting provisions.
   Any provision contained in this article as it pertains to land within the
Central Oahu SCP area prevails should there be any conflict with the common
provisions or any other provisions under
Chapter 24.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.14) (Added by Ord. 21-6)
CENTRAL O‘AHU SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9299.png]
 
PREFACE AND EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
PREFACE
The Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan has been prepared in accordance
with the Charter-prescribed requirements for development plans and is to be
accorded force and effect as such for all Charter-and ordinance-prescribed
purposes.
It is one of a set of eight community-oriented plans intended to help guide
public policy, investment, and decision-making over the next 25 years. Each
plan addresses one of eight planning regions of O‘ahu, responding to specific
conditions and community values of each region. The map on the following page
illustrates these planning regions.
Of the eight documents, the plans for ‘Ewa and the Primary Urban Center, to
which growth and supporting facilities will be directed over the next 25 years,
have been entitled “Development Plans”.
Plans for the remaining six areas, which are envisioned as relatively stable
regions for which public actions will focus on supporting existing populations,
have been entitled “Sustainable Communities Plans” in order to appropriately
indicate their intent.
Central O‘ahu statement and policies sustain Central O‘ahu’s character,
lifestyle, and economic opportunities by focusing future residential
development on master planned suburban communities within a Community Growth
Boundary and on redevelopment around two transit centers in Waipahū.
   Exhibit ES-1: Development Plan and Sustainable Communities Plan Areas
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9301.png]
 
The General Plan calls for development to be “encouraged” in Central O‘ahu and
‘Ewa urban-fringe (suburban residential) areas and in the Kapolei urban center
in order to “relieve development pressures” on the East Honolulu, Windward,
North Shore, and Wai‘anae areas and to “meet housing needs not readily provided
in the primary urban
center.”
THE SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN PROCESS
This Plan is a revision of the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan which
was adopted by the City Council in 2002. The 2002 Central O‘ahu Sustainable
Communities Plan was the seventh of the eight plans to be revised in response
to a 1992 City Charter amendment which changed the nature of the eight regional
plans from relatively detailed, parcel-specific plans to conceptual, visionary
plans.
As required by the adopting ordinance, the Plan is to be reviewed five years
after adoption to assess the appropriateness of the Plan’s vision, policies,
guidelines, and implementing actions as well as its consistency with the
General Plan.
This document is the culmination of a community-based planning effort led by
the Department of Planning and Permitting which involved public meetings and
workshops, interviews, focus groups, and numerous meetings since 2007.
In its final form, the Plan incorporates and responds to comments received from
public outreach to community leaders, business and labor representatives,
landowners, developers, and public and private agency staff through a variety
of formats since 2007.
The Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan Review Report provides
documentation of the comments and suggestions received, and details the
Department’s assessments of what revisions or implementation improvements
should be made as a result.
A SUSTAINABLE FUTURE FOR O‘AHU
There has been a recent surge in widespread community discussions, actions and
laws adopted to address sustainability. In 2005, the Hawai‘i State Legislature
convened a statewide group to draft a Hawai‘i 2050 Plan, whose primary purpose
is to provide policy recommendations for creating a sustainable Hawai‘i. In
2007, greenhouse gas emissions goals for 2020 were enacted. Public service
announcements dealing with conserving water and electricity abound. The concept
of buildings that are designed, built and occupied with environmental
considerations at the forefront largely did not exist when the current
Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans were adopted. This setting
raises the question of the role of the Development Plans and Sustainable
Communities Plans. Are they the City’s version of a sustainability plan?
The answer is that they are the land development portion of a larger blueprint
for sustainability. As discussed below, the General Plan sets long term goals
for the City and County of Honolulu, across 11 major elements. Perhaps its most
substantive chapter deals with population, and hence land development
distribution. It sets the growth management strategy for O‘ahu. The Development
Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans provide more detail on this land
management strategy, assuring that how we use the land now, and in the future,
will respond to the three major elements of a Sustainable Place: economic
health, social equity, and environmental protection.
Since 1977, the City’s policy, as adopted by the City Council in the O‘ahu
General Plan, has been to “keep the Country country” by fully developing
downtown Honolulu from Pearl City to Kahala, by building O‘ahu’s Second City in
‘Ewa, and by developing surrounding suburban “urban fringe” areas in ‘Ewa and
Central O‘ahu. Millions of dollars of taxpayers’ monies have been paid for
roadways, schools, sewers, water systems, and other infrastructure to support
this pattern of development.
Our most recent projections show that O‘ahu will need almost 79,500 new homes
to meet expected population growth between 2010 and 2035. The General Plan, and
the Development Plans, and Sustainable Communities Plans adopted by the City
Council to implement the General Plan, provide capacity for most new homes to
be built either in downtown Honolulu, ‘Ewa, or Central O‘ahu.
Inevitably, this requires that some prime agricultural land in Central O‘ahu
inside the Community Growth Boundary be used to provide the required single and
multi-family housing (even though the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities
Plan does protect over 10,000 acres of high quality agricultural land outside
the Community Growth Boundary). The loss of some prime agricultural land in
Central O‘ahu and ‘Ewa is the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan
Preface and Executive Summary cost of insuring that the rural areas in
Wai‘anae, North Shore, and the Windward side and along Kunia Road in Central
O‘ahu are protected against development.
The issues addressed either directly or indirectly by these regional plans
certainly overlap with other planning responsibilities of other City
departments, such as water delivery and consumption, crime reduction,
increasing public health, and developing responsive transportation systems.
Collectively, these efforts comprise the strategy of developing a Sustainable
Future for O‘ahu.
INTEGRATING PRINCIPLES OF SUSTAINABILITY INTO DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES
A community that can successfully manage change will flourish and prosper in
the future. For this plan, this means ensuring that planned growth and
development respects and adheres to the principles of sustainability.
These principles of sustainability are intended to promote the long-term health
of the land and its people, and its community resources for current and future
generations.
   •   Protect lands designated for agriculture, physical and biological
resources, and where appropriate, open spaces and view planes.
   •   Use resources so they are not depleted, permanently damaged, or
destroyed.
   •   Encourage planning, development, and construction technologies that
minimize negative environmental impacts.
   •   Respect the cultural, social, and physical resources that shape and
reinforce residents’ sense of community and quality of life.
   •   Guide the process of change. Strive to make decisions based on an
understanding of the effects such decisions will have on the land and community
resources.
   •   Strive for balance between economic prosperity, social and community
well-being, and environmental stewardship.
   •   As an integral part of the planning process, consider the long-term
impact of proposed actions and prepare plans that can accommodate the needs of
future generations accordingly.
THE HONOLULU LAND USE PLANNING AND MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
The City and County of Honolulu guides and directs land use and growth through
a three-tier system of objectives, policies and guidelines, and regulations.
   •   The General Plan forms the first tier of this system. First adopted by
resolution in 1977, the General Plan is a relatively brief document, consisting
primarily of one-sentence statements of objectives and policies. It has been
amended several times, but the basic objectives and policies set forth in the
1977 plan remain intact.
   •   The second tier of the system is formed by the Development Plans, and
Sustainable Communities Plans, which are adopted and revised by ordinance.
These plans address eight geographic regions of the island, including the
Primary Urban Center, East Honolulu, Central O‘ahu, ‘Ewa, Wai‘anae, North
Shore, Ko‘olau Loa and Ko‘olau Poko.
   •   The third tier of the system is composed of the implementing ordinances
and regulations, including the Land Use Ordinance (Honolulu’s zoning code), the
Subdivision Rules and Regulations, and the City’s Capital Improvement Program.
Mandated by the City Charter, these ordinances constitute the principal means
for implementing the City’s plans. These ordinances and regulations are
required to be consistent with the General Plan, the Development Plans, and
each other.
In addition to these three Charter-mandated tiers, the Development Plans are
supplemented by two planning mechanisms that are not mentioned in the Charter:
   •   Functional plans (such as the O‘ahu Regional Transportation Plan or the
O‘ahu Water Management Plan), some of which are mandated by state or federal
regulations, provide long-range guidance for the development of public
facilities and infrastructure; and
   •   Special Area Plans (such as the Waipahū Town Plan or the Wahiawā Urban
Design Plan) give specific guidance for neighborhoods, communities or
specialized resource areas.
AUTHORITY OF THE DEVELOPMENT AND SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLANS
The authority for the Development and Sustainable Communities Plans
(hereinafter referred to as “Development Plans” for simplicity) is derived from
the City Charter, which mandates preparation of a General Plan and Development
Plans to guide “the development and improvement of the city.”
Together with the General Plan, the Development Plans provide a policy context
for the land use and budgetary actions of the City.
The Charter provides that “public improvement projects and subdivision and
zoning ordinances shall be consistent with the development plan for that area.”
Although the Development Plans are not themselves regulatory and require
implementing ordinances (the “third tier” discussed in the preceding section),
they provide guidance that decision makers and administrators should follow to
the extent it is sensible, in approving project development and in revising
rules and regulations and standard policies. They are policy tools and are to
be used, in conjunction with the programs and budgets of the City, to
accomplish the objectives of the City and as guides for the decisions made in
the private sector. Consistent with the Charter’s description of the
Development Plans as “conceptual schemes”  and “a policy guide,” the language,
maps and illustrations of the Development Plans should not be deemed to be
regulatory.
The plans are also intended to aid decisions made in the private sector by
clearly indicating what the City’s development priorities are, where
development is appropriate, and what kinds of development are appropriate in
each location.
The 1992 Charter amendments established that the Development Plans are to be
conceptual plans whose purpose is to provide:
   •   “priorities . . . (for the) coordination of major development
activities;” and
   •   sufficient description of the “desired urban character and the
significant natural, scenic and cultural resources . . . to serve as a policy
guide for more detailed zoning maps and regulations and public and private
sector investment decisions.”
The revised plan presented in this document conforms to that mandate.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This plan is organized in five chapters and an appendix, as follows:
   •   Chapter 1: “Central O‘ahu’s Role in O‘ahu’s Growth” defines Central
O‘ahu’s role and identity within the overall framework of island-wide planning
and land management.
   •   Chapter 2: “The Vision for Central O‘ahu’s Future” summarizes the
community’s vision for the future of the region, and lists important elements
of that vision.
   •   Chapter 3: “Land Use Policies and Guidelines” is the plan’s policy core,
and provides the land use policies needed to implement the vision for Central
O‘ahu described in Chapter 2.
   •   Chapter 4: “Public Facilities and Infrastructure Policies” provides the
infrastructure policies needed to implement the vision for Central O‘ahu
described in Chapter 2.
   •   Chapter 5: “Implementation” identifies the means through which the
policies will be applied, including zone changes and infrastructure budgeting
and development.
   •   Appendix A includes:
   •   Four conceptual maps (Open Space, Urban Land Use, Public Facilities, and
Development Capacity) which illustrate the vision and policies of the Plan; and
   •   A glossary of terms used in the Plan and on those maps.
The following summary provides an overview to the vision and policies of the
Plan.
CENTRAL O‘AHU’S ROLE IN O‘AHU’S DEVELOPMENT PATTERN
   •   Promotes and protects diversified agriculture on 10,350 acres of high-
quality agricultural lands;
   •   Provides a variety of housing types in master planned suburban
residential communities and mixed-use medium density centers in Waipahū;
   •   Promotes new employment in existing commercial and industrial areas, and
in new commercial areas designed to support their surrounding residential
communities;
THE VISION TO 2035
   •   Population growth from 168,600 in 2010 to 181,400 in 2035;
   •   Addition of almost 12,800 new housing units to the existing 51,000 homes
in Central O‘ahu in 2010;
   •   Increase of jobs from 62,600 jobs in 2010 to 83,600 in 2035 (with nearly
all the increase consisting of civilian jobs);
   •   New master planned residential developments at Royal Kunia, Koa Ridge
Makai, and Waiawa; and
   •   Long-term protection for agricultural and preservation lands from urban
encroachment.
ELEMENTS OF THE VISION
   •   Protect Agricultural Lands and Open Space by containing urban
development for the foreseeable future within the existing Community Growth
Boundary, and creating an Open Space Network within the Boundary which includes
parks, golf courses, agricultural areas, deep ravines, natural habitat areas
and greenways along major roads (See Open Space Map in Appendix A);
   •   Revitalize Waipahū and Wahiawā based on Special Area Plans and Community
Vision Statements for each town prepared in partnership with their communities;
   •   Build Master Planned Residential Communities with identifiable town
centers and homes that meet the needs of a wide range of families and age
groups;
   •   Design Communities to Reduce Automobile Usage by providing easy access
to transit, supporting moderate density housing and commercial development
along the Waipahū rail transit corridor, implementing traffic calming design,
and guiding development to encourage people to walk and bike.
   •   Protect Natural, Historic, and Cultural Resources; and
   •   Provide Adequate Infrastructure to address current deficiencies, and
assure availability of key infrastructure prior to approval of new development.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
Chapter Three provides land use development policies for :
   •   Open Space Preservation and Development;
   •   Regional Parks and Recreation Complexes;
   •   Community-Based Parks;
   •   Historic and Cultural Resources;
   •   Natural Resources;
   •   Waipahū Town;
   •   Wahiawā Town;
   •   Central O‘ahu Plantation Villages;
   •   Existing and Planned Residential Communities;
   •   Planned Commercial Retail Centers;
   •   Industrial Centers;
   •   Mililani Technology Park;
   •   Military Areas.
Chapter Four contains infrastructure policies and implementing guidelines for:
   •   Transportation;
   •   Water Allocation and System Development;
   •   Wastewater Treatment;
   •   Electrical Power Development;
   •   Solid Waste Handling and Disposal;
   •   Drainage Systems;
   •   School Facilities;
   •   Public Safety Facilities;
   •   Other Community Facilities.
Chapter Five describes the means for implementing the Central O‘ahu Sustainable
Communities Plan through:
   •   Development Priorities
   •   Special Area Plans
   •   Functional Plans
   •   Review and approval of Zone Change Applications, and Other Development
Applications; and
   •   Review and Revision of Development Codes.
1. CENTRAL O‘AHU’S ROLE IN O‘AHU’S DEVELOPMENT PATTERN
Central O‘ahu plays a key role in implementing the directed growth policies of
the General Plan of the City and County of Honolulu.
The towns of Waipahū and Wahiawā serve as gateways to ‘Ewa and the North Shore.
Historically, they have been headquarters for the sugar and pineapple
plantations, and Wahiawā has served as a support center for the military.
Beginning in 1968, Central O‘ahu also began to play a role as a major area for
housing development. At that time, Castle & Cooke began development of Mililani
Town, a 3,500 acre planned low-density suburban community which offered
affordable single family housing to first time buyers.
Subsequently, additional housing has been developed above Waipahū and the H-
1 Freeway in Village Park, Gentry Waipi‘o, Waikele, Royal Kunia, and other
development projects.
This residential development has been supported by State and City policy, land
use approvals, and provision of key infrastructure like the H-2 Freeway.
In 1989, the Honolulu City Council approved changes to the General Plan which
designated the urban fringe areas in Central O‘ahu as one of O‘ahu’s principal
residential development areas. Since then, Central O‘ahu, along with the
Primary Urban Center (PUC) and the Secondary Urban Center and urban fringe
areas in ‘Ewa, has provided the bulk of the new housing developed on the
island.
The General Plan also calls for maintaining the viability of agriculture on
O‘ahu, supports agricultural diversification in all agricultural areas on
O‘ahu, and encourages the continuation of a high level of military-related
employment in the Hickam-Pearl Harbor, and Wahiawā areas.
It also calls for establishment of a green belt in Central O‘ahu and protection
of the natural environment from incompatible development and from pollution.
This update of the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan reaffirms those
roles, and amplifies how they can be accomplished. In support of the General
Plan policies, the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan:
   •   Promotes diversified agriculture on approximately 10,350 acres of prime
and unique agricultural lands along Kunia Road, north of Wahiawā, surrounding
Mililani, and on the Waipi‘o Peninsula in accordance with the General Plan
policies to support agricultural diversification in all agricultural areas;
   •   Provides for the eventual development of over 24,000 new homes in master
planned residential developments at Koa Ridge Makai, Waiawa, and Royal Kunia,
and in transit-oriented development around rail stations in Waipahū and at
Leeward Community College;
   •   Provides for a variety of housing types from affordable units and
starter homes to mid-size multi-family and single family units;
   •   Provides new employment in existing commercial and industrial areas
(including Mililani Technology Park), and in new commercial areas designed to
serve their surrounding residential communities;
   •   Identifies the infrastructure needed to meet the likely residential,
commercial, and industrial development through 2035; and
   •   Helps relieve urban development pressures on rural and urban fringe
Sustainable Communities Plan Areas (Wai‘anae, North Shore, Ko‘olau Loa, Ko‘olau
Poko, and East Honolulu) so as to preserve the “country” lifestyle of the rural
areas and sustain the stable, low density residential character of the urban
fringe areas.
   Exhibit 1.1: Development Plan and Sustainable Communities Plan Areas for
O‘ahu
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9307.png]
 
2. THE VISION FOR CENTRAL O‘AHU’S FUTURE
This chapter presents a statement of the vision for Central O‘ahu’s future,
discusses key elements of the vision, and presents illustrative maps and
tables.
2.1   VISION STATEMENT
The vision for Central O‘ahu has two horizons. The first horizon extends from
the present to the year 2035. This is the horizon that was used to project
likely socioeconomic change in Central O‘ahu, and to assess the infrastructure
and public facility needs that will have to be met over that period.
The vision for Central O‘ahu reflects a nurturing of natural, agricultural and
urban resources important to the well-being of the entire island. Its historic
communities will be revitalized and the development of its urban areas will
encourage vibrant community life and reduce dependence on automobile travel.
The Vision to 2035. By 2035, the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan
Area shown in
Exhibit 1.1 is expected to experience moderate growth as existing areas zoned
for residential development and served by infrastructure are built out, and
development begins on the remaining master planned areas within the Community
Growth Boundary. Population will have grown from 168,600 people in 2010 to
181,400 in 2035. Almost 12,300 new housing units will have been built since
2010 in master-planned communities.
Significant job growth is also expected, rising from over 58,900 non-
construction jobs in 2005 to almost 77,400 in 2035 (12% of O‘ahu total
projected). The bulk of the private non-construction job growth is projected to
be in services, retail, or transportation/ communication/utilities (91%) with
another 6% in industrial occupations.
The Second Horizon: Beyond 2035 - In the course of the Sustainable Communities
Plan revision in 2000, it became clear that there was value in looking beyond
the planning horizon to identify what Central O‘ahu should look like when
“fully” developed.
Such a perspective helped identify where open space should be preserved within
the urbanized area, and where to set the limits to development in Central
O‘ahu. As such, this second horizon might be called the “built-out” horizon and
is probably 30 or 40 years in the future.
Protect Agricultural Lands and Open Space
Urban growth will be contained within a boundary which protects prime
agricultural lands along Kunia Road, north of Wahiawā, surrounding Mililani,
and on the Waipi‘o Peninsula for diversified agriculture. Preservation of these
prime and unique agricultural lands for use in diversified agriculture will
help to retain open space and views, in addition to supporting economic
diversification and sustainability.
Within the Community Growth Boundary, a regional system of open space and
greenways will give Central O‘ahu the feel of a network of communities “within
a garden,” as opposed to an unbroken suburban sprawl from Wahiawā to Waipahū.
Open space will be preserved in parks, golf courses, agricultural areas, deep
ravines, and wildlife habitats which will also help to protect significant
views.
The Patsy T. Mink Central O‘ahu Regional Park will provide significant active
and passive recreation facilities and access to the Kīpapa and Waikele ravines
which could help form part of a Central O‘ahu ravine recreational network. (See
discussion of the ravines in Sec. 2.2.3.)
A Shoreline Parks and Preservation Area developed along the entire shoreline in
Pearl Harbor’s West Loch and Middle Loch will restore the shoreline in Waipahū
to public use, provide active and passive recreation facilities, and help
create the Pearl Harbor Historic Trail, a pedestrian path and bikeway running
from Rainbow Marina near Aloha Stadium to the Wai‘anae Coast.
Prime agricultural land loss - Creation of master planned residential
communities in the Central O‘ahu fringe areas has been a key element in the
City’s growth management strategy adopted as part of the 1977 General Plan and
reinforced by subsequent City actions approving land use plans and
infrastructure investments since 1977. It is true that development of Central
O‘ahu agricultural lands within the Community Growth Boundary has resulted in
the conversion of hundreds of acres of highly productive agricultural land,
formerly used for sugar and pineapple plantations, as new homes and job centers
were developed.
However, this is the cost of protecting agricultural lands and open space in
the rural areas of O‘ahu. By focusing new job growth and residential
development in ‘Ewa, Central O‘ahu, and central Honolulu from Pearl City to
Kāhala, the vision of “Keeping the Country country” can be achieved.
Thousands of acres of agricultural lands in the Sustainable Communities Plans
(SCP) areas are protected by the Community Growth Boundaries in those plans,
including 50,000 acres in the Central O‘ahu and North Shore Sustainable
Communities Plan areas and hundreds of acres in other SCP areas, including
Wai‘anae, near Kahuku, in Waiāhole/Waikāne, and in Waimānalo.
State purchase of good agricultural lands in Central O‘ahu has ensured the
preservation of those lands for agricultural uses in perpetuity. In addition,
the State and the City are both focusing on what can be done to nurture and
strengthen the community of farmers conducting agricultural and related
activities on that land. The objective of saving the agricultural lands is not
for them to lie fallow and go wild, but to foster agricultural communities and
viable agricultural and related activities on those lands.
Revitalize Waipahū and Wahiawā
Special Area Plans and the Waipahū Neighborhood Transit-Oriented Development
Plan prepared in partnership with the Waipahū and Wahiawā communities will
guide redevelopment of these important gateway towns. To support the
revitalization of these towns, commercial and industrial development outside of
Waipahū and Wahiawā will be limited to completion of the Mililani Technology
Park development and building of new commercial centers designed to meet the
demand from their surrounding residential communities rather than a regional or
island-wide market.
Development within Waipahū and Wahiawā is supported by two Enterprise Zones
that provide State and County tax incentives to businesses which create new
jobs within the zones.
Build Master-Planned Residential Communities That Support Walking, Biking and
Transit Use
Growth in Central O‘ahu will mean community building, not just project
development. Residential growth will occur primarily in master-planned
communities (Royal Kunia, Koa Ridge and Waiawa). Almost 12,800 units will have
been added by 2035 to the 2010 total of almost 51,000 homes.
The master plans and design of new developments must demonstrate how they would
create communities that interact with each other and support the vision for
development of the entire Central O‘ahu region. Such communities should be
designed with identifiable and easily accessible town and village centers or
“main street areas” and incorporate a mixture of residential and commercial/job
center development. While not every community will have a “main street”, all
should have a “gathering place.”
These communities are designed to meet the needs of a wide range of families
and age groups. Ample housing should be provided for families needing
affordable units and starter homes as well as for those seeking large multi-
family and single-family units. Housing for persons of all ages will be needed,
including young adults just moving out on their own, families seeking to buy
their first home, and senior citizens wanting a retirement home close to their
children and grandchildren. Such a desirable variety in housing types can be
partially achieved through the inclusion of “granny flats” (small accessory
dwelling units) and/or “ohana” units where infrastructure will support these
additions, as permitted by Ordinance 15-41.
Separate identities should be created for existing and planned communities by
using open space, architectural design, streetscape treatments, and landscaping
which links to the regional open space and greenway network.
Design Communities to Reduce Automobile Usage
Central O‘ahu will be developed with a transportation system which:
   •   Reduces congestion by providing connectivity, both within and between
subdivisions;
   •   Provides easy access to transit;
   •   Uses traffic calming design; and
   •   Encourages people to walk and bike, reducing the need for use of the
automobile.
Where allowed by terrain, communities will be designed with multiple street/
walkway connections to adjacent communities and collector roads at approximate
1/4 mile intervals, thereby facilitating and encouraging convenient auto,
pedestrian and bikeway access to parks, schools, neighborhood shopping, and
transit corridors. These connections will also reduce congestion on major
regional roads by offering multiple alternative routes and facilitate improved
neighborhood access for emergency and utility vehicles.
Moderate density housing and commercial development will be built along the
portion of the Honolulu Rail Transit line from Kunia Road through Waipahū to
Pearl Highlands in the Primary Urban Center. The moderate density residential
and commercial uses centered around Honolulu Rail Transit stations in Waipahū
and at Leeward Community College will support efficient use of bicycles, buses
and rail transit, allowing residents and commuting workers to minimize
automobile use.
The elevated Honolulu Rail Transit system will run on the median of Farrington
Highway through Waipahū and will have two Waipahū stations (West Loch and
Waipahū Transit Center) and a station at Leeward Community College.
Express buses will also run along the H-2 Freeway, from Waipahū to Wahiawā,
connecting to the Honolulu Rail Transit Pearl Highlands Station by a flyover
ramp from the H-2 Freeway.
Automobile usage will be reduced by seamlessly integrating bus service with
rail service using local shuttles and Bus Rapid Transit to connect Central
O‘ahu communities to rail stations.
Protect Natural, Historic and Cultural Resources
The Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan provides a vision for
preservation, conservation, and enhancement of community resources.
Natural resources will be conserved through:
   •   Retaining natural drainageways;
   •   Protecting valuable plant and wildlife habitats;
   •   Cleaning up contaminated areas;
   •   Efficiently using all water supplies through conservation measures and
distribution system leak repair;
   •   Developing a dual water distribution system with potable water for
drinking and other clean water uses and non-potable water for irrigation and
industrial uses;
   •   Reclaiming non-potable water from wastewater where feasible; and
   •   Supporting efforts to minimize degradation of protection provided to the
environment by the Conservation District.
Cultural and Historic Resources will be preserved and enhanced by:
   •   Protecting panoramic views;
   •   Retaining visual landmarks and significant vistas;
   •   Preserving significant historic and pre-historic features from Central
O‘ahu’s past; and
   •   As required by State law, conducting surveys to thoroughly assess the
historical significance of sites and structures affected by development
projects and to identify the appropriate measures to preserve the historic and
cultural values of the resources.
Provide Adequate Infrastructure to Meet the Needs of New and Existing
Development
Public agencies will work with the community (residents, businesses,
developers, and landowners) to address current deficiencies in roads, schools,
and parks and to create adequate infrastructure to meet the needs of the
residential and working population of the area. Especially for public schools,
emergency medical services, and peak hour roadway capacity, the construction
schedule of new development that generates increased service demands will be
coordinated with the timing for the development of needed infrastructure
capacity.
Completion of the first increment of the elevated Honolulu Rail Transit system
(from East Kapolei to Ala Moana Shopping Center) is critical to the O‘ahu
General Plan policy of relieving development pressure elsewhere on O‘ahu by
developing the Second City in ‘Ewa and the Urban Fringe in ‘Ewa and Central
O‘ahu. It is needed to provide an effective and reliable alternative to
commuting by auto for a significant number of commuters. Without the project,
traffic delays for Leeward O‘ahu commuters would increase by 46 percent
compared to today, according to the 2010 Honolulu High-Capacity Transit
Corridor Project Environmental Impact Statement (p. 3-28).
When applications for new projects are reviewed and approved, conditions will
be included as a part of the land use approval, requiring that, before building
permits are issued, a determination be made by the Department of Planning and
Permitting that key infrastructure is developed in a timely manner to meet the
needs resulting from the new projects.
Public-private mechanisms for financing infrastructure such as Tax Increment
Financing (TIF) and Community Facilities Districts (CFD) will be developed to
support timely development of infrastructure, in accordance with approved
private project master plans and public agency functional plans and
infrastructure facility development plans.
Public agencies’ planning for infrastructure needs will be guided by where the
Sustainable Communities Plan indicates residential and commercial development
should occur. See the discussion of development priorities in Section 2.2.10.
2.2   KEY ELEMENTS OF THE VISION
The vision for Central O‘ahu’s future will be implemented through the following
elements:
   2.2.1   Community Growth Boundary
   2.2.2   Retention of Agricultural Lands and Enhancement of Agricultural
Productivity
   2.2.3   Open Space and Greenways
   2.2.4   Revitalization of the Waipahū and Wahiawā Town Centers
   2.2.5   Economic Development and Enterprise Zones
   2.2.6   Master-planned Residential Communities and Vital Rural Villages
   2.2.7   Communities Designed to Support Non-Automotive Travel
   2.2.8   Conservation of Natural Resources
   2.2.9   Preservation and Enhancement of Historic and Cultural Resources
   2.2.10   Adequate Infrastructure
Each of these elements is discussed below.
2.2.1   COMMUNITY GROWTH BOUNDARY
The Community Growth Boundary for Central O‘ahu gives long-range protection
from urbanization for 10,350 acres of prime and unique agricultural lands and
for preservation of open space, while providing adequate land for residential,
commercial, and industrial uses needed in Central O‘ahu for the foreseeable
future. It is the intent that urban zoning not be approved beyond this
Boundary.
The Community Growth Boundary for Central O‘ahu is illustrated in
Exhibit 2.1, shown in greater detail on the four conceptual maps in Appendix A,
and described conceptually in the Appendix A Glossary.
Criteria. Criteria for establishing whether an area should be considered inside
or outside the boundary are given below:
The boundary generally circumscribes the existing communities and the planned
developments of Royal Kunia, Wahiawā, Mililani, Mililani Mauka, Koa Ridge
Makai, Waiawa, Waipi‘o, Waikele and Mililani Technology Park.
   •   Areas outside of the State Urban District, with the exception of
portions of Waiawa, and approximately 32 acres of Waikele Gulch formerly used
for military operations that are currently approved for nonconforming
industrial uses; and
   •   Areas inside the State Urban District which are in either the
Preservation or Agriculture Zoning Districts, with the exception of Phase II of
the Mililani Technology Park (which has Development Plan approval for urban
use, but still has Ag-1 zoning), Waiawa Castle & Cooke, and portions of Waiawa
that are planned for development but have not been rezoned.
   Exhibit 2.1: Community Growth Boundary for ‘Ewa and Central O‘ahu
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9313.png]
 
Objectives. The main objectives of the Central O‘ahu Urban Community Boundary
are to:
   •   Support General Plan policy;
   •   Support diversification of agriculture in Central O‘ahu;
   •   Allow residential development in specified master-planned communities;
   •   Promote an efficient pattern of urban development and support the full
development of the Primary Urban Center and the Secondary Urban Center;
   •   Avoid development of hazardous areas; and
   •   Protect natural and scenic resources.
Protection for Prime Agricultural Land. The Community Growth Boundary protects
prime agricultural lands along Kunia Road, north of Wahiawā, surrounding
Mililani, and on the Waipi‘o Peninsula from urban development for the
foreseeable future, providing an incentive for landowners to give long term
leases to farmers. No proposals for urban uses will be considered for these
areas.
Open Space Network. Within the Urban Community Boundary, significant acreage
will be retained in open space in parks, wildlife habitats, golf courses,
agricultural lands, and natural and grass-lined drainageways. (Of the estimated
21,500 acres within the Urban Community Boundary, almost 5,250 acres or 24
percent of the acreage will be in open space.) Two agricultural areas within
the Boundary, Pine Spur and Honbushin, which provide a green space break
between Mililani and the Schofield Barracks/Wheeler Army Air Field/Wahiawa area
will be retained in the Agricultural Zoning District, and no proposals for
urban uses for these areas will be considered.
Capacity for Growth. Even with the amount of land reserved for agriculture,
parks, and open space, there is ample capacity within the Urban Community
Boundary for residential, commercial, and industrial development extending
beyond the 20-year horizon (2035).
As shown in
Table 2.1, almost 1,700 acres are available for residential development, 280
acres for retail and office development, 100 acres for industrial development,
and almost 70 acres for high-technology and medical park development.
Development will be approved in phases to match the provision of
infrastructure.
2.2.2   RETENTION OF AGRICULTURAL LANDS AND ENHANCEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL
PRODUCTIVITY
The closure of the O‘ahu Sugar Company in 1995 raised serious questions about
how thousands of acres of former sugar lands in Central O‘ahu should be used in
the future.
The withdrawal of Del Monte Corporation from pineapple cultivation on O‘ahu in
2006 added to the urgency of supporting viable agricultural uses.
The Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan protects the highest value prime
and unique agricultural lands in Central O‘ahu from urban development.
These high value lands are located in four areas:
   •   Lands along both sides of Kunia Road,
   •   Lands north of Wahiawā,
   •   Lands surrounding Mililani, and
   •   Lands on the Waipi‘o Peninsula which are inside the Navy restricted area
arc around the Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam West Loch Annex.
State agencies indicated that these prime and unique agricultural lands in
Central O‘ahu should be retained in agriculture because they are among the best
in the State, are supported by an extensive, well-developed agricultural
infrastructure, and are near the major transportation hub for export markets.
TABLE 2.1 CENTRAL O‘AHU DEVELOPMENT CAPACITY AND ENTITLEMENT STATUS
            Potential Number of Units      Developable Land Area (Gross
Projects(1) Housing   Which                Acres)                         Total
            Units     Need LUC Need Zoning Housing Comm. Ind. Tech./ Med.
                                                              Park
TABLE 2.1 CENTRAL O‘AHU DEVELOPMENT CAPACITY AND ENTITLEMENT STATUS
             Potential Number of Units Developable Land Area (Gross
Projects(1)  Housing   Which           Acres)                         Total
             Units     Need LUC Need   Housing Comm. Ind. Tech./ Med.
                                Zoning                    Park
Mililani
Technology                                                16          16
Park(2)
Royal Kunia  2,000                     206     20    103              329
Phase II
Royal Kunia
Phase II     1,600     1,600    1,600  161                            161
expansion(3)
(4)
Waiawa Phase
I & II(3)    5,900                     546     119                    665
(5)
Waiawa Phase 6,500     6,500    6,500  600     10                     610
III
Waiawa
Castle &     1,500     1,500    1,500  114                            114
Cooke (6)
Koa Ridge    3,500                     365     60    10               425
Makai(7)
Koa Ridge
Medical Park                                              28          28
(7)
Waipahū TOD 4,500
(8)
Leeward
Community    820                820
College TOD
(9)
Waikele
Storage Park                                         32               32
(10)
Totals       26,320    9,600    10,420 1,992   209   145  59          2,405
   Total  15,900                    1,117   199   113  59          1,488
Zoned
NOTES:
See
Exhibit 2.3 for location of projects. Acreages and housing unit capacity
estimates as of December 2017. Construction timing will depend on market
conditions, approvals and permits.
(1)   Projects on lands located inside the Community Growth Boundary which
are eligible for processing zone change and other development applications
and permits.
(2)   150 acres in Phase II of Mililani Technology Park were purchased by
the State for a First Responder Technology Campus and Cybersecurity Data
Center, and are no longer available.
(3)   Development may be delayed due to long term leases for photovoltaic
projects.
(4)   When the application to place Royal Kunia Phase II in the State Urban
District was before the State Land Use Commission (LUC), the applicant
stated that this 161 acre area would be developed as a golf course. Now the
developer proposes residential development instead. Because one condition
of the LUC approval is to develop in “substantial compliance with
representations” made to the LUC, LUC approval to develop for residential
use instead of golf course development will be required.
(5)   Commercial acreage includes 68 acres in Commercial/Industrial Mixed
Use.
(6)   The State LUC identified Waiawa Castle & Cooke as eligible for
“incremental” reclassification to the State Urban District when and if
further conditions are met. Community areas in Waiawa Castle & Cooke can
contain small commercial centers.
(7)   The LUC granted reclassification to the Urban District for Koa Ridge
Makai in June 2012. Developable area estimates for Koa Ridge are based on
zoning and recent Urban Design Plan submittals.
(8)   The units estimate shown is the potential increase in development
capacity based on the TOD overlay zoning regulations adopted for Waipahū by
Ordinance 17-56 (October 26, 2017).
(9)   The units estimate shown is the potential increase in development
capacity if TOD overlay zoning regulations are adopted based on the Aiea-
Pearl City Neighborhood TOD Plan (September 2014).
(10)   Twelve condominium property regime parcels (32 acres) located in
Waikele Gulch (former military installation) are currently being used as
self-storage facilities, which the City approved as a non-conforming use
when the federal government transferred ownership of the properties to a
private entity. Future land use designation changes are anticipated to be
sought for these 32 acres to allow industrial use of the properties
(including for storage and accessory office use) without nonconforming
status.
Source: Department of Planning and Permitting records and annual survey
results.
 
These 10,350 acres of agricultural land protected by the Community Growth
Boundary have been rated, in the most authoritative studies, as potentially
among the most productive lands in the State for diversified agriculture, and
as lands uniquely suited for pineapple production.
The State Department of Agriculture’s November 1977 study, Agricultural Lands
of Importance to the State of Hawai‘i (Revised) (ALISH), indicates that the
lands along Kunia Road, north of Wahiawā, and surrounding Mililani are uniquely
suited for agriculture. The ALISH study also identifies the former sugar lands
along Kunia Road and a portion of the lands on the Waipi‘o Peninsula as “prime”
agricultural lands which generally produce the largest yields and the best
quality crops for the least expenditure of energy.
The University of Hawaii Land Study Bureau’s December 1972 bulletin, Detailed
Land Classification - Island of O‘ahu, rated productive capacity of the former
sugar fields in Kunia as A and B and the Waipi‘o Peninsula lands as B and C.
Former pineapple lands along Kunia Road, north of Wahiawā, and surrounding
Mililani were predominately rated as B. (An A rating was given to the highest
productivity lands and E was given to the lowest).
One reason for the high ratings for the Kunia lands is that they have unique
advantages in infrastructure, water availability from the Waiahole Ditch, and
access to the local markets of Honolulu and to the export markets through
Honolulu International Airport.
Successful agricultural operations are currently being pursued on the Kunia,
Wahiawā, and Mililani lands. Seed crops, potatoes, melons, and other crops are
being grown on the Kunia lands.
Agricultural activities on Navy lands on the Waipi‘o Peninsula ended with the
shut down of the sugar plantations in ‘Ewa and Central O‘ahu. In the early
2000’s, the Navy did request proposals for agricultural activities on its
Waipi‘o Peninsula and ‘Ewa Plains lands around the Joint Base Pearl Harbor West
Loch Annex. Leases have been let for farming of the ‘Ewa Plains lands within
the Navy restricted area around the West Loch Annex, but not for the Waipi‘o
Peninsula lands.
The Navy has recently approved a 30 year lease for a 42 acre site at the
Waipi‘o Peninsula which will be developed as a solar farm. Details of the 2013
Final Environmental Assessment for the project indicate the Navy is unlikely to
seek to lease lands on the Peninsula for agricultural purposes due to various
operational restrictions.
Additional protection for Central O‘ahu agricultural lands is provided by the
State Important Agricultural Lands (IAL) program. Once identified as IAL, such
lands cannot be rezoned without a “super majority” vote, and are eligible for
incentives which encourage their retention in agricultural use.
State law also permits owners to submit a petition to the Land Use Commission
(LUC) to reclassify up to 15 percent of the IAL area into a State Rural, Urban,
or Conservation Land Use District. How this 15 percent of the IAL land is to be
developed under City plans and zoning still needs to be determined by the City
as part of the approval of the incentives for IAL.
In 2013, the State Land Use Commission, in response to an application from the
landowner, approved Important Agricultural Land designation for over 400 acres
of Castle & Cooke lands in Central O‘ahu.
The City is in the middle of the process of identifying additional IAL for
O‘ahu, having identified the criteria and standards to be used in selecting the
IAL. In the next phase of the process, specific IAL will be approved by the
City Council and then submitted to the Land Use Commission for final approval.
(See
Exhibit 3.1 for a map of lands eligible for consideration as IAL under eight
statutory criteria and one technical criterion.)
By protecting agricultural lands from urban development, an opportunity has
been created for long-term retention and development of diversified agriculture
on small farms, corporate lands, and agricultural parks. However, protection
through land use plans and regulations, while necessary, is not sufficient to
create a strong diversified agricultural sector in Central O‘ahu. Public-
private partnerships are needed to solve problems of lease terms and tenure,
access to capital, research, and marketing if this vision is to be realized.
State and City support for diversified agriculture activities is needed, and
should include water system improvements, and economic infrastructure like
grower cooperatives, storage and distribution systems, and an expanded network
of farmers’ markets.
2.2.3   OPEN SPACE AND GREENWAYS
Large agricultural areas, parks, golf courses, and other open space areas are
linked by a network of ravines and greenways to create an Open Space Network.
See the Open Space Map in Appendix A.
Table 2.2 lists the major components of the Central O‘ahu Open Space Network.
The ravines remain free of further urbanization, with the exception of
approximately 32 acres in the Waikele Gulch outside of the 100-year flood plain
that are approved for nonconforming industrial uses, preserving their scenic,
natural resource, and recreational values. They provide natural open space
breaks between the agricultural fields and urbanized areas, define boundaries,
and provide view amenities for the master-planned communities. They have become
part of a ravine recreational network featuring trails and passive open space.
Where possible, drainage, transportation, and utility corridors are used to
create a system of linear greenbelts or greenways characterized by landscaping
and bikeways which will connect existing and planned communities.
An important element in the Central O‘ahu Open Space Network is the Patsy T.
Mink Central O‘ahu Regional Park which provides needed open space, recreational
opportunities, and a point for access to the Kīpapa and Waikele Gulches when
they become part of the proposed ravine recreational network.
The Waipahū Shoreline Park and Preservation Area will restore public access to
the Pearl Harbor West Loch and Middle Loch shoreline, provide passive and
active recreational facilities, and anchor one end of the Pearl Harbor Historic
Trail; a path shared by bikers and pedestrians running from the Rainbow Marina
near Aloha Stadium to Nānākuli. When redeveloped, the Trail could be a world-
class facility, celebrating O‘ahu’s culture and history while providing
recreation and encouraging healthy activity by local residents.
TABLE 2.2: CENTRAL O‘AHU OPEN SPACE NETWORK
TABLE 2.2: CENTRAL O‘AHU OPEN SPACE NETWORK
Mountain and Agricultural Areas
   Wai‘anae Range Conservation District Lands
   Agricultural Lands along Kunia Road
   Agricultural Lands North of Wahiawā in Poamoho
   Agricultural Lands Surrounding Mililani
   Agricultural Lands in the Waipi‘o Peninsula Restricted Area
   Military Training Areas (west of Schofield Barracks and East Range)
   Ko‘olau Range Conservation District Lands
Natural Gulches and Drainageways
   Waiawa Stream
   Waikele Stream/Gulch
   Kīpapa Stream/Gulch
   Pānakauahi Gulch
   Waikakalaua Stream
   Kaukonahua Stream (North and South Forks)
Shoreline Areas
   Pearl Harbor access points
   Wetlands and Wildlife Habitats
      Pouhala Marsh
Parks
   Waipahū Cultural Garden Park
   Bill Balfour Jr. Waipahū District Park
   Waipahū District Park
   Waipahū Shoreline Park and Preservation Area (planned)
       including the Waipi‘o Peninsula Soccer Park
   Patsy T. Mink Central O‘ahu Regional Park
   Mililani District Park
   Mililani Mauka District Park
   Wahiawā State Freshwater Park
   Wahiawā Botanical Garden
   George Fred Wright Wahiawā District Park
Golf Courses
   Ted Makalena
   Royal Kunia
   Waikele
   Hawai‘i Country Club
   Mililani
   Leileihua (military)
   Kalākaua (military)
Green Way Corridors
   Historic OR&L Railway/Pearl Harbor Historic Trail
   H-2 Freeway
   Kamehameha Highway (from Waipahū Street to Wahiawā)
   Meheula Parkway
   Wilikina Drive (from Kunia Road to Kaukonahua Stream)
 
2.2.4   REVITALIZATION OF WAIPAHŪ AND WAHIAWĀ
Waipahū and Wahiawā will be revitalized through policies and programs designed
to attract new investment and increase levels of activity in their traditional
commercial and civic centers. Additional mid-rise development will be allowed
in both towns and encouraged around the Honolulu Rail Transit stations in
Waipahū as part of an economic revitalization strategy.
Special Area Plans for Waipahū and Wahiawā have been prepared in partnership
with the Waipahū and Wahiawā communities to provide a community-based strategy
for the revitalization efforts.
More recently, a Waipahū Neighborhood Transit-Oriented Development Plan was
prepared with community input and adopted in April 2014 by the City Council. It
will serve as the basis for a zoning ordinance amendment to guide redevelopment
for the area roughly within 1/2 mile of the two Honolulu Rail Transit stations
in Waipahū.
As discussed in the following sections, two Enterprise Zones support job
development in Waipahū and Wahiawā by offering businesses incentives to develop
and create jobs within the zones (See
Exhibit 2.2 for location).
2.2.5   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND ENTERPRISE ZONES
Outside of Waipahū, Wahiawā, and the Mililani Technology Park, new commercial
and industrial development will be designed to meet the demand from surrounding
residential communities rather than a regional or island-wide market, in order
to support the development of the secondary urban center in ‘Ewa and the
revitalization of the town centers of Waipahū and Wahiawā.
Three Enterprise Zones (as shown in
Exhibit 2.2) were approved by the City Council in the Central O‘ahu Sustainable
Communities Plan Area. The northernmost Zone includes industrial and commercial
areas in Wahiawā and Mililani Technology Park. The southernmost Zone includes
areas along Kunia Road, Waipahū, and the Waipi‘o Peninsula (as well as Pearl
City’s Manana area and the Pearl City Peninsula which is located in the Primary
Urban Center Development Plan Area). A new central Zone includes areas in
Waipi‘o and Koa Ridge Makai.
   Exhibit 2.2: Central O‘ahu Enterprise Zones
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9325.png]
 
Under enabling legislation approved by the City Council in 1995 (Resolution 95-
292), in 2002 (Resolution 02-227), and in 2016 (Resolution 16-120), qualifying
businesses receive rebates on City property taxes for two years, and waiver of
certain county fees for seven years. In addition, under State law (Chapter
209E, Hawai‘i Revised Statutes), the businesses may receive exemptions from
State excise taxes for seven years, a decreasing State income tax credit for
seven years, and a State income tax credit for unemployment insurance premiums.
Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, Schofield Barracks/Wheeler Army Air Field, and
the Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam Wahiawā Annex are important job centers for
Central O‘ahu which provide an alternative to commuting to downtown Honolulu,
and need to be supported, as appropriate and consistent with the vision for
Central O‘ahu.
2.2.6   MASTER-PLANNED RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITIES AND VITAL RURAL VILLAGES
A network of master-planned residential communities provides a wide variety of
housing and can accommodate the need for affordable housing. Master plans guide
developments in Royal Kunia, Waikele, Waiawa, Waiawa Castle & Cooke, and Koa
Ridge Makai (See
Exhibit 2.3 for project locations).
These master-planned communities should incorporate planning policies and
guidelines to preserve historic and cultural values, establish open space and
greenway networks, and create well designed, livable communities.
Such communities should be designed with an identifiable, distinct and easily
accessible main street, town center or neighborhood center which may include a
mixture of residential and small-scale community-related commercial
development.
These master-planned communities should also be designed and developed in ways
that protect and expand green infrastructure, and conserve water and reduce
water pollution through use of low-impact development best practices.
Finally, the master-planned communities should be complete communities which
provide jobs, affordable housing, and amenities so that more Central O‘ahu
residents have the opportunity to live, work, and play without having to leave
Central O‘ahu.
   Exhibit 2.3: Existing and New Master-Planned Communities
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9329.png]
 
In particular, affordable rental housing should be provided for students,
families, seniors, and those with special needs.
Two rural villages with roots in O‘ahu’s plantation past, Kunia Village and
Poamoho Village, have been protected as historical and cultural resources.
However, they are more than nostalgic museum attractions, and are being
refurbished and reinvented to be vital rural villages, providing homes and
opportunities in a way reminiscent of their plantation days.
2.2.7   COMMUNITIES DESIGNED TO SUPPORT NONAUTOMOTIVE TRAVEL
The master-planned residential communities will be designed or redeveloped to
support pedestrian and bike use within the community and transit use for trips
both within and outside of the community.
Connectivity will be established within subdivisions by use of walkable block
sizes and street standards and between subdivisions by establishing and
implementing a 1/4 mile collector/ connector master road plan, where permitted
by terrain.
An east-west Rail Transit Corridor running through Waipahū will be part of a
rapid transit system linking the Primary Urban Center with the University of
Hawai‘i West O‘ahu Campus and the City of Kapolei.
Medium density mixed residential and commercial development will be developed
around the two Honolulu Rail Transit stations located on Farrington Highway at
Leoku Street and at Mokuola Street. (Their general location is indicated on
Exhibit 3.4 and on the Public Facilities Map in Appendix A). Medium density
mixed residential and commercial development will also be developed around the
Honolulu Rail Transit station at the Leeward Community College campus.
The Honolulu Rail Station located at Pearl Highlands in Pearl City (which is in
the Primary Urban Center Development Plan Area) will be important for Central
O‘ahu residents who will be able to access the rail transit station park and
ride lot from the H-2 highway.
The rail stations will serve as the hubs for bus routes and include bike
sharing facilities, making it easy to transfer from one transportation mode to
another. Access to the rail transit system from other Central O‘ahu communities
will be provided by mass transit bus service, park and ride facilities, and
express bus service running within High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) lanes.
2.2.8   CONSERVATION OF NATURAL RESOURCES
Central O‘ahu’s natural resources, including endangered species habitats,
ravines, potable water supply, and Pearl Harbor waters, will be conserved by:
   •   Protecting open space outside the Community Growth Boundary from urban
development;
   •   Identifying and protecting endangered species habitats and other
important ecological zones from threats such as fire, weeds, feral animals, and
human activity;
   •   Retaining the major Central O‘ahu ravines as flood plains and open space
resources by restricting further development and minimizing grading or other
disturbance of the gulch walls;
   •   Designing the regional drainage and wastewater treatment system to
minimize non-point source pollution of the ocean and Pearl Harbor;
   •   Protecting prime watershed recharge areas and the Pearl Harbor potable
aquifer which underlies the Central O‘ahu area;
   •   Protecting valuable habitats for endangered waterbirds located on the
shoreline of Pearl Harbor at Pouhala Marsh;
   •   Efficiently using all water supplies through conservation measures and
distribution system leak repair;
   •   Cleaning up contaminated areas that pose hazards to soil and water
quality; and
   •   Reducing light pollution’s impact on wildlife by requiring use, where
sensible, of fully shielded lighting fixtures using lower wattages.
See
Exhibit 3.3 in Chapter 3 for a conceptual mapping of key natural resources.
2.2.9   PRESERVATION AND ENHANCEMENT OF HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
Central O‘ahu’s historic and cultural resources will be preserved and enhanced
by:
   •   Preserving significant historic and pre-historic features from the
plantation era and earlier periods, including:
         The Waipahū Sugar Mill and surrounding related features;
         The OR&L right-of-way;
         Kunia and Poamoho Villages and other remnants of the plantation era;
         Hawai‘i’s Plantation Village (at the Waipahū Cultural Garden), which
brings together plantation-era buildings as an attraction; and
         Native Hawaiian cultural and archaeological sites, notably the
Kukaniloko complex;
   •   Retaining visual landmarks and significant vistas, including:
         Distant vistas of the shoreline and Pearl Harbor from the H-2 Freeway
and Kunia Road above the ‘Ewa Plain;
         Views of the Wai‘anae and Ko‘olau Mountains from Kunia Road,
Kamehameha Highway, and H-2 Freeway;
         Views of Pearl Harbor from Farrington Highway/H-2 Freeway access east
of Waipahū High School;
         The view of the Waipahū Sugar Mill stack and mill building from
Waipahū Depot Road;
         The view of the Wai‘anae Mountains from the Waipahū Cultural Garden;
         The view of the Wai‘anae Mountains from Mililani High School, from
Meheula Parkway near Keaolani Street, and from Mililani District Park;
         The view of Diamond Head and Pearl Harbor from Mililani Recreation
Center No. 2;
         The view of the upper Central O‘ahu plains toward Waialua and of the
Wai‘anae Mountains from the intersection of Kamehameha Highway and Whitmore
Avenue, north of Wahiawā;
         The view of West Loch and of the Wai‘anae Range from Kamehameha
Highway while passing the Central O‘ahu Regional Park; and
   •   Limiting building heights outside of Waipahū and Wahiawā to low-rise and
mid-rise structures to protect panoramic views and the character of the built
environment.
2.2.10   DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES
Development in Central O‘ahu shall be characterized by:
   •   Transit-Oriented Development in Waipahū, supporting the revitalization
of Waipahū and transit ridership;
   •   Creation of new job centers for Wahiawā and Whitmore Village serving
Central O‘ahu and North Shore diversified agriculture and age friendly
communities;
   •   Completion of existing and approved master-planned residential
developments and proposed developments at Royal Kunia, Koa Ridge Makai, and
Waiawa (See the Development Capacity and Special Areas Map in Appendix A and
Table 2.1);
   •   Moderate growth of commercial centers in Central O‘ahu Urban Fringe
Areas to primarily serve the needs of the surrounding residential communities;
   •   Adequate Facilities Requirements adopted as a condition of zoning
approvals to ensure that development does not outpace infrastructure
development;
   •   Coordinated Public-Private Infrastructure and Project Development that
supports the directed growth strategy of the General Plan (Examples include a
number of transportation projects on the H-2 Freeway); and
   •   Adequate Funding for Infrastructure through methods such as Tax
Increment Financing (TIF) and Community Facilities District (CFD) which provide
funding for infrastructure concurrently with, or in advance of, residential
and/or commercial development.
Table 2.1 provides estimates of the approximate size and scale of projects
shown in
Exhibit 2.3 and on the Land Use Map and Development Capacity and Special Areas
Map in Appendix A. Several projects shown have previously received Development.
Plan and zoning approval and are at various stages in the development process.
A number of proposed projects would require land use approvals to proceed.
In addition, transit-oriented development zoning proposed for adoption for
Waipahū and Leeward Community College may allow as many as 5,300 additional
units.
The total potential residential development in the region is estimated to be
almost 24,000 units, but zoning had been approved for only 10,800 units, as of
December 2015.
Annual housing unit construction in Central O‘ahu averaged 930 units per year
from 1990 to 1999, but slowed to about 520 per year between 2000 and 2009.
(Since 2010, housing unit production by major developers has fallen to less
than 50 units per year due to market conditions, build out of project areas,
and difficulties in obtaining new entitlements.) At the higher 1990 - 1999
rate, over 25 years worth of development capacity is provided within the
Community Growth Boundary in Central O‘ahu.
The Department’s most recent projections of likely growth for O‘ahu, prepared
in 2009, project annual housing absorption from 2010 to 2035 for Central O‘ahu
to average approximately 510 units per year. At that rate, more than 45 years
of residential development capacity is provided within the Community Growth
Boundary in Central O‘ahu.
3. LAND USE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
The land use policies and guidelines in this chapter should be used in the
review and approval of public and private projects in Central O‘ahu in order to
help implement the vision for Central O‘ahu’s development as described in the
preceding chapter. These policies and guidelines are not regulations, but
provide guidance that decision makers and administrators should follow, where
sensible, in approving projects and revising rules, regulations, and best
practice standards.
3.1   Open Space Preservation and Development
3.2   Regional Parks and Recreation Complexes
3.3   Community-Based Parks
3.4   Historic and Cultural Resources
3.5   Natural Resources Protection
3.6   Waipahū Town
3.7   Wahiawā Town
3.8   Central O‘ahu Plantation Villages
3.9   Existing and Planned Residential Communities
3.10   Planned Commercial Retail Centers
3.11   Industrial Centers
3.12   Mililani Technology Park
3.13   Military Areas
3.1   OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT
The open space system consists of both active and passive areas. Active areas
include parks, golf courses and agricultural fields. Passive areas include
lands in the State Conservation District, fallow land in the State Agricultural
District, and drainage and utility corridors. Shoreline areas may be either
active or passive.
After the withdrawal of plantation agriculture from nearly all of Central
O‘ahu, a range of new uses have been introduced or proposed. These include seed
crops, diversified agriculture, solar farms, and military uses.
Major changes in agricultural land ownership included the 2005 purchase of
2,400 acres of agricultural lands south of Schofield Barracks by Island Palm
Communities (a joint venture of Lendlease and the U.S. Army), and the State’s
2012 purchase of the 1,700 acre Galbraith Trust agricultural lands north of
Wahiawa.
Much of the Island Palm Communities land is still available for agriculture,
but portions of the lands may be used for replacement housing in the future to
free up land on Schofield Barracks, Wheeler Army Airfield, and Helemano for
military purposes.
The Hawai‘i Agricultural Foundation, with cooperation of Monsanto and Island
Palm Communities, has established a Kunia Agricultural Park on 182 acres of the
Island Palm Communities land.
The State Agribusiness Development Corporation (ADC) has responsibility for
1,200 acres of the Galbraith Trust lands, and has been preparing the soil and
working on establishing water sources in hopes of offering leases to farmers in
late 2016.
The Office of Hawaiian Affairs acquired the balance of the Galbraith Trust
lands, around 500 acres surrounding the important Kūkaniloko site, and is
reviewing possible uses for the lands around the site, including forestry,
orchard crops and other forms of diversified agriculture, to determine which
would be compatible with the Kūkaniloko site.
The ADC also has responsibility for another 91 acres adjacent to Schofield
Barracks. In addition, the Department of Agriculture is constructing and will
manage a 150 acre State agricultural park adjacent to Royal Kunia Phase 2
acquired in 2000 as a condition of zoning for Royal Kunia, and is managing
almost 500 acres near Wheeler Army Air Field.
   Exhibit 3.1: Qualified Lands Identified in the O‘ahu Important Agricultural
Lands Study
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9333.png]
 
3.1.1   GENERAL POLICIES
Open space will be used to:
   •   Provide long range protection for diversified agriculture on lands
outside the Community Growth Boundary and for two agricultural areas (Pine Spur
and Honbushin) located inside the Community Growth Boundary (See
Exhibit 3.1: Qualified Lands Identified in the O‘ahu Important Agricultural
Lands Study);
   •   Protect scenic views, and natural, cultural, and historic resources;
   •   Provide recreation;
   •   Define the boundaries of communities by:
      °   Using the large expanses of open space beyond the Community Growth
Boundary to define the regional urban pattern,
      °   Using the open space system within the Community Growth Boundary to
visually distinguish and physically separate individual communities,
neighborhoods, and land use area;
   •   Provide a fire safety buffer where developed areas border “wildlands”
either in preservation or agricultural areas;
   •   Promote the accessibility of shoreline and mountain areas (as required
by City Ordinance);
   •   Preserve natural gulches and ravines as drainageways and storm water
retention areas; and
   •   Create major pedestrian and bikeway linkages between communities such as
the OR&L / Pearl Harbor Historic Trail, through a network of greenways along
transportation and utility corridors and drainageways.
3.1.2   RELATION TO OPEN SPACE MAP
The following areas shown on the Open Space Map in Appendix A are components of
the regional open space system:
   Mountain and Agricultural Areas. These are the areas outside of the
Community Growth Boundary, including areas within the State Conservation
District.
   Natural Gulches and Drainageways. Within the Community Growth Boundary, the
major gulches, as identified in
Table 2.2, are indicated for preservation, except for the portion of
Waikakalaua Gulch that has been previously designated for urban use.
   Shoreline Areas. Along the Pearl Harbor shoreline, coastal-dependent uses
and features such as shoreline parks and wetlands are indicated as parks and
preservation areas, respectively.
   Parks. Only island-wide, regional and district parks are shown. Community
and neighborhood parks are also part of the open space system, but are
generally too small to display on a regional map. Their location is determined
more by community design considerations (see Section 3.3).
   Cemeteries. The existing Mililani Memorial Park and Mortuary is shown.
Cemeteries are a permitted use in the P-2 General Preservation Zoning District
and provide a form of landscaped open space.
   Golf Courses. All golf courses are shown, whether public or private-owned,
since their visual contribution to the open space system is the same.
   Greenways or Open Space Corridors. These corridors are indicated on the map
following certain public rights-of-way which make a significant contribution to
the regional open space network as linear connectors.
Significant elements in the Central O‘ahu Open Space Network are listed in
Table 2.2.
3.1.3   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Open Space
Preservation and Development should be implemented:
3.1.3.1   Mountain Areas
   •   Acquire and maintain public campgrounds and access to hiking trails in
the areas beyond the Community Growth Boundary on the slopes of both the
Wai‘anae Range and the Ko‘olau Range.
   •    Require public access to mountain areas where sensitive resources are
not affected, including vehicular access to and parking at trail heads and
public campgrounds, when new mauka developments are approved.
   •   Maintain the forest at higher elevations in the State Conservation
District. Plan utility corridors and other uses to avoid disturbances to areas
with high concentrations of native species.
   •   Identify endangered species, their habitats and other important
ecological zones and protect them from threats such as fire, weeds, feral
animals, and human activity.
   •   Protect areas proposed by the State Office of State Planning in the
State Land Use District Boundary Review (1992) for addition to the State
Conservation District to protect the Leeward Ko‘olau Watershed and the
hydrologic zone of contribution to the Navy Shaft in Waiawa from urban
development; provided, however, that urban uses such as utility installations
and public facilities specifically approved by the State Department of Health
and the Honolulu Board of Water Supply may be permitted with the zone of
contribution.
   •   Identify and protect areas that are important to Native Hawaiian
cultural practices.
3.1.3.2   Natural Gulches and Drainageways
   •   Preserve the major natural gulches within the Community Growth Boundary,
as listed in
Table 2.2, as part of the open space system.
   •   Integrate planned improvements to Central O‘ahu drainage systems into
the regional open space network by emphasizing the use of retention basins and
recreational access in the design approach (See Chapter 4, Section 4.6).
   •   View drainageways and utility corridors as opportunities to link major
open spaces with pedestrian and bike paths. Encourage shared use of these
resources to realize both their environmental contribution and recreational
value. (
Table 2.2 lists the major gulches.)
   •   Where practical, retain drainageways as natural or man-made vegetated
channels rather than concrete channels.
   •   Provide for pedestrian and bicycle access where these can be safely
accommodated.
3.1.3.3   Shoreline Areas
   •   Provide public access to the Pearl Harbor shoreline at intervals of
approximately 1/4 mile, except where access is restricted by the military for
security reasons. To make this access usable by the public, provide adequate
parking.
   •   Maintain and enhance, where necessary, nearshore wetlands and mangroves
as wildlife habitats.
   •   Provide, at a minimum, a 60-foot setback along the shoreline; and, where
possible, expand the setback to 150 feet where justified, based on historic or
adopted projections of coastal erosion rates.
   •   Analyze the possible impact of sea level rise for new public and private
projects in shoreline areas and incorporate, where appropriate and feasible,
measures to reduce risks and increase resiliency to impacts of sea level rise.
3.1.3.4   Agricultural Areas
   •   Permit facilities necessary to support intensive cultivation of arable
agricultural lands, including distribution, sales, or agri-tourism facilities.
   •   Permit facilities to support limited outdoor recreation use, such as
camping, horseback riding and hiking, preferably in areas where agricultural
use is least suitable.
   •   Permit residential use to the extent that it is accessory to the
agricultural use. Where several farm dwellings are planned as part of an
agricultural use, they should be sited and clustered to avoid the use of more
productive agricultural lands and to reduce infrastructure costs.
   •   Ensure that uses of non-residential farm buildings are consistent with
the intent and purpose of the agricultural zoning district and that the
structures are in compliance with the regulations regarding flood hazards.
   •   Design and locate buildings and other facilities that are accessory to
an agricultural operation to minimize impacts on nearby urban areas and
roadways.
3.1.3.5   Parks
   •   Maintain distant views of the Wai‘anae Range from Kamehameha Highway in
the development and siting of facilities and landscaping in the Patsy T. Mink
Central O‘ahu Regional Park. (See
Exhibit 3.2: Major Parks in the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan
Area.)
   •   Develop trails leading from Patsy T. Mink Central O‘ahu Regional Park to
Waikele Gulch and connecting to a trail system throughout Central O‘ahu
gulches.
   •   Establish a new shoreline park complex at Waipi‘o Peninsula, giving
access from Waipahū to the Pearl Harbor shoreline on the West Loch and Middle
Loch.
   •   Retain Wahiawā Botanical Garden as primarily a gulch in its natural
state.
   •   Expand Wahiawā Freshwater Park to include most of the area adjacent to
the Wahiawā Reservoir, limiting public access only as necessary to protect
water quality and public safety.
3.1.3.6   Golf Courses
   •   Locate and design golf courses to optimize their function as drainage
retention areas and as buffers between developments.
   •   Consider the impact on existing and proposed regional trails, paths, and
bike routes in designing new golf courses. Provide safe corridors by or through
the courses where necessary for those trails, paths, and bikeways.
   •   Design golf courses to provide view amenities for adjacent urban areas,
including public rights-of-way.
   •   Use landscape treatment, setbacks, and modifications to golf course
layout rather than fencing or solid barriers when screening is needed for
safety reasons, where feasible.
3.1.3.7   Wildlands - Urban Fire Hazard Setbacks
   •   As determined appropriate by the Honolulu Fire Department, require
residential or commercial developments that are adjacent either to preservation
areas within the Community Growth Boundary or to lands within the State
Conservation District to provide a setback to reduce the risk of fire spreading
from the “wildlands” to the developed area. Typically, such a setback would be
20 to 30 feet wide and landscaped with low growth, low-burn plantings.
   Exhibit 3.2: Major Parks in the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan
Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9337.png]
 
3.1.3.8   Greenways and Open Space Corridors
   •   Provide sufficient easement width for the major trunk lines and
transmission and distribution lines for utility systems, when their alignment
is not within a road right-of-way, to permit the growth of landscaping within
and adjacent to the easement, consistent with all applicable operations,
maintenance, and safety requirements.
   •   When overhead or underground transmission and distribution lines are
located within or adjacent to a road right-of-way, provide sufficient width to
permit the growth of landscaping adjacent to the transmission line, consistent
with all applicable operations, maintenance, and safety requirements. The
purpose of the landscaping is to divert attention from the overhead lines and,
preferably, obscure views of the overhead lines from the travel way and
adjacent residential areas.
   •   Place new transmission lines underground where possible under criteria
specified in State law.
   •   Permit the use of utility easements for pedestrian and bicycle routes,
consistent with all applicable operations, maintenance, and safety
requirements.
   •   Design the rights-of-way for major and minor arterials as landscaped
parkways or greenways, complete with a landscaped median strip, landscaped
sidewalks, and bikeways. Major arterials should have separate bike paths, and
minor arterials should have bike lanes. Suggested width for major arterials,
including right-of-way and planting strips, is 120 feet wide and for minor
arterials is 100 feet wide.
   •   Where urban development abuts the H-2 Freeway, provide an open space/
landscaped buffer of sufficient size to preserve a view of green, minimize the
visual intrusiveness of the development, and reduce the noise and air quality
impact of the freeway traffic on the abutting development.
   •   Link Wahiawā Botanical Garden to the Wahiawā Freshwater Park on Lake
Wilson by a trail through the gulch connecting the two areas.
3.2   REGIONAL PARKS AND RECREATION COMPLEXES
The following section presents general policies and guidelines for development
of regional parks and recreation complexes.
Regional recreational sites include the Patsy T. Mink Central O‘ahu Regional
Park, Wahiawā Botanical Garden, Wahiawā Freshwater Park, Waipahū Cultural
Garden, the proposed Waipahū Shoreline Park Complex, and public and privately-
owned golf courses.
Regional Parks - Patsy T. Mink Central O‘ahu Regional Park is a 269-acre park
developed on a triangular area across Kamehameha Highway from the Waipi‘o
Gentry planned community.
Key features of the Regional Park and sports complex include:
   •   Professional quality baseball, youth baseball, and softball complexes,
each with four diamonds;
   •   Multi-purpose fields for soccer and other field sports;
   •   A championship tennis complex with center court and 20 tennis courts;
   •   A community center and aquatic center with Olympic-sized swimming and
diving pools;
   •   An archery range; and
   •   Passive recreational areas for picnicking, kite-flying, and pedestrian
paths.
Additional features planned for the park include:
   •   Basketball courts and sand volleyball fields;
   •   A four field in-line hockey complex;
   •   A skateboard park;
   •   A dog obedience and training facility; and
   •   A tree farm.
Wahiawā Botanical Garden is a 27-acre park with a unique collection of plants
representing the mid-level rain forest habitat. It is located in a small ravine
in the center of Wahiawā and is one of five botanical gardens operated by the
City Department of Parks and Recreation. It includes a multi-purpose pavilion,
office, maintenance buildings, comfort station, and parking stalls.
The Garden has experienced problems in the past with erosion, lack of financial
support and patronage, vandalism, and illegal dumping. A new Master Plan was
developed in 2003 for the Garden and much of the facility has been
rehabilitated and expanded. Over the past few years, additional drainage
culverts have been added to handle the volume of water flowing through the
gulch.
Wahiawā Freshwater Park is a 66-acre State recreation area surrounding Lake
Wilson (Wahiawā Reservoir) which has picnicking facilities and the only year-
round freshwater shoreline and boat fishing area on O‘ahu. In addition to its
recreation value, the park serves as an edge for the western end of Wahiawā and
as a visual gateway to the North Shore.
Waipahū Cultural Garden is a 49-acre park site owned by the City. The private,
non-profit Friends of Waipahū Cultural Garden Park has established and operates
(as a concession) a recreated plantation village and museum to display the
cultural traditions, physical forms, and lifestyles of plantation workers and
their families. The park is not designed for active recreation, but does
include a picnic area, an ethno-botanic garden, and an educational building
with a crafts room.
Waipahū Shoreline Park Complex. A shoreline park and preservation area complex
is under development for the entire length of shoreline in Pearl Harbor’s West
Loch and Middle Loch. The complex currently includes:
   •   The Pearl Harbor Historic Trail (a shared use path running on the OR&L
right-of-way);
   •   The Pouhala Marsh Wildlife Sanctuary; and
   •   The Waipi‘o Peninsula Soccer Park.
The Pearl Harbor Historic Trail running on the OR&L right-of-way will allow
bikers and pedestrians to travel as far as Nānākuli to the west. Riding east,
the path follows a greenbelt linking a network of shoreline parks stretching
from West Loch to Rainbow Marina near Aloha Stadium. When redeveloped, the path
will celebrate O‘ahu’s history and culture, provide recreational access, and
encourage healthy activity.
Waipi‘o Peninsula Soccer Park, with a multi-field soccer complex, has been
developed by the City and County on lands that are leased from the Navy. It
includes a stadium, 20 play fields, and parking areas, and provides a venue for
local, national, and international soccer players to train and compete year-
round.
Additional elements proposed for the Waipahū Shoreline Park Complex include:
   •   A 19-acre passive park located makai of Leeward Community College and
east of Waipahū High School; and.
   •   Connections to the shoreline proposed in the Waipahū Neighborhood TOD
Plan (November 2012) which calls for eventual redevelopment of the urban area
makai of the Leoku Street station with “green finger” parks at the end of
streets linking them to the West Loch shoreline, and for creation of a new
Stream Walk greenway near the Mokuola Street station which would extend along
Kapakahi Stream to the Pouhala Marsh area.
The shoreline park could also potentially provide access to nearshore fishing
and boating in the Pearl Harbor West Loch waters if permitted by the United
States Navy.
(The locations of parks in Central O‘ahu are shown in
Exhibit 3.2.)
Golf Courses - Central O‘ahu has six golf courses. The City operates the Ted
Makalena Golf Course on the Waipi‘o Peninsula.
Privately-owned golf courses include the Hawai‘i Country Club, the Mililani
Golf Club, Royal Kunia Country Club, and the Waikele Golf Club. Additional
privately-owned courses have been planned for Royal Kunia and for Waiawa, but
it is not certain if those plans will go forward. Development of a planned
second golf course at Royal Kunia is deterred by binding conditions of zoning
requiring multi-million dollar contributions to the City and a local non-profit
foundation before the golf course opens. Plans for golf courses at the Waiawa
project are under review, and the areas may be used instead as open space areas
designed for scenic values and retention of storm waters.
The U. S. military operates the Leilehua Golf Course near Wheeler Army Air
Field. The Kalakaua golf course at Schofield Barracks has been closed because
part of the course land area has been developed for family housing. The
military is reviewing whether the course should be reopened and perhaps even
expanded.
3.2.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Consider using public-private partnerships to build and maintain park
and recreation complexes in order to sustain economic development.
   •   Design the built environment to avoid adverse impacts on natural
resources or processes in the coastal zone or any other environmentally
sensitive area.
   •   Design physical features to maximize visibility, foster positive
interactions among park and recreation complex users, and deter criminal acts
by increasing the likelihood of being caught.
Regional Parks.
   •   Construct facilities at Patsy T. Mink Central O‘ahu Regional Park
incrementally, as funding allows. Use private funds, if possible, to construct
some of the athletic facilities in the sports complex.
   •   Retain Wahiawā Botanical Garden primarily as a gulch in its natural
state. Focus improvements to the Wahiawā Botanical Garden on promoting
ecotourism, environmental education, and conservation of tropical plants;
undoing the effects of recent high waters; and mitigating the impacts of
flooding.
   •   Expand and improve park facilities at Wahiawā Freshwater Park, including
construction of the planned jogging path.
   •   Make improvements to the Waipahū Cultural Gardens which are consistent
with the historical and cultural theme of the park and which enhance open space
and passive recreational values.
   •   Establish a major new shoreline park complex, the Waipahū Shoreline Park
and Preservation Area Complex, giving access from Waipahū to the Pearl Harbor
shoreline by providing active and passive recreation facilities, completing the
Pearl Harbor Historic Trail (Leeward O‘ahu Bikeway), and connecting the area to
the rest of Waipahūu with a network of pedestrian and bike paths.
Golf Courses
   •   Limit municipal golf course improvements in Central O‘ahu to enhancement
of Ted Makalena Golf Course because of the need to use high-quality water for
irrigation above the Pearl Harbor aquifer.
   •   Locate any new stand-alone municipal courses to serve the region in ‘Ewa
where non-potable water for irrigation uses is available from the Honouliuli
Wastewater Treatment Plant.
   •   Use golf courses, where appropriate, to provide protection for open
space, and help reduce flooding and non-point pollution by helping retain storm
waters.
Recreation Complexes
   •   Design recreation complexes to be compatible with surrounding land uses
and environmental features.
3.2.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Regional Parks
and Recreation Complexes should be implemented.
3.2.2.1   Appropriate Scale and Siting
   •   Use architectural elements and siting to heighten the visibility of
major recreation events areas as they are approached from principal travel
corridors.
3.2.2.2   Environmental Compatibility
   •   Locate and operate uses that generate high noise levels in a way that
keeps noise to an acceptable level in existing and planned residential areas.
   •   To retain a sense of place, incorporate natural features of the site and
use landscape materials that are indigenous to the area in the design of
recreation areas where feasible.
   •   Use xeriscaping (the use of landscape materials with low water demand),
non-potable water for irrigation, and efficient irrigation systems wherever
possible to conserve groundwater resources. Give preference to use of drought-
resistant native Hawaiian plants where feasible and appropriate.
3.2.2.3   Community Integration
   •   Although the design of recreational attractions may have a distinct
identity and entry, link these destinations with surrounding areas using
connecting roadways, bikeways, walkways, landscape features or architectural
design.
3.2.2.4   Island-wide and Regional Parks
   •   Continue developing planned facilities at Patsy T. Mink Central O‘ahu
Regional Park, a major park of approximately 270 acres, at the site known as
“Waiola”, near Waikele and Waipi‘o. Maintain distant views of the Wai‘anae
Range from Kamehameha Highway in the development and siting of park landscaping
and facilities.
   •   Provide trails from the Patsy T. Mink Central O‘ahu Regional Park to
Waikele Gulch, connecting to a trail system throughout Central O‘ahu’s gulches.
   •   Connect the Wahiawā Botanical Garden to the Wahiawā Freshwater Park at
Lake Wilson by way of a trail in the gulch which connects the two facilities.
   •   Expand Wahiawā Freshwater Park to include most of the area adjacent to
the Wahiawā Reservoir, limiting public access only as necessary to protect
water quality and public safety.
(The locations of parks in Central O‘ahu are shown in
Exhibit 3.2.)
3.2.2.5   Sports and Recreation Complexes
Definition of Use Areas
   •   Separate uses that attract a high number of people for events as much as
possible from residential areas and wildlife habitats.
   •   Provide amenities and service facilities to accommodate “tailgate”
picnics, as well as nearby picnic tables and outdoor grills in parking areas
for sporting events.
Transportation Facilities
   •   Locate bus loading areas, shelters, and bicycle parking facilities as
close as possible to entry gates for special events areas.
   •   Locate bus stops at all principal activity areas.
Views
   •   Locate and design facilities for special events to be readily visible
and identifiable from the principal transportation corridors that lead to them.
   •   Establish the visual identity of the complex through distinctive
architecture, landscaping, or natural setting.
Landscape Treatment
   •   Minimize the visibility of perimeter fencing, parking lots and garages,
and other utilitarian elements through plantings or other appropriate visual
screens along roadway frontages.
   •   Plant canopy trees to provide shade in large parking lots. Use special
paving or pavement markings to indicate pedestrian routes to destinations and
differentiate sections of the parking area.
Natural Environment
   •   Retain, protect, and incorporate wetland and other wildlife habitat
areas as passive recreational resources.
3.2.2.6   Siting
   •   Island-wide and regional parks and golf courses are shown on the Open
Space Map and the Public Facilities Maps in Appendix A.
   •   Require a City review and approval process which provides adequate
public notice and opportunity for input for any change in the location of an
island-wide or regional park or a golf course.
   •   Allow additional regional sports and recreation complexes in areas
designated for commercial, industrial, or park use, subject to a City review
and approval process that provides public review and complete analysis.
3.3   COMMUNITY-BASED PARKS
The following section provides general policies and guidelines for community-
based parks and recreation areas.
As of 2014, Central O‘ahu had over 1,100 acres in existing or planned parks, of
which 370 acres are in community-based public and private parks.
Table 3.1 lists the existing and planned public and private parks and golf
courses in Central O‘ahu.
Community-based parks (and associated recommended size and service area radius)
include:
   •   Mini-parks (no size specified and 1/2 mile),
   •   Neighborhood parks (5 acres, 1/2 mile),
   •   Community parks (10 acres, one mile), and
   •   District parks (20 acres, two miles).
The primary method of acquiring the needed additional park land will be through
the park dedication ordinance which requires developers to dedicate land for
parks and playgrounds. The ordinance requires dedication of a minimum of 110
square feet per apartment, multi-family building, and planned development
dwelling unit, and 350 square feet per one-family, two-family, and duplex unit
as part of the subdivision approval process.
The following section provides general policies and guidelines for community-
based parks and recreation areas.
Table 3.1 Central O‘ahu Public and Private Parks and Golf Courses
Name and Type of Park Acreage
Table 3.1 Central O‘ahu Public and Private Parks and Golf Courses
Name and Type of Park                                      Acreage
Regional Parks and Facilities
Patsy T. Mink Central O‘ahu Regional Park                269
Wahiawā Botanical Garden                                  27
Wahiawā Freshwater Park (State)                           66
Waipahū Cultural Garden Park                              49
Waipahū Shoreline Park and Preservation Area               
   Pearl Harbor Historic Trail                          NA
   Pouhala Marsh Wildlife Sanctuary (State)             70
   Waipi‘o Peninsula Soccer Park                      234
   Shoreline Park Expansion Area                        19
Regional Park Total                                        734
Community-Based Parks
District Parks
Mililani District Park with Gym                            21
Mililani Mauka District Park                               16
George Fred Wright Wahiawā District Park with Gym and Pool10
Waiawa District Park (planned)2                            20
Bill Balfour Jr. Waipahū District Park with Gym and Pool  14
District Park Total                                        81
Community Parks
Crestview Community Park                                   8
Hō‘ae‘ae Community Park                            10
Koa Ridge Community Park (planned)                         17
Maka‘unulau Community Park                               16
Mililani Mauka Community Park                              13
Royal Kunia Phase 2 Community Park                         11
Waiawa Community Park #11 (planned)2                       10
Waiawa Community Park #33 (planned)2                       12
Waikele Community Park with Pool                           13
Whitmore Community Park with Gym                           1
Community Park Total                                       111
Neighborhood Parks
Ala Hula Square                                            <1
Hans L'Orange Neighborhood Park                            7
Hōkūahiahi Neighborhood Park                             4
Hōlaniali‘i Neighborhood Park                           4
Honowai Neighborhood Park                                  6
‘Iliahi Neighborhood Park                                3
Ka‘ala Neighborhood Park                                 2
Kahi Kani Neighborhood Park                                3
Kamā‘i‘o Neighborhood Park                            4
Kaoma‘aikū Neighborhood Park                            12
Ke‘alohi Neighborhood Park                               4
Kīpapa Neighborhood Park                                  5
Kūahelani Neighborhood Park                               4
Kunia Neighborhood Park                                    6
Kupuohi Neighborhood Park                                  9
Melemanu Neighborhood Park                                 4
Mililani Neighborhood Park                                 5
Michael S. Nakamura Neighborhood Park                      8
Mililani Waena Neighborhood Park                           7
Noholoa Neighborhood Park                                  7
Pūpū‘ole Mini-park                                     8
Waiawa Neighborhood Park #16B (planned)2                   2
Waiawa Neighborhood Park #18 (planned)2                    7
Waiawa Neighborhood Park #40 (planned)2                    6
Mitsuo “Mits” Shito Waikele Neighborhood Park          5
Waipahū Uka Neighborhood Park                             4
Waipi‘o Neighborhood Park                                12
Whitmore Neighborhood Park                                 2
Neighborhood Park Total                                    151
Private Parks1
Koa Ridge Neighborhood Parks (planned)                     3
Mililani Recreation Centers                                12
Royal Kunia Recreation Center                              12
Private Park Total                                         28
Community Based Park Total                                 370
REGIONAL AND COMMUNITY BASED PARK TOTAL                    1075.69
Golf Courses
Hawai‘i Country Club                                     136
Mililani Golf Club                                         165
Leilehua Golf Course                                       193
Royal Kunia Country Club                                   163
Ted Makalena Golf Course                                   151
Waikele Golf Club                                          135
Golf Course Total                                          943
PARK AND GOLF COURSE TOTAL                                 2,049
KEY:
1   Private park listings are from DPP’s listing of parks recognized for
purposes of the Park Dedication Ordinance, and may be incomplete.
2   Waiawa parks and acreages as proposed in 2007 Urban Design Plan, and may
change with project design changes under consideration by Kamehameha Schools.
Sources:   Department of Parks and Recreation; Department of Design and
Construction, Department of Planning and Permitting
 
3.3.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Provide adequate parks to meet residents’ recreational needs. The
Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR) standard for community-based parks is
that a minimum of two acres of community-based parks should be provided per
1,000 residents, with one acre per thousand needed for district parks and one
acre needed for community parks, neighborhood parks, and mini-parks. Even if
these standards are met, there may still be unmet park needs due to demographic
or other community conditions.
   •   Currently, Central O‘ahu needs significantly more district park acreage
to meet the DPR standard, but has more acreage in the smaller community-based
parks than is called for by the DPR standard.
   •   To meet the DPR standard, Central O‘ahu’s population of 168,539 in 2010
needed 337 acres in community-based parks with 169 needed in district parks and
168 in other community-based parks.
   •   The combined total of Central O‘ahu’s public and private community-based
parks in 2010 was 294 acres, with 61 in district parks and 233 acres in the
other community-based parks. Some of the shortage in district park acreage is
made up by the facilities in the Patsy T. Mink Central O‘ahu Regional Park.
   •   Central O‘ahu’s population is expected to grow to 181,400 by 2035. Based
on the DPR standards, 363 acres of community-based parks will be needed to meet
the projected growth, including 181 acres in district parks. To meet the
district park standard, an increase of 120 acres would be needed over the 2010
level.
   •   The need for community-based parks can be met either through public
parks operated by the City and County or private community parks and recreation
centers operated by home owner associations.
   •   The primary method of acquiring the needed additional park land will be
through the park dedication ordinance which requires developers to dedicate
land for parks and playgrounds.
   •   The ordinance requires dedication of a minimum of 110 square feet per
apartment, multi-family building, and planned development dwelling unit, and
350 square feet per one-family, two-family, and duplex unit as part of the
subdivision approval process.
   •   Use community-based parks as sites for farmer’s markets and community
gardens.
   •   Protect and expand access to recreation resources in the mountains, at
the shoreline, and in the ocean. Trails to and through the gulches and the
mountains are an important public recreational asset. Some areas are difficult
to access because of landowner restrictions. New development projects are an
opportunity to provide public access to trail heads from the streets extending
toward the mountain slopes or approaching the edges of the gulches.
   •   Support efforts to expand access to mountain and gulch trails in areas
where urban development will not occur.
3.3.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Community-Based
Parks should be implemented:
3.3.2.1   Development of Community-Based Parks
   •   Co-locate Neighborhood or Community Parks with elementary or
intermediate schools and coordinate design of facilities when efficiencies in
development and use of athletic, recreation, meeting, and parking facilities
can be achieved, traffic impacts reduced, and pedestrian safety increased.
   •   Coordinate the development and use of athletic facilities such as
swimming pools and gymnasiums with the State Department of Education (DOE)
where such an arrangement would maximize use and reduce duplication of
function.
   •   Where feasible, site Community and Neighborhood Parks near the center of
neighborhoods, in order to maximize accessibility.
   •   Provide accessible pathways from surrounding streets to facilitate
pedestrian and bicycle access to parks.
   •   Use xeriscaping (the use of landscape materials with low water demand),
non-potable water for irrigation, and efficient irrigation systems wherever
possible to conserve groundwater resources. Give preference to use of drought-
resistant native Hawaiian plants where feasible and appropriate.
   •   Include passive areas for picnicking and large, outdoor community
gatherings in district parks within master-planned residential communities.
   •   Use community-based parks in Central O‘ahu as sites for community
gardens.
3.3.2.2   Access to Ravines and Mountain Trails
   •   Where appropriate, new developments should provide a public access
easement and parking area for hikers from the mauka boundary to a public
mountain trail easement.
   •   Where appropriate, new developments should provide a means for a safe
trail to major Central O‘ahu gulches which are either within or adjacent to the
project area. (These gulches which are part of the Central O‘ahu Open Space
Network include Waiawa, Pānakauahi, Kīpapa, Waikele, and Waikakalaua Gulches.)
3.3.2.3   Siting
   •   Conceptual locations for district parks are shown on the Open Space Map
in Appendix A. These locations may be revised without needing to amend the
Sustainable Communities Plan when more detailed site information and planning
analysis is available.
   •   Community and neighborhood parks are part of the open space system, but
their location is determined more by community facility design considerations
than by their relationship to the regional open space network. Siting of
Community and Neighborhood Parks should be reviewed and decided at the time the
Project Master Plan is submitted, prior to the granting of a zone change.
3.4   HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
Central O‘ahu contains several different types of historic and cultural sites,
which are representative of its history and valuable as historic records and
cultural references. In addition, public views which include views along
streets and highways, mauka-makai view corridors, panoramic and significant
landmark views from public places, views of natural features, heritage
resources, and other landmarks, and view corridors between significant
landmarks, can be important cultural resources.
OR&L Historic Railway - The railroad right-of-way runs along the edge of Pearl
Harbor, with a spur that leads up to the Waipahū Cultural Garden Park site.
Waipahū Sugar Mill Environs - The location of the mill site is indicated as the
Old Waipahū Town Anchor on the map of Waipahū Town in
Exhibit 3.4. Related features nearby include the Waipahū Cultural Garden Park,
the grouping of storefronts on Waipahū Depot Road and Waipahū Street, and the
OR&L Historic Railway.
Kunia and Poamoho Villages - These plantation villages, still occupied and
functioning as housing areas, are both shown on the Urban Land Use Map, but
they are both located beyond the designated Community Growth Boundary in areas
where agriculture is expected to remain a viable land use.
Native Hawaiian Cultural and Archaeological Sites - Kūkaniloko, a site where
high chiefs were born, is located north of Wahiawā. It has been preserved by
the State Office of Hawaiian Affairs (OHA) in collaboration with the Department
of Land and Natural Resources and maintained by the Hawaiian Civic Club of
Wahiawā, and the Friends of Kūkaniloko as an interpretive site. The 500 acres
surrounding the site was acquired by the OHA in 2012 as part of the State’s
purchase of the Galbraith Trust lands north of Wahiawā. OHA’s purpose in
acquiring the surrounding acres was to protect the site.
Other sites are located throughout Central O‘ahu, particularly in the ravines.
Exhibit 3.3 indicates the locations of some of these historic and cultural
resources which are also listed in
Table 3.2.
   Exhibit 3.3: Natural, Cultural, and Scenic Resources in the Central O‘ahu
Sustainable Communities Plan Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9345.png]
 
 
Table 3.2 Significant Central O‘ahu Historic And Cultural Resources
Historic And Cultural Features
   •    OR&L Historic Railway Right-Of-Way
   •   Waipahū Sugar Mill and surrounding related features
   •   Waipahū Cultural Garden Park
   •   Kunia Village
   •   Kīpapa Gulch Tunnel Complex
   •   Poamoho Village
   •   Pearl Harbor National Historic Landmark
Native Hawaiian Cultural And Archaeological Sites
   •   Kūkaniloko
   •   Kīpapa Gulch Archaeological Sites
   •   Waikele Gulch Archaeological Sites
   •   Waikakalaua Gulch Archaeological Sites
Significant Views And Vistas
   •   Distant vistas of the shoreline and Pearl Harbor from the H-2 Freeway and Kunia
Road above the ‘Ewa Plain.
   •   Views of the Wai‘anae and Ko‘olau Mountains from Kunia Road, Kamehameha Highway,
and the H-2 Freeway.
   •   Views of Pearl Harbor from Farrington Highway in the vicinity of Waipahū High
School.
   •   The view of the Waipahū Sugar Mill from Waipahū Depot Road.
   •   The view of the Wai‘anae Mountains from the Waipahū Cultural Garden.
   •   The view of the Wai‘anae Mountains from Mililani High School, from Meheula Parkway
near Keaolani Street, and from Mililani District Park.
   •   The view of the upper Central O‘ahu plains toward Waialua from the intersection of
Kamehameha Highway and Whitmore Avenue.
   •   The view of West Loch and of the Wai‘anae Range from Kamehameha Highway while
passing the Patsy T. Mink Central O‘ahu Regional Park.
This section provides policies, and guidelines for the preservation and development of
historic and cultural resources in Central O‘ahu.
 
3.4.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Emphasize physical references to Central O‘ahu’s history and cultural
roots to help define Central O‘ahu’s unique sense of place.
   •   Protect existing visual landmarks and support creation of new culturally
appropriate landmarks.
   •   Preserve significant historic features from the plantation era and
earlier periods.
   •   Vary the treatment of sites according to their characteristics and
potential value.
   •   Use in-situ preservation and appropriate protection measures for
historic, cultural, or archaeological sites with high preservation value
because of their good condition or unique features, as recommended by the State
Historic Preservation Officer. In such cases, the site should be either
restored or remain intact out of respect for its inherent value.
   •   Ensure protection of Kūkaniloko. Determine the appropriate form of that
protection through consultation with the Hawaiian Council of Elders, the
Wahiawā Hawaiian Civic Club as the longtime caretakers of the site, the Office
of Hawaiian Affairs as owner of the lands surrounding the site, the State
Historical Preservation Officer, and others.
   •   For other native Hawaiian cultural and archaeological sites located
throughout Central O‘ahu, particularly in the ravines, review, on a case-by-
case basis, to determine if they should be preserved and protected or if an
adaptive reuse of the site is appropriate.
   •   Retain significant vistas, as identified in
Table 3.2., whenever possible.
   •   Where known archaeological and cultural sites have been identified and
impact mitigations approved as part of prior development approvals, assume that
these mitigations carry out the Plan vision and policies for preservation and
development of historic and cultural resources in Central O‘ahu.
3.4.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Historic and
Cultural Resources should be implemented:
3.4.2.1   Sites under Review
   •   Adaptive Reuse - Allow historic sites to be converted from their
original intended use to serve a new function if it can be done without
destroying the historic value of the site, especially if its interpretative
value is enhanced.
   •   Accessibility - Public access to an historic site can take many forms,
from direct physical contact and use to limited visual contact. Determine the
degree of access based on what would best promote the preservation of the
historic, cultural and educational value of the site, recognizing that economic
use is sometimes the only feasible way to preserve a site. In some cases,
however, it may be highly advisable to restrict access to protect the physical
integrity or sacred value of the site.
3.4.2.2   Impacts of Development on Historic and Cultural Resources
   •   Compatible Setting - The context of an historic site is usually a
significant part of its value. Plan and design adjacent uses to avoid conflicts
or abrupt contrasts that detract from or destroy the physical integrity and
historic or cultural value of the site. The appropriate treatment should be
determined by the particular qualities of the site and its relationship to its
physical surroundings.
   •   Public Views - Design and site all structures, where feasible, to
reflect the need to maintain and enhance available views of significant
landmarks and vistas. Do not permit development to block important public
views, as listed in
Table 3.2 and illustrated in
Exhibit 3.2. Whenever possible, relocate or place underground overhead utility
lines and poles that significantly obstruct public views, under criteria
specified in State law.
3.4.2.3   OR&L Historic Railway
   •   As recommended in the Waipahū Town Plan (December 1995) and the Pearl
Harbor Historic Trail Master Plan (May 2001), develop the right-of-way as a
world-class heritage and educational corridor to enhance neighboring
communities and serve as a major visitor and cultural attraction.
Adaptive Reuse
   •   Develop a paved shared-use path for bicycles and pedestrians along the
length of the OR&L right-of-way, either within or adjacent to the right-of-way.
Adjacent Uses
   •   Design structures and elements related to the Pearl Harbor Historic
Trail to reflect the historic nature of the railway and its surroundings.
   •   Set back new development as specified in Neighborhood Transit-Oriented
Development (TOD) Plans, TOD development regulations, or as otherwise specified
in existing land use approvals, policies, and regulations.
   •   Provide landscaping along the adjacent path, with occasional rest stops
with seating and other amenities.
Public Access
   •   Encourage public use by providing and maintaining a shared path for
pedestrians and bicyclists as part of a path running from ‘Āiea to Nānākuli.
   •   Provide interpretative signs along the route to explain the historic
significance of the railroad and note points of interest.
3.4.2.4   Waipahū Sugar Mill Environs
Method of Preservation
   •   Retain the sugar mill stack and boiler room as visual symbols of
Waipahū’s plantation town history.
   •   Maintain the historic theme of the Waipahū Cultural Garden Park, and
seek opportunities to establish a more direct physical and economic connection
between the park and the mill.
   •   Promote economic revitalization and in-fill development in the old
commercial core along Waipahū Street and Waipahū Depot Road to maintain the
historic character of this area.
   •   Establish a transit linkage between Waikele Center and Waipahū Town.
Adaptive Reuse
   •   Allow a variety of reuse options which are consistent with the purpose
of retaining the historic plantation theme for the old town core at the Waipahū
Sugar Mill site.
   •   Encourage adaptive reuse of older commercial buildings in the town core
as a means to retain the historic building forms.
Urban Form
   •   Limit buildings in the old commercial core to two or three floors in
height in keeping with the area’s historic scale and to preserve views of
existing mill structures.
   •   In renovations to the sugar mill for adaptive reuse, minimize exterior
alterations that substantially change the building profile or accessory
structures that define the mill’s original purpose.
   •   Promote a strong pedestrian shopping orientation in the old town core by
expanding “storefront” businesses, enhancing the sidewalk areas with street
trees and period fixtures, consolidating off-street parking behind buildings,
and retaining on-street parking wherever possible.
   •   Modify development standards, as needed, to facilitate the retention and
rehabilitation of historic structures and appropriate in-fill development.
Public Access
   •   Retain the Waipahū Cultural Garden Park as a public facility.
   •   Encourage public access to the Waipahū Sugar Mill and other privately
owned historic buildings in the Old Waipahū Town Anchor area (See Sec.
3.6.1.1).
3.4.2.5   Native Hawaiian Cultural and Archaeological Sites
Method of Preservation
   •   Require preservation in situ for those features that the State Historic
Preservation Officer has recommended such treatment.
   •   Determine the preservation method, ranging from restoration to “as is”
condition, on a site-by-site basis, in consultation with the State Historic
Preservation Officer.
Adjacent Uses
   •   Determine appropriate delineation of site boundaries and setbacks and
restrictions for adjacent uses on a site-by-site basis in consultation with the
State Historic Preservation Officer.
   •   Include the sight lines that are significant to the original purpose and
value of the site as criteria for adjacent use restrictions.
Public Access
   •   Determine the appropriateness of public access on a site-by-site basis
in consultation with the State Historic Preservation Officer, Hawaiian cultural
organizations and the owner of the land on which the site is located.
3.5   NATURAL RESOURCES PROTECTION
This section describes the general policies that are to be applied to protect
Central O‘ahu natural resources.
3.5.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Conserve potable water.
   •   Protect valuable habitat for waterbirds and other endangered animals and
plants.
   •   Preserve the major Central O‘ahu ravines’ role in retaining storm water
and their potential as open space recreational resources by restricting further
development and minimizing grading or other disturbances of the gulch walls.
   •   Reduce light pollution’s adverse impact on wildlife and human health and
its unnecessary consumption of energy by using, where sensible, fully shielded
lighting fixtures using lower wattage.
3.5.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for natural resources
protection should be implemented:
Water Conservation
   •   Protect prime watershed recharge areas and the Pearl Harbor potable
aquifer which underlies the Central O‘ahu area.
Endangered Species
   •   Require surveys for proposed new development areas to identify
endangered species habitat, and require appropriate mitigations for adverse
impacts on endangered species due to new development.
Light Pollution
   •   Use the minimum outdoor lighting necessary for public safety, security,
and community aesthetics consistent with the goals of energy conservation and
environmental protection.
   •   Minimize glare and obtrusive light by limiting outdoor lighting that is
misdirected, excessive or unnecessary by fully shielding lighting fixtures so
that no light escapes above the horizontal plane and by using lower wattage.
   •   Adopt outdoor night lighting standards for rural areas that reflect the
rural character of those areas.
3.6   WAIPAHŪ TOWN
This section discusses policies and guidelines for development of Waipahū.
Waipahū will be revitalized with the support of policies and programs designed
to attract new investment and to increase activity in its traditional
commercial and civic centers.
The closing of the O‘ahu Sugar Company in 1995 marked the end of an era and of
Waipahū’s role as a sugar mill town. Most of the mill site has been
redeveloped, but the mill smokestack still stands, and adaptive use of the
boiler room and other mill buildings as part of the Leeward YMCA has preserved
key features of the landmark site.
Waipahū’s commercial and industrial areas have been adversely affected by the
growth of new commercial and industrial developments elsewhere in ‘Ewa and
Central O ‘ahu, requiring a search for new service and niche market
opportunities if the business areas are to be revitalized.
Since the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan was approved in 2002,
Waipahū has experienced considerable redevelopment including the new Leeward
YMCA (which integrates elements of the historic sugar mill in its structure),
the Filipino Community Center (FilCom Center), and nearby commercial and light
industrial areas. The Waipahū Festival Marketplace has opened near Waipahū
Depot Road, contributing to revitalization of that area. Finally, new
residential areas along Manager’s Drive and near the Ted Makalena golf course
provide infill development rather than suburban expansion.
Waipahū’s future is addressed in the Waipahū Town Plan, the Special Area Plan
for Waipahū (completed in December 1995 and accepted by City Council Resolution
in 1996), in the Waipahū Livable Communities Initiative (May 1998), and in the
Waipahū Neighborhood TOD Plan (April 2014), the first of a series of
neighborhood transit-oriented development plans for the areas around rail
transit stations to be adopted by the City Council.
The Waipahū Neighborhood TOD Plan provides a vision for neighborhood
improvements and redevelopment of the areas around the planned West Loch and
Waipahū Transit Center stations of the Honolulu Rail Transit system  and serves
as the basis for proposed Transit-Oriented Development Special District zoning
regulations covering the areas generally within one-half mile of the stations.
These community-based plans form the basis for the following policies and
guidelines which will be used to evaluate proposed land use changes and
infrastructure developments in Waipahū.
3.6.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Develop Waipahū as a harmonious blend of the old and new.
         Retain and embrace Waipahū Town’s cultural and plantation heritage -
the smokestack and portions of the sugar mill should remain as dominant
symbols, and the Waipahū Cultural Garden Park should serve as a reminder of
this heritage.
         Provide opportunities for economic revitalization which generate jobs
and attract people to Waipahū while minimizing adverse impacts to existing
small businesses.
         Approve new land uses if they are compatible with existing uses and
provide for community needs.
         Develop so there is a mixture of old style plantation buildings with
more contemporary buildings.
         Improve the overall visual appearance and character of Waipahū Town.
         Improve vehicular access into and within Waipahū, and integrate
pedestrian, bicycle, and transit facilities.
         Create streets that are landscaped and pedestrian- and bike-friendly.
         Provide ample roads to get around and through the town.
         Retain Waipahū Street as a slow winding road with large monkey pod
trees.
   •   Integrate the economic development of Waipahū with social, cultural, and
recreational enhancements.
         Revitalize Waipahū Town for the betterment of the business community
and to provide gainful employment serving the immediate community and the
region.
         Make the economic development and revitalization of Waipahū,
particularly within the town core area (also known as the Old Town Anchor
area), central to implementing the community’s desired land use plan.
         Recognize and address the social and recreational opportunities that
would achieve a balance in the future development of Waipahū, enhance the
experiences of residents and workers, and make Waipahū a more attractive place
to visit.
         Provide increased opportunities for recreation on the land and in
nearshore waters.
   •   Preserve and enhance greenery and open spaces for the current and future
residents to use and enjoy.
         Create a network of green spaces, parks, paths, trails and shaded
neighborhood streets linked to the two Honolulu Rail Transit stations, the
Pearl Harbor Historic Trail, and the Waipahū Cultural Garden.
         Reopen Waipahū’s shoreline for fishing, boating, and picnicking, to
the extent allowed by the Navy.
         Develop and maintain the Pearl Harbor Historic Trail as a
recreational shared use path stretching from ‘Āiea to Nānākuli.
   •   Create a Waipahū that is a vibrant community where the country
atmosphere is preserved, where business prospers, and where diverse people can
come together to live, work, shop, and play.
   •   Around the two Waipahū stations on the Honolulu Rail Transit system,
encourage transit-oriented development that:
         Reflects Waipahū’s unique character,
         Maintains the quantity of affordable housing while offering housing
for a wider range of households,
         Creates more walkable, healthier, prosperous neighborhoods with safe
pedestrian and bicycling environments that put pedestrians first, and
         Offers gathering places for all generations.
3.6.1.1   Anchor Areas
As shown in
Exhibit 3.4, the Waipahū Town Plan (1995) identifies four land use anchor
areas:
   •   The Old Waipahu Town Anchor area includes the Manager’s Drive area, the
Sugar Mill site, Hans L'Orange Park, Waipahū Street, Waipahū Depot Road, and
the Waipahū Cultural Garden Park.
         The Sugar Mill site formerly housed O‘ahu Sugar Company’s mill
operations.
         ∙   Retain selected historic structures on the mill site in future
redevelopment of the site.
         ∙   Permit light industrial use in the area adjacent and mauka of the
sugar mill.
         ∙   Permit commercial and community-oriented uses within the remainder
of the site.
         ∙   -   “Big box” stores would not be appropriate for the site.
            -   Community-oriented uses for the site include a YMCA facility,
and a Filipino Community Center.
         ∙   Designate an Old Town Commercial Area along portions of Waipahū
Street and Waipahū Depot Road. Use guidelines for the streetscape and building
to enhance the Old Town identity of the area.
         ∙   Encourage existing businesses to revitalize their building
facades.
         ∙   Encourage new businesses to in-fill in ways that visually maintain
the Old Town Commercial low-rise character and wide range of uses.
         ∙   Establish a pedestrian-oriented theme.
         ∙   Create a Festival Market Place Plaza in the center of the Old Town
Commercial Area to act as an “outdoor room” for important community events and
activities. (See
Exhibit 3.5)
         ∙   Uncover, restore, and enhance Kapakahi Stream, and create a Stream
Walk linking the Waipahū Plantation Village, the Festival Market Place Plaza,
the Waipahū Transit Center Rail Station near the intersection of Farrington
Highway and Mokuloa Street, the Pearl Harbor Historic Trail, the Pouhala Marsh,
and the Waipi‘o Soccer Complex. (See
Exhibit 3.5)
   •   The Community Facilities Anchor area includes the Civic Center site, the
Waipahū Transit Center on Hikimoe Street and the planned Waipahū Transit Center
Rail Station near the intersection of Farrington Highway and Mokuola Street.
The Rail Station will be within walking distance of both the Community
Facilities Anchor area and the Old Waipahū Town Anchor area. Existing
facilities include the Bill Balfour Jr. Waipahū District Park, the Waipahū
Civic Center, the Waipahū Public Library, a senior citizen health care center,
a children’s day care center, and elderly rental housing. The recently
completed Plantation Town Apartments include both affordable and market for-
sale housing units.
         Continue to consolidate government services in the vicinity of
Mokuola Street and the Bill Balfour Jr. Waipahū District Park.
         Create a highly walkable, attractive village center generally within
1/4 mile of the Waipahū Transit Center station with in-fill housing, retail,
and mixed-use development.
         Create an urban transit boulevard along Farrington Highway near the
planned rail station and transit plazas on both sides of Farrington Highway at
the rail station.
   •   The Recreation Anchor area includes the Waipahū Shoreline Park and
Preservation Area, the Pearl Harbor Historic Trail along the OR&L Right-of-Way,
and the Waipi‘o Peninsula recreational facilities, including the Waipi‘o
Peninsula Soccer Park and the Ted Makalena Golf Course.
         Develop the Waipahū Shoreline Park and Preservation Area along the
entire shoreline in Pearl Harbor’s West Loch and Middle Loch with a 150-foot
setback required for all new development located on the shoreline if justified
based on historic or adopted projections of shoreline erosion or extreme
flooding events. (This park would be part of a continuous shoreline park and
greenbelt from West Loch to Rainbow Marina near Aloha Stadium.)
         Seek Navy approval for access to nearshore fishing and boating in
Pearl Harbor’s West Loch to improve recreational opportunities.
         Develop the Pearl Harbor Historic Trail within the 40-foot wide OR&L
right-of-way to connect to the Leeward O‘ahu Bikeway to create a bikeway
running from Nānākuli to the Rainbow Marina near Aloha Stadium.
   •   The Commercial Anchor area includes a commercial and light industrial
area centered on the planned West Loch Station near the intersection of Leoku
Street and Farrington Highway. This area is recognized as a “Commercial Center”
with higher density than other areas of Waipahū
         Enhance the area’s ability to attract commercial and residential uses
and emphasize the Waipahū gateway character of the area.
         Use public-private partnerships to encourage redevelopment of the
area as medium-density, mid-rise, mixed-use residential/commercial development
generally within a 1/4 mile distance of the planned West Loch Station (as shown
on
Exhibit 3.4).
         Acquire the shoreline setback areas and the shoreline trail park
areas along West Loch.
         Open view planes to allow views of Pearl Harbor from key points along
Leokane Street and Pupu‘ole Street on the makai edge of the area.
   Exhibit 3.4: Waipahū Town Anchors, Transit Nodes, and Key Sites
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9355.png]
 
   Exhibit 3.5: Festival Market Place, Kapakahi Stream Walk, and Rail Station
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9353.png]
 
3.6.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Waipahū Town
should be implemented:
3.6.2.1   Urban Design
   •   Preserve the scale and sense of Waipahū as a small town. Preserve
existing zoning heights and densities throughout Waipahū Town to preserve views
of the smokestack and to help maintain the small town scale, except as
appropriate for redevelopment in the Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) Special
Districts around the Honolulu Rail Transit stations.
   •   Maintain the visual dominance of the sugar mill site, particularly the
smokestack.
   •   Retain and renovate as needed structures having historic, cultural, and/
or visual significance. Identify historic buildings on the mill site and in the
Old Town Commercial Area. Encourage adaptive reuse of these historic buildings.
   •   Establish a special image for the Old Town Commercial Area signifying
its historic character and role as the cultural and business center for
Waipahū. Adopt detailed design guidelines for the Old Town Commercial Area to
create the desired historic plantation theme.
   •   Enhance landscaping along Farrington Highway and adjoining roadways
through the increased use of street trees and the establishment of planting
schemes which help to identify and distinguish between the different commercial
and industrial areas.
         Landscape the areas beneath the rail guideway on Farrington Highway;
         Plant canopy trees on streets perpendicular to Farrington Highway;
and
         Create landscaped entry features at both ends of Farrington Highway
and at the intersection of Waipahū Depot Road and Farrington Highway.
   •   Develop open space areas, the shoreline, and other available natural
areas for use by the public and integrate them into the built environment.
   •   Make open space and coastal resource areas on the Waipi‘o Peninsula and
along the Pearl Harbor shoreline available for increased use by the public.
   •   Use landscaped roads, and pedestrian/bicycle pathways to link parks,
open space areas, and centers of interest.
   •   Modify development standards to facilitate the retention and
rehabilitation of historic structures and appropriate in-fill development.
3.6.2.2   Old Waipahū Town
   Sugar Mill Site
   •   Retain the visual qualities and building character that defined the
mill’s original purpose in renovations to the sugar mill site for adaptive
reuse.
   Old Town Commercial Area
   •   Maintain the compactness of the town’s historic shopping area, and
encourage new uses in-fill between existing buildings along Waipahū Street and
Waipahū Depot Road.
   •   Except as necessary for adjustments to improve traffic flow and safety,
maintain the character of Waipahū Street and Waipahū Depot Road in order to
safeguard the historically and visually significant buildings and maintain the
area’s pedestrian scale and orientation.
   •   Wherever possible, identify, maintain and restore existing significant
historic structures and encourage their adaptive reuse where necessary to
ensure their continued viability and use.
   •   Require the architectural character of new buildings to reflect the
plantation era architecture of Waipahū’s historic past. Basic design
principles, texture, construction materials, and colors should be compatible
with styles from this era.
   •   Encourage and maintain a strong pedestrian orientation through the
expansion of “storefront” businesses, enhancement of the streetscape and
walking environment, and consolidation of off-street parking behind buildings.
   •   Locate new buildings or additions close to the street, creating a
traditional “street line” of facades, with buildings forming an attractive edge
to the roadway.
   •   Orient storefronts to the street and include elements such as canopies,
overhangs, porches, and trellises to scale down building heights and enhance
the street-level environment.
   •   Limit buildings to two or three floors in height in keeping with the
area’s historic scale and to preserve views of existing mill structures.
   •   Discourage awkward or over-scaled building forms, and reduce long
building forms or offset them into smaller masses of more residential
proportions.
3.6.2.3   Community Facilities Anchor/Waipahū Transit Center Rail Station Area
   •   Develop and landscape spaces between buildings in a manner which
provides the area with a unifying visual image and creates the sense of an
active, people-oriented civic park.
   •   Create an urban transit boulevard on Farrington Highway between Waipahū
Depot Road and Mokuola Street to separate local traffic and through traffic and
provide slower speeds and a safer pedestrian environment adjacent to the rail
station.
   •   Allow mixed-use development in the Farrington/Mokuola Transit-Oriented
Development (TOD) Special District in order to create a walkable, medium-
density community with neighborhood retail and a commercial core near the rail
station.
   •   Allow increased building heights to 60 feet generally within a 1/4 mile
of the rail station and to 45 feet for properties generally from a 1/4 mile to
a 1/2 mile away from the rail station, except where lots adjoin an R-
5 residential district.
   •   Relax limits on maximum building area in the TOD Special District
generally within a 1/4 mile of the rail station to create active street edges,
and discourage surface parking lots in front of buildings.
   •   Allow a floor area ratio (FAR) as high as 3.5 as a bonus for realizing
important community benefits.
   Exhibit 3.6: Commercial Anchor/West Loch Rail Station
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9359.png]
 
3.6.2.4   Commercial Anchor/West Loch Rail Station Area
   •   Establish attractive and distinctive entry features at the western end
of the Commercial Anchor Area.
   •   Create an urban transit boulevard on Farrington Highway between Leoku/
Leo‘ole Streets and Leoleo Street to separate local traffic and through traffic
and provide slower speeds and a safer pedestrian environment adjacent to the
rail station.
   •   Allow mixed-use development in the Farrington/Leoku Transit-Oriented
Development (TOD) Special District in order to create a walkable, medium-
density community with neighborhood retail and a commercial core near the rail
station.
   •   Encourage mid-rise, medium density apartment and live/work uses when
combined with retail commercial uses on the ground level generally within 1/
4 mile of the West Loch station.
   •   Upgrade the visual appearance of business development through building
facade improvement programs and through the greater use of shade trees within
parking areas and of landscape buffers between parking areas and adjoining
streets.
   •   Allow increased building heights up to 60 feet generally within a 1/
4 mile of the station, and up to 45 feet for properties generally from a 1/
4 mile to a 1/2 mile away from the station except where lots adjoin an R-
5 residential district.
   •   Allow building heights up to 90 feet in the TOD Special District as a
community benefits bonus.
3.6.2.5   Residential Areas
   •   Where possible and appropriate, establish small community gardens in
residential and apartment areas in order to increase green space and maintain a
connection with the town’s agricultural roots.
   •   Provide street trees in all neighborhoods in order to soften the visual
impact of development and enhance the walking environment for residents.
   •   Encourage mid-rise, medium density apartment buildings, including mixed-
use developments, in areas generally within 1/4 mile of the West Loch and
Waipahū Transit Center stations, with the exception of the Old Town Commercial
Area.
3.6.2.6   Circulation Design Guidelines
   •   Incorporate complete streets features wherever feasible.
   •   Improve existing pedestrian and bicycle connections and, where
appropriate, develop new ones to nearby residential areas from the old
commercial core and to recreational and cultural facilities located around the
old commercial core.
   •   Landscape all pathways in a manner which identifies their role as visual
and functional linkages between open spaces and centers of activity.
   •   Design pathways, where possible, to accommodate safe movement for
walkers, joggers, and bicycle riders.
   •   Provide landscape improvements, including shade trees, to streets and
front yards in the Farrington Highway business areas to accommodate, where
possible, walkways and bicycle paths which link the different business
developments together and connect these areas to adjoining residential
neighborhoods.
   •   Develop sidewalks, traffic signal improvements, and other measures to
facilitate pedestrian circulation between mauka and makai areas of Waipahū.
   •   Develop plazas accessible to pedestrians at the two Honolulu Rail
Transit stations and the Festival Marketplace.
   •   Provide bicycle parking and storage at residential buildings throughout
the area generally within 1/2 mile of the two Honolulu Rail Transit stations.
3.6.2.7   Open Space and Views
   •   Acquire shoreline setback areas and the shoreline trail park areas along
West Loch, in part so that Pearl Harbor can be seen from key points along
Leokane Street and Pupu‘ole Street on the makai edge of the area.
   •   Connect existing and planned parks and open space areas, wherever
possible, by a series of tree-lined pedestrian pathways, jogging paths, and
bikeways.
   •   Strengthen visual and physical connections between Waipahū Cultural
Garden Park, the old commercial core and significant adjoining areas and
roadways.
   •   Preserve significant views, including views of the Ko‘olau and Wai‘anae
Mountain Ranges from along Farrington Highway, views of Pearl Harbor from
Farrington Highway in the vicinity of Waipahū High School, the view of the
Waipahū Sugar Mill from the Waipahū Cultural Garden, and the view of the
Wai‘anae Mountains from the Waipahū Cultural Garden.
   •   Preserve mature trees.
   •   Provide publicly accessible open spaces for passive recreation, play
areas, and socializing in the area generally within 1/2 mile of the two
Honolulu Rail Transit stations.
3.7   WAHIAWĀ TOWN
Historically, Wahiawā has functioned as both a plantation town and as a support
community for Schofield Barracks. It took on the role of a regional center as
well, with medical and civic services.
Wahiawā’s role as a stopping point for people traveling to and from the North
Shore has been declining as a result of improvements in the highway system.
Wahiawā has historically been the boundary between the urban growth of Central
O‘ahu and the broad vistas of the agricultural and rural areas of the North
Shore.
Wahiawa’s State and County offices have historically provided services to both
upland Central O‘ahu and to North Shore communities and played a role as a
regional civic and shopping center. Wahiawā’s role as a regional center for
Central O‘ahu has been diminished by the development of major new towns and
residential areas such as Mililani Town and Melemanu Woodlands. Its commercial
areas have had difficulty competing with the shopping centers of the newer
communities and the major new “big box” retailers in power centers at Mililani,
Waipi‘o, Waikele, and Pearl City.
Wahiawā has also been affected by the decline in both the pineapple and sugar
industry and by changes in military force levels at Schofield Barracks and
Wheeler Army Airfield.
Wahiawā is unique because it is a town surrounded by forest, because it has a
forest within town in the tree lined gulch that courses through the center of
town, and because it is an island, completely surrounded by the North and South
forks of Kaukonahua Stream and Lake Wilson which provides special views and
recreational opportunities.
Earlier planning efforts which considered Wahiawā’s development include the
Central O‘ahu/North Shore Regional Plan (July 1993) and the Wahiawā Town Master
Plan (1994).
In 1998, the Council approved the Wahiawā Urban Design Plan, the Special Area
Plan for Wahiawā, which was the result of a community-based planning process
involving the Planning Department (now the Planning Division of the Department
of Planning and Permitting) working with a Wahiawā Urban Design Task Force,
comprised of various community businesses, organizations, and elected
representatives.
The following general policies are drawn from the Wahiawā Urban Design Plan and
earlier community-based planning efforts.
3.7.1   GENERAL POLICIES
Wahiawā should build on the strength of its stable and attractive residential
areas and protect and enhance its unique characteristics.
3.7.1.1   Maintain and Enhance Wahiawā’s Plantation Heritage and Rural, Small-
Town Atmosphere.
   •   Maintain the scale and feeling of Wahiawā as a small town. Wahiawā’s
plantation heritage and “country town” atmosphere give it a character that is
not found in newer master planned communities.
      °   Preserve commercial and civic buildings and residential neighborhoods
which reflect the town’s plantation heritage and multi-cultural roots.
      °   Maintain and protect the quality of the living environment offered by
existing single-family residential areas.
   •   Ensure that the architectural character of new buildings and of building
renovations is compatible with historic buildings in the area and reflects the
town’s plantation heritage.
3.6.1.2   Enhance Wahiawā’s Role as a “Gateway” Between Town and Country.
   •   Develop new job centers for Wahiawā serving Central O‘ahu and North
Shore diversified agriculture.
   •   Prohibit new urban development in Central O‘ahu north of Wahiawā so that
Lake Wilson and Kaukonahua Stream continue marking the northernmost extent of
urban development in Central O‘ahu.
   •   Establish and maintain appropriate gateway entry features on Kamehameha
Highway at both the northern and southern entrances to Wahiawā.
3.7.1.3   Enhance the Town Core as a Setting for Social, Civic, and Commercial
Interactions.
   •   Strengthen Wahiawā’s civic center by consolidating public services, and
encouraging the location of more social and community service organizations in
the town.
   •   Maintain and enhance the character and role of Wahiawā’s business area
as a community shopping district and regional service center in order to
encourage O‘ahu residents and visitors to discover what Wahiawā has to offer.
   •   Explore creating a geriatric research and technology park in Wahiawā to
serve as a hub for conducting research, developing technologies, and providing
services and products in support of age-friendly communities.
3.7.1.4   Protect and Enhance Forest and Lake Features.
   •   Protect and enhance Wahiawā’s unique forest and lake features.
   •   Pursue public-private partnerships to explore opportunities to redevelop
commercial and residential areas on the Town side of the northern and southern
gateway entry points (where Kamehameha Highway crosses Lake Wilson) to take
advantage of shoreline views and make the shoreline more accessible and
enjoyable to the public while reinforcing the integrity of the Wahiawā Town
Center.
Exhibit 3.7 shows the town’s business district, civic center, as well as other
major land uses within Wahiawā.
   Exhibit 3.7: Wahiawā Town
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9363.png]
 
3.7.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Wahiawā Town
should be implemented:
3.7.2.1   Business District
   •   Re-establish Wahiawā’s historic “identity” within a “Town Center”
located along Kamehameha Highway in the vicinity of California and Kīlani
Avenue.
   •   Maintain and restore existing structures that reflect the historic and
architectural character of Wahiawā where possible, and encourage adaptive reuse
where necessary to ensure their continued viability and use.
   •   Require redevelopments to reflect an architectural theme consistent with
the historic character of Wahiawā. Ensure the architectural character of new
buildings and of the building renovations are compatible with historic
buildings in the area and reflect the town’s plantation heritage.
   •   Provide open space and landscaping to reinforce the historic character
of Wahiawā.
   •   Establish distinctive and attractively landscaped gateway features at
each of the Kamehameha Highway entries to the town to reinforce a “sense of
arrival” along these approaches.
   •   Encourage new commercial uses to in-fill on vacant and underutilized
parcels within Wahiawā’s existing business district. Avoid expansion of the
district since it is not needed.
   •   Allow repair shops, storage, and similar uses which provide needed
services but confine them to the town’s existing industrial area between Palm
and North Cane Street.
   •   Provide buffer landscaping and similar edge treatments around industrial
sites to minimize impacts on adjoining areas.
   •   Limit building heights in keeping with Wahiawā’s small town scale.
However, give some flexibility for public buildings, such as government offices
and churches, in order to allow for designs that create symbols of identity for
the community.
   •   Locate parking areas behind commercial establishments in order to
improve the pedestrian environment and appearance of the streetscape.
   •   Upgrade the visual appearance of business developments through building
facade improvement programs and through the greater use of shade trees within
parking areas and landscape buffers between parking areas and adjoining
streets.
3.7.2.2   Civic Center
   •   Welcome and encourage expansion of existing government facilities and
community services. To the extent possible, cluster these uses within and
bordering the area bounded by California Avenue, North Cane Street, KīIani
Avenue, and Lehua Street.
   •   Expand and consolidate parking for the Civic Center and Wahiawā General
Hospital within a multi-level parking garage located on Center Street.
   •   Landscape and develop available setback areas and open spaces in a
manner which gives the area a unifying visual image and provides a “village
green” for informal gatherings and relaxation.
3.7.2.3   Residential Areas
   •   Prevent the intrusion of apartment buildings or other incompatible uses
into existing single-family residential areas.
   •   Maintain the extensive use of street trees to enhance Wahiawā’s rural
character and image as a “town within a forest”, and extend the trees into all
of Wahiawā’s residential areas.
3.6.2.4   Circulation
   •   Incorporate complete streets features wherever feasible.
   •   Make minor adjustments to street rights-of-way, alignments,
intersections, and on-street parking where they would improve traffic flow and
safety. In general, however, avoid new streets or major street widenings as
they are not needed and would detract from Wahiawā’s rural and small town
character.
   •   Provide on-street parking during non-peak traffic hours to “slow-down”
traffic along Kamehameha Highway.
   •   Where possible, expand off-street parking where needed to support local
businesses, such as along Kamehameha Highway.
   •   Establish a network of bicycle paths and designated bicycle routes along
major traffic corridors in order to improve safety and convenience and
encourage increased use of bicycles for travel within the community.
   •   Connect the Wahiawā Botanical Garden to the Wahiawā Freshwater Park on
Lake Wilson by way of a trail through the gulch which connects the two
facilities.
   •   Develop jogging paths and bike trails to take advantage of the Lake
Wilson shoreline.
   •   Install landscaping, sidewalk and other streetscape improvements in
areas lacking in greenery or with unsafe or inadequate provision for pedestrian
traffic.
3.7.2.5   Open Space and Views
   •   Preserve and protect the natural scenic character of Lake Wilson and
adjoining forested areas from alteration or encroachment of urban uses because
they are vital elements of Wahiawā’s “town in a forest” image.
   •   Expand and improve Wahiawā Freshwater Park with appropriate facilities
which will encourage and accommodate greater public use without major
disruption to the site’s natural beauty.
   •   Upgrade recreational facilities in existing community parks and, where
possible, add new facilities in order to meet current and future demands for
sports activities.
   •   Where possible, design site layouts and building orientations for new
developments to maximize view opportunities of prominent natural views in
Wahiawā including Lake Wilson and the Wai‘anae Mountains, and, to a lesser
degree, the Ko‘olau Mountains.
   •   Preserve significant vistas, including the views of the upper Central
O‘ahu plains toward Waialua and of the Wai‘anae Range from the intersection of
Kamehameha Highway and Whitmore Avenue, near Kukaniloko.
3.8   CENTRAL O‘AHU PLANTATION VILLAGES
This section provides policies and guidelines for preservation and maintenance
of the plantation villages at Kunia and Poamoho.
The villages of Kunia and Poamoho, both located in the agricultural fields of
Central O‘ahu, are the only two plantation villages in this region that have
substantially retained the character and ambiance of a traditional agricultural
camp. State law supports retention of these former plantation communities by
listing them as a permitted use in the State Agricultural District. As Central
O‘ahu becomes urbanized, the villages should be preserved as physical reminders
of Central O‘ahu’s plantation era heritage.
As shown in
Exhibit 3.7, Kunia Village is located off Kunia Road about two miles south of
Schofield Barracks.
Exhibit 3.7 also provides a map of Poamoho Village which is located about one
mile north of Wahiawā in the agricultural fields of north-central O‘ahu.
Currently, neither Kunia nor Poamoho is operated by a plantation company.
Residents and other concerned parties have worked to maintain the villages.
   •   Poamoho has been reorganized as a fee simple condominium property, with
residents as condominium owners.
   •   The Kunia Village land was acquired by the Hawai‘i Agricultural Research
Center (HARC) after being subdivided from a much larger parcel recently
acquired by Island Palm Communities, a partnership between the U.S. Army and
Lendlease.
   •   HARC is working on plans for both the village and the nearby industrial
and commercial facilities. HARC seeks to manage the village as rental housing
for agricultural workers. Under HARC’s approach, workers and retirees now
living in the village could stay on, but new residents would have to be
agricultural workers to rent homes in the village.
3.8.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Use the villages as affordable housing for workers from new diversified
agricultural activities on lands along Kunia Road and north of Wahiawā.
   Exhibit 3.8: Central O‘ahu Plantation Villages
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9367.png]
 
   •   Develop related affordable housing to support diversified agricultural
employees.
   •   Rehabilitate the existing village structures or adapt them for reuse.
   •   Preserve and enhance the existing rural forms and historic character
exhibited within the villages.
   •   Perpetuate rural agriculture functions and activities in the surrounding
area in conjunction with village land uses.
3.8.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Central O‘ahu
Plantation Villages should be implemented.
   •   Preserve existing buildings of historical, cultural, and/or
architectural significance.
   •   Retain and rehabilitate existing housing units, where feasible, in a
manner which allows them to remain affordable to the existing residents.
   •   Require the design, visual appearance and placement of any new
structures within or adjoining the existing villages to reflect and complement
the villages’ historic character and forms.
Method of Preservation
   •   Rehabilitate existing historic plantation houses as part of an assisted
housing program.
   •   Rehabilitate and convert rental dwellings for sale, giving preference to
existing residents to minimize displacement and retain the sense of community.
   •   Preserve the historic development pattern, architectural character and
street appearance by allowing exceptions from conventional subdivision and
other development codes, as appropriate.
   •   Replace structures that must be razed, and develop other vacant areas
with new in-fill development that respects the historic character of the
original village.
Adaptive Reuse
   •   Rehabilitate residential areas with an emphasis on affordable home
ownership opportunities for existing residents.
   •   When a historic structure is converted to a use other than its original
purpose, rehabilitate the structure in a manner that does not alter its
exterior appearance.
Urban Form
   •   Maintain the current grid/loop street pattern in the existing villages
and replicate it in new in-fill development.
   •   Do not use standard subdivision street hierarchy and design standards.
   •   To minimize impacts on front yards and structure and to retain a rural
village character, maintain narrow street widths without sidewalks in the
residential portions of existing villages and establish narrow street widths
without sidewalks in new villages.
   •   Locate any new collector streets outside existing villages.
   •   Plant and maintain principal entry roads to and through the villages as
tree-lined boulevards.
   •   Highlight village entries with landscape features.
   •   Provide appropriate canopy trees along all street frontages.
   •   Ensure lot sizes and dimensions for new in-fill homes in the existing
villages are similar to those of existing house lots.
   •   Require new structures on vacant lots in the existing villages to be
designed to complement the exterior design of adjacent homes.
   •   Landscape and maintain yards and other open spaces to preserve and
enhance the open space appearance of the villages.
Open Space/Views
   •   Preserve and maintain existing village greens and play fields as places
for community gatherings and recreation.
   •   Preserve existing landscaping within the villages and stands of trees in
bordering ravines.
Adjacent Land Uses
   •   Maintain agricultural use on adjacent lands.
   •   Minimize the visibility of any new structures in the vicinity by
appropriate landscape screening and building siting.
   •   If visibility is unavoidable, design the new structure to respect the
scale and character of the villages.
   •   Improve roadways as necessary to provide access to public facilities.
3.9   EXISTING AND PLANNED RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITIES
This section provides general policies and guidelines for the development of
new communities and the expansion or renovation of existing communities.
Guidelines are provided for three types of residential uses: Residential, Low-
Density Apartment, and Medium Density Apartment.
   •   Residential areas consist of one and two-story single-family attached
and/or detached dwellings with individual entries.
   •   Low-Density Apartment areas consist of two-story and three-story
townhouses or low-rise apartment buildings. Dwelling units may have common
entries, but buildings are typically non-elevator structures.
   •   Medium-Density Apartment developments take the form of multi-story
apartment buildings. They may be located in mixed use zones, with the ground
floor or lower floors occupied by retail and service commercial uses.
3.9.1   General Policies
   •   Overall Density - To achieve the desired compactness and character of
development in planned residential communities, develop with the housing
density of the aggregate area zoned for residential use (including the streets)
in the range of 10 to 15 units per acre. (This average does not include areas
zoned for commercial or industrial use.)
   •   Higher Density Housing along the Waipahū-Kapolei Rail Transit Corridor -
To promote use of mass transit, develop higher density residential use along a
major rail transit corridor linking Waipahū with Kapolei in the west and with
Primary Urban Center communities to the east.
      °   Develop Medium Density Apartment and Commercial mixed uses at
Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) areas around the three Honolulu Rail Transit
stations.
      °   Develop areas along the rapid transit corridor at housing densities
of 25 units per acre, and encourage greater densities within the TOD areas.
      °   See Exhibits
3.4,
3.5, and
3.6 for Waipahū Rail Station Areas and
Exhibit 3.9 for the Leeward Community College Rail Station Area. The Urban Land
Use Map and the Public Facilities Map in Appendix A also show the locations of
the TOD areas in Waipahū and at Leeward Community College.
   Exhibit 3.9: Leeward Community College Rail Station TOD Area (Conceptual
Plan)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9371.png]
 
   •   Affordable Housing - Require that housing affordable to low and low-
moderate income households be provided in new residential developments. In
particular, provide affordable rental housing for students, families, seniors,
and those with special needs.
   •   Physical Definition of Neighborhoods - Make the boundaries of
neighborhoods evident through the use of street patterns, natural features,
landscaping, building form, and siting.
      °   The focus of neighborhood activity should be on the local street or a
common pedestrian right-of-way or recreation area.
      °   Where urban development abuts the H-2 Freeway, provide an open space/
landscaped buffer of sufficient size to preserve a view of green, minimize the
visual intrusiveness of the development and reduce the noise and air quality
impact of the freeway traffic on the abutting development.
   •   Community Centers - In the Master Plan for each new residential
community, identify where its village center, town center or “Main Street” area
is and how that center or Main Street will be established and supported by any
existing or planned commercial or job centers.
   •   Compatible Mix of Building Forms - Use a variety of housing types and
densities to avoid visual monotony and accommodate a variety of housing needs,
but without sharp contrasts between the exterior appearance of adjacent housing
areas.
   •   Allow mixtures of residential with low-density apartment buildings in
low-density apartment zones, to promote variety.
   •   Transit-oriented Streets - Design street patterns and rights-of-way to
accommodate mass transit (bus) service and make the service convenient to
access for as many households as possible.
   •   Connectivity - Minimize dead end streets, provide for intersections at
regular intervals, and connect with adjacent development. Allow roadway cross-
sections within new residential developments to be reduced from current
standards where higher capacity is provided by multiple alternative routes.
   •   Pedestrian and Bicycle Travel - Encourage pedestrian and bicycle travel,
particularly to reach neighborhood destinations such as schools, parks, and
convenience stores. At a minimum, provide pedestrian and bikeway connectivity,
where roadway connectivity is deemed not feasible, to allow direct travel
through the community and to neighborhood districts.
   •   Integration of Linear Corridors - Encourage physical and visual
connections between communities through the creative design of transportation
and utility corridors and drainage systems.
   •   Provision of Community Facilities - Provide land for community
facilities including meeting facilities, community centers, and elderly and
child-care centers.
Table 3.3 gives an overview of the density and height guidelines for planned
and existing residential developments.
Conceptual locations for residential, and low and medium-density apartment
development are shown on the Urban Land Use Map in Appendix A. See Section
3.8.3 for further discussion of the relationship between the Residential
Communities policies and guidelines and the Urban Land Use Map.
3.9.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Existing and
Planned Residential Communities should be implemented.
Residential
   Density
   •   Develop at densities of 5 to 12 units per acre encouraging more compact,
innovative, environmentally sensitive design and alternative layouts.
   Building Height
   •   In general, limit buildings to not exceed two stories, although the
height may vary according to required flood elevation, slope, and roof form.
   Site Design
   •   Use features such as varied building setbacks and shared driveways to
avoid monotonous rows of garages and driveways along neighborhood street
frontages.
 
Table 3.3 Density and Height Guidelines by Residential Density Category
Residential Category      Density (Housing Units) Building Height
Residential               5-12/acre               not over two stories
Low-Density Apartment     10-30/acre              not over three stories
Medium-Density Apartment1 25-90/acre              not over 60 ft.2
Mixed-Use with            25-90/acre              not over 90 ft.3
Residential
Notes:
1   Medium-Density Apartment uses are appropriate in the Medium-Density
Residential/Commercial mixed use areas in the Waipahū and Leeward Community
College Transit-oriented Development (TOD) areas, in the Wahiawā Regional Town
Center, and adjacent to the Waiawa Major Community Commercial Center.
2   Medium-Density Apartment building heights in the Farrington/Mokuola Station
TOD Special District should not exceed the lower of the elevation of the roof
ridge line of Waipahū Sugar Mill or 60 feet. Building heights in the
Farrington/Leokū Station TOD Special District should be allowed to 60 feet but
may go up to 90 feet if a bonus is awarded because community benefits are
provided.
3   Up to 90 feet in height may be considered in community centers for mixed-
use buildings that include residential uses.
 
   Building Form
   •   Use varied roof forms, exterior colors and finishes, building
orientation, floor plans, and architectural details to provide visual interest
and individual identity.
   Affordable Housing
   •   Allow accessory and ohana dwelling units without occupancy restrictions
to increase the availability of affordable rentals and help create an age
friendly community.
Low Density Apartment
   Density
   •   Develop at densities of 10 to 30 units per acre.
   Height
   •   In general, limit buildings to not exceed three stories above grade.
Maximum building heights should allow for pitched roof form.
   Building Form
   •   Use building form, orientation, location of entries, and landscape
screening to maintain a sense of residential scale and provide greater privacy
and individual identity for housing units.
   Compatibility
   •   Ensure that building scale, roof form, and the quality of materials are
compatible with those of adjacent low-density residential areas.
Medium Density Apartment
   Location
   •   Develop Medium-Density Apartment as the predominant form of housing
around the two Honolulu Rail Transit stations in Waipahū, either as a single
use or mixed-use development.
   •   Allow Medium-Density Apartment uses in Wahiawā near the Town Center, and
in Waiawa adjacent to the Major Community Commercial Center.
   Density
   •   Allow building densities to accommodate 25 to 90 units per acre.
   Height
   •   Limit building heights to not exceed 60 feet, except as allowed in Sec.
3.6.2.4 Guidelines for the Farrington/Leokū Transit-Oriented Development (TOD)
Special District and in Sec. 3.9.2 Guidelines for mixed-use buildings in Major
Community Commercial Centers.
   •   Limit Medium Density Apartment building heights in Waipahū in the
Farrington/Mokuola TOD Special District to not exceed 60 feet or the elevation
of the roof ridge line of the Waipahū Sugar Mill, whichever is lower.
   Architectural Character
   •   Allow building scale, roof form and the quality of materials to reflect
a more urban character.
   Height Setbacks
   •   Employ building height setbacks and landscaping to reduce the direct
visibility of taller buildings from lower density residential areas and from
the street front.
   •   Allow lower building elements to directly abut the street front.
Circulation System
Master-planned projects should each have a circulation plan, or a “circulation
element” in their Project Master Plan (see Chapter 5).
   •   Use the circulation plan to define the hierarchy of streets within the
project and its relationship to the surrounding transportation network.
   •   Design streets to provide safe access and mobility for all users,
including pedestrians, bicyclists, transit users, motorists, and persons of all
abilities, as determined through a context sensitive solution process that
integrates community context and the surrounding environment, including land
use, and balances the needs and comfort of all modes and users.
   •   Use a modified grid street pattern (modified as necessary to fit the
topography or other limitations) with block lengths of 300 feet by 500 feet or
any combination of two sides summing to 800 feet.
   •   Provide pedestrian pass-throughs or mid-block cross walks, if possible,
where blocks exceed 350 feet on a side.
   •   Connect new residential development to adjacent subdivisions to allow
creation, where allowed by topography, of an east-west and mauka-makai roadway
network at approximately 1/4 mile intervals.
   •   Allow roadway cross-sections within new residential developments to be
reduced from current standards where higher capacity is provided by multiple
routes.
   Transit Routes and Facilities
   •   Show on the circulation plan existing and proposed bus routes and
specific measures to accommodate efficient bus transit service for as many
households as possible.
   •   Design the rights-of-way along existing or potential bus transit routes
to provide for bus shelters, bus pull-outs, and, if applicable, park-and-ride
facilities and/or future rail transit stations in accordance with the
Department of Transportation Services design standards.
   •   Require street patterns showing the alignment of proposed or potential
bus transit routes, to be submitted to the Department of Transportation
Services as part of the subdivision roadway master plan review process.
   •   Design the circulation plan so that at least 85 percent of all proposed
residences will be within a five-minute (or 1/4 mile) walking distance of an
existing or proposed bus stop or rail transit stop, unless localized
topographic conditions make such a requirement impractical.
   •   Design the circulation plan so that all commercial development with more
than 1,000 square feet and all employment sites with more than ten employees
are within 1/8 mile of an existing or potential bus stop or rail transit stop.
   •   Design the circulation plan so that all development is within 1/2 mile
of an existing or potential bus stop or rail transit stop, unless localized
topographic conditions make such a requirement impractical.
   •   Design the circulation plan so that potential bus routes have two
different access points into the proposed development. The route alignment
should seek to achieve optimal operational efficiency between the two access
points.
   Pedestrian and Bicycle Routes and Facilities
   •   Design the circulation plan to indicate any principal pedestrian and
bicycle paths that are physically separated from roadways.
   •   Design street intersections along these separated paths to have a
tighter curb radius and include special signage and paving to encourage safe
and convenient pedestrian and bicycle crossings.
   •   Allow interior mid-block pedestrian/bicycle routes to be provided as an
alternative to paved sidewalks along local streets.
   •   Provide safe pedestrian and bike passage through barriers such as walls
and fences, and across ditches and roadways.
   Landscape Treatment
   •   Include conceptual street tree plans in the circulation plan.
   •   Identify entries to the community with special landscape treatment.
   •   Design the rights-of-way for major and minor arterials as landscaped
parkways, complete with a landscaped median strip, landscaped sidewalk, and
bikeways. Major arterials should have separate bike paths, and minor arterials
should have bike lanes. Suggested width for major arterials, including right-
of-way and planting strips, is 120 feet wide and for minor arterials is 100
feet wide.
   •   Where urban development abuts the H-2 Freeway, provide an open space/
landscaped buffer of sufficient size to preserve a view of green, minimize the
visual intrusiveness of the development, and reduce the noise and air quality
impact of the freeway traffic on the abutting development.
   •   Provide canopy trees to shade the sidewalk/bike path areas.
   •   Install landscape treatment along the edges of the project that is
appropriate for the natural setting and designed to provide continuity and
transition from adjacent developed areas.
   •   Use xeriscaping (the use of landscape materials with low water demand),
non-potable water for irrigation, and efficient irrigation systems wherever
possible to conserve groundwater resources. Give preference to use of drought-
resistant native Hawaiian plants where feasible and appropriate.
3.9.3    Relation to Urban Land Use Map
Residential areas are shown on the Central O‘ahu Urban Land Use Map in Appendix
A as follows:
   Residential and Low Density Apartment. Areas with this designation should be
zoned as a residential or a low-density apartment district, subject to
appropriate siting considerations and the General Policy for “Overall Density”
provided in Section 3.9.1.1.
   Medium Density Residential/Commercial Mixed Use.  Areas with this
designation should be zoned predominantly for medium-density apartment use.
Mixed use, with retail activities at the ground level, is encouraged.
   Uses Allowed in All Residential Areas - The following uses are not
specifically designated on the Urban Land Use Map but can be located in all
residential areas:
   •   Neighborhood commercial centers;
   •   Elementary schools;
   •   Parks;
   •   Meeting facilities (including churches);
   •   Community centers;
   •   Elderly-care centers and child-care centers; and
   •   Fire stations, and other public facilities and utilities serving the
area.
The adopted Waipahū Neighborhood TOD Plan (April 2014) includes detailed
listings of allowed uses in the TOD Special District that, when approved by the
City Council, should take precedence over the Sustainable Communities Plan
policies and guidelines in the case of a conflict, and should not require an
amendment to the SCP.
3.10   PLANNED COMMERCIAL RETAIL CENTERS
This section provides general policies and guidelines for the development of
commercial centers in Central O‘ahu. These policies and guidelines should be
applied to the expansion or renovation of existing commercial centers, as well
as to new centers.
Definitions - Planned commercial centers, outside of Waipahū and Wahiawā,
differ from commercial areas within towns such as Waipahū or Wahiawā because
they are typically managed as a unit with shared parking and center management.
Four types of commercial centers can be defined based on size and function:
   •   Neighborhood Commercial Center (5-10 acres or less, typically located
within or adjacent to residential area, up to 100,000 square feet [sq. ft.] of
floor area).
      °   Neighborhood Commercial Centers have frontage on at least one
collector street and may have up to 100,000 sq. ft. of floor area, which is
leased to tenants such as grocery stores, sundries stores, and other services
and shops catering to common household needs.
      °   Single commercial establishments, such as convenience stores or “Mom
and Pop” stores, or groupings of stores smaller than five acres in size also
fall within this category, provided that they are appropriately located and
will not contribute to the evolution of a commercial strip.
   •   Community Commercial Center (10-30 acres, typically located on an
arterial highway or at the intersection of two major collector streets, up to
250,000 sq. ft. of floor area).
      °   This type of center principally serves the community in which it is
located, providing for basic shopping and service needs on a larger scale than
the neighborhood center.
      °   Community Commercial Centers may contain up to 250,000 sq. ft. of
floor area. Major attractions typically include a large grocery store, a drug
store, and/or a department store. The other, smaller tenants in the center are
largely dependent on the effectiveness of the major tenants to draw customers.
      °   Examples of this type of commercial center include the Gentry Waipi‘o
Shopping Center and the Mililani Shopping Center.
   •   Major Community Commercial Center (up to 50 acres, located in
communities which are not near an urban center, up to 500,000 sq. ft. of floor
area).
      °   Major planned communities not located near an urban center may need a
larger commercial center.
      °   The Major Community Commercial Center provides for many of the same
community shopping needs as the standard Community Commercial Center, but due
to its larger market, it is able to support more large stores and a wider
variety of small retail and service commercial tenants.
      °   The Major Community Commercial Center occupies up to 50 acres and
contains up to 500,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
      °   An existing Major Community Commercial Center is shown on the Urban
Land Use Map at Mililani and planned Major Community Commercial Centers are
shown at Waiawa and at Koa Ridge Makai.
   •   Regional Commercial Center (more than 50 acres, located with frontage on
a major arterial highway and access from freeway interchange, more than 500,000
sq. ft. of floor area).
      °   This type of center is typically “anchored” by several major stores
and features a wide variety of other tenants, often including entertainment and
community facilities.
      °   The regional center serves surrounding communities, but also attracts
business from throughout the island.
      °   Waikele is the only Regional Commercial Center shown for Central
O‘ahu.
3.10.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Develop planned commercial centers outside of Waipahū and Wahiawā to
provide retail shopping and services for the immediate residential communities
in which they are located.
   •   Develop commercial centers outside of Waipahū and Wahiawā by
concentrating commercial uses in central locations instead of in continuous
commercial strips along arterial roads.
   •   Emphasize pedestrian and transit access to and within the centers.
   •   Permit multi-family residential use above the first floor, and include
it wherever possible in commercial centers.
   •   Wherever possible, design new commercial centers to help create and/or
support pedestrian-friendly village centers, town centers, or “Main Street”
areas for their communities.
      °   Such centers or “Main Streets” provide a place where people from the
surrounding neighborhoods gather, shop, dine, or play and are a key element
that defines a community’s identity.
   •   Allow Neighborhood Commercial Centers to be located within any
residential community, and to be reviewed and approved as part of development
of master planned residential communities or redevelopment plans of existing
communities.
   •   Design Community Commercial Centers to help create communities out of
residential developments by playing the role of meeting place and recreational,
social, cultural, and civic center that the town square and Main Street play in
traditional towns.
   •   Allow Community Commercial Centers at Mililani, Mililani Mauka, Waipi‘o,
and Royal Kunia as shown on the Urban Land Use Map in Appendix A.
   •   Allow Major Community Commercial Centers at Mililani, Koa Ridge, and
Waiawa as shown on the Urban Land Use Map in Appendix A.
      °   In Major Community Commercial Centers, where compatible and subject
to appropriate conditions, allow business hotels to provide short term
accommodations to business travelers and others who are not seeking resort
accommodations.
      °   Limit development of the planned Waiawa center and Koa Ridge center
to support the residential communities surrounding Waiawa and Koa Ridge and not
to become regional centers drawing shoppers from other parts of O‘ahu.
   •   Allow no new Regional Commercial Centers for Central O‘ahu in order to
withhold development that would compete with the objective of redeveloping the
commercial areas of Waipahū and Wahiawā and developing regional shopping
attractions in the City of Kapolei.
   •   Limit office uses in Central O‘ahu Major Community and Community
Commercial Centers.
      °   Offices which provide services to the local community may be included
in the centers, but the emphasis of Central O‘ahu Community Commercial Centers
should be on retail services.
      °   These limitations on office uses are specifically applicable to
Waiawa and Koa Ridge so as to promote the development of office uses in the
Secondary Urban Center and in Waipahū.
   •   Locate developments in Central O‘ahu which are primarily oriented to
office uses in Waipahū, Wahiawā, or at the Mililani Technology Park.
      °   Develop offices at Mililani Technology Park at low densities typical
of campus-like business parks.
3.10.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Planned
Commercial Retail Centers should be implemented. These guidelines should be
applied to the expansion or renovation of existing commercial centers, as well
as to new centers.
All Commercial Centers
Orientation to “Main Street” or the Town/Village Center
   •   Locate and orient structures in the commercial center to the street up
to the “build to” line along the designated “Main Street” or Town/Village
Center frontage.
   •   Locate most parking for commercial structures fronting “Main Street” or
the Town/Village Center behind the structures in joint development parking lots
or in structures although some on-street parking can be provided on the Main
Street or Town/Village Center frontage.
   •   Locate the main entrance to commercial structures fronting the “Main
Street” or Town/Village Center on that street frontage with secondary entrances
from parking areas.
   •   Construct sidewalks in front of retail uses fronting the “Main Street”
or Town/Village Center wide enough (12 to 16 feet) to allow window shopping
and/or outdoor dining.
Mix of Uses
   •   Plan commercial centers primarily for retail and accessory office uses
that provide services to the surrounding community. Residential uses and other
uses which meet the social, cultural, recreational, and civic needs of the
surrounding community may also be incorporated in such commercial centers.
Appropriate Scale
   •   Design the building mass of a commercial center to be in keeping with
its urban and natural setting.
Compatible Style
   •   Design the architectural character of commercial centers to respect the
surrounding urban and natural features, particularly when located adjacent to a
residential area or significant natural or historic feature.
Accessibility
   •   Design streets to provide safe access and mobility for all users,
including pedestrians, bicyclists, transit users, motorists, and persons of all
abilities, as determined through a context sensitive solution process that
integrates community context and the surrounding environment, including land
use, and balances the needs and comfort of all modes and users.
   •   Incorporate site design and facilities to promote pedestrian, bicycle,
and transit access in commercial centers. Pedestrian and bicycle access is more
important for smaller neighborhood centers while transit access is more
significant for community centers.
Neighborhood Commercial Centers
   Architectural Character
   •   Design the project architecture to reflect a residential architectural
character and respect adjacent residential uses.
   •   Use gable and hip-form roofs to create breaks in the roof line to reduce
the apparent scale of large roof plates.
   •   Use exterior materials and colors that are typically found in
residential construction to express residential character.
   Building Siting
   •   Orient buildings to the pedestrian.
   •   Orient storefronts to face the street, and, to the extent possible, be
sited close to the sidewalk.
   •   Place parking and service areas behind the buildings or otherwise
visually screened from streets and residential areas.
   Building Height and Density
   •   Design buildings at a residential scale.
   •   Allow building heights limits which allow for gable and hip-form roof
elements.
   •   Limit total floor area for a lot or contiguous lots with common parking
to no more than 100,000 sq. ft.
   Vehicular Access
   •   Provide access to the parking and loading areas from a collector street.
   •   Permit access to a local residential street only if it is for emergency
or secondary access and if it would not encourage through traffic along the
local street.
   Pedestrian and Bicycle Facilities
   •   Provide at least one pedestrian access from the public sidewalk or other
off-site pedestrian pathway to the entrances of establishments in the
commercial center that does not require crossing a traffic lane or parking lot
aisle or driveway.
   •   Design and locate bicycle racks to provide security, convenience, and
visibility from the street entry.
   •   Provide appropriate signage to indicate the availability and location of
bicycle racks.
   Visual Screening, Lighting & Signage
   •   Screen parking and service areas from the street and adjacent
residential lots by planting a landscape screen of trees and hedges along
street frontages and property lines and planting shade trees throughout the
parking lot.
   •   Use xeriscaping (the use of landscape materials with low water demand),
non-potable water for irrigation, and efficient irrigation systems wherever
possible to conserve groundwater resources. Give preference to use of drought-
resistant native Hawaiian plants where feasible and appropriate.
   •   Use only low level or indirect lighting in parking lots.
   •   Require all signage to either be non-illuminated or indirectly
illuminated.
Community Commercial Centers
   Architectural Character
   •   Allow varied architectural character, depending on the context.
   •   Require commercial center buildings that are visible from adjacent
residential areas to reflect a residential character while allowing other
facades to have a character more typical of a commercial building.
   •   Avoid disruptive contrasts between facades and extended blank walls that
are visible simultaneously from public areas.
   Building Bulk and Massing
   •   Provide a transition in scale from larger building elements of the
commercial center to finer elements near the adjacent use when the building is
adjacent to a residential area or a building of historic value.
   •   Avoid blank facades on portions of buildings visible from a street by
using texture, articulation, color, and fenestration to create visual interest.
   •   Require facades that are close to the public right-of-way to be composed
of display windows and pedestrian entrances.
   Building Height and Density
   •   Limit building heights to generally not exceed 45 feet, except in Major
Community Commercial Centers where a height up to 90 feet may be considered for
mixed-use buildings that include residential uses, where justified by community
benefits.
   •   Limit the total floor area to no more than 250,000 sq. ft. for a
standard Community Commercial Center and 500,000 sq. ft. for a Major Community
Commercial Center.
   Pedestrian, Bicycle and Transit Facilities
   •   Provide street frontage improvements for bus stops, including a bus
shelter and a pull-out off a traffic lane, along all abutting streets which
have bus routes.
   •   Provide a pedestrian pathway from the bus stop to the nearest entrance
of the nearest building of the commercial center. The pathway should be clearly
indicated with special paving or markings and covered to provide weather
protection, if the commercial center building is not directly connected to the
bus shelter.
   •   Design bicycle racks to provide security and be visible from the street
entry to the commercial center.
   •   Provide appropriate signage to indicate the availability and location of
bicycle racks.
   Visual Screening
   •   Minimize the visibility of parking and service areas from the street and
adjacent residential lots through screening.
   •   In the case of major community commercial centers, minimize the
visibility of large building volumes and expansive parking areas through site
planning, architectural treatment of elevations and landscaping.
   •   Plant a landscape screen, consisting of trees and hedges, along street
fronting the parking lot or garage.
   •   Plant shade trees throughout all parking lots.
   •   Use xeriscaping (the use of landscape materials with low water demand),
non-potable water for irrigation, and efficient irrigation systems wherever
possible to conserve groundwater resources. Give preference to use of drought-
resistant native Hawaiian plants where feasible and appropriate.
   •   Provide landscape planters along the facade of each parking level for
parking garages close to and readily visible from a street.
   •   Visually screen service areas from public and residential areas.
   Signage
   •   Indirectly illuminate signage visible from residential areas.
   Transit Access
   •   Design the circulation plan for master-planned projects with commercial
development so that all commercial development with more than 1,000 sq. ft. and
all employment sites with more than ten employees is within 1/8 mile of an
existing or potential bus stop or rail transit stop.
3.11   INDUSTRIAL CENTERS
This section provides general policies and guidelines for development of
industrial areas and industrial uses in Central O‘ahu.
Existing industrial areas in Central O‘ahu include areas in Waipahū makai of
Farrington Highway (94 acres), in the old Waipahū mill area (in the Mill Town
Center and Sugar Mill Center areas, approximately 32 acres), in Gentry Business
Park in Waipi‘o (127 acres), and in portions of the Waikele Gulch that are
approved for nonconforming industrial uses (approximately 32 acres). The
Waikele Gulch was part of a former military installation. When the Federal
government transferred ownership of the Waikele Gulch land to a private entity,
the industrial use of approximately 32 acres within the Waikele Gulch as self-
storage facilities continued. Future land use designation changes are
anticipated to be sought for approximately 32 acres within Waikele Gulch to
remove its nonconforming status.
New industrial areas are planned for Royal Kunia (123 acres), Koa Ridge Makai
(with 55 acres identified for Commercial or Industrial use) and Waiawa (with 90
acres of mixed commercial/industrial areas in Phase 1).
Proposals to create packaging and processing facilities and an agricultural
technology park next to Whitmore Village and associated agricultural support
facilities in Wahiawā have been circulated, and received some funding from the
State, most recently with the purchase of a warehouse in Wahiawā. In addition,
a proposal to create and fund a geriatric research and technology park in
Wahiawā, to be operated by the State High Tech Development Corporation has been
circulated but did not receive approval in the 2014 State Legislature.
Mililani Technology Park is an industrial-commercial mixed use area designed to
attract mostly office uses seeking a campus-style setting. (See Sec. 3.12 for
policies and guidelines for Mililani Technology Park.)
3.11.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Locate major industrial uses and utility plants for O‘ahu in the Primary
Urban Center or ‘Ewa. However, limited industrial development on existing
industrial zoned land is needed in Central O‘ahu to accommodate services and
storage for surrounding communities, and to provide a range of jobs within the
region.
   •   Provide support for diversified agricultural jobs in Central O‘ahu and
the North Shore from industrial areas in Wahiawā.
   •   Allow small lots off the main commercial streets in Waipahū and Wahiawā
for industrial small businesses, particularly automobile repair shops,
contractors’ yards, “incubator” businesses, and businesses which serve
residential and commercial areas.
3.11.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Industrial
Centers should be implemented.
Appropriate Scale
   •   Minimize visibility of large building volumes and tall building or
machinery elements from arterial roads, major regional collector roads,
residential areas, commercial and civic districts, and parks through site
planning and landscaping.
Environmental Compatibility
   •   Locate operations that discharge air or water pollutants, even when
treated, in areas where they would impose the least potential harm on the
natural environment in case the treatment process fails to perform adequately.
   •   Locate and operate uses that generate high noise levels in a way that
will keep noise to an acceptable level in existing and planned residential
areas.
   •   Buffer industrial areas located within residential communities from
residential uses, so that larger industrial building forms do not have a
negative visual, lighting, noise, or odor impacts on residential areas.
   •   Use xeriscaping (the use of landscape materials with low water demand),
non-potable water for irrigation, and efficient irrigation systems wherever
possible to conserve groundwater resources. Give preference to use of drought-
resistant native Hawaiian plants where feasible and appropriate.
Uses
   •   Allow all uses that provide direct services to adjacent residential
communities, including automobile service and repair, in Central O‘ahu
industrial areas.
   •   Prohibit petroleum processing, resource extraction, and the manufacture
of chemicals and explosives.
   •   Allow other industrial uses based on performance criteria established by
regulatory agencies.
   •   Allow retail establishments in industrial areas as accessory uses only.
   •   Allow offices and business services in a building or complex of
buildings which primarily consists of industrial uses and industrial building
types, so long as no building is primarily used for offices or business
services.
Location
   •   Allow industrial areas within the master-planned communities of Waipi‘o-
Gentry, Royal Kunia, Koa Ridge, and Waiawa.
   •   Maintain industrial areas oriented to small businesses providing
consumer services within Wahiawā (north of Cane Street) and Waipahū, so long as
these do not front on commercial streets or major collector streets, provided
that designation of use areas is subject to redefinition either through Special
Area Plans for those towns, or in the case of Waipahū, through the Waipahū
Neighborhood TOD Plan and TOD Special Districts.
   •   Prohibit new industrial developments that front on streets with
residences on the opposite side, and to the extent possible, design the
developments to direct industrial traffic away from residential neighborhoods.
Building Height
   •   Limit building heights to generally not exceed 60 feet.
   •   Allow taller vertical structures when required as part of an industrial
operation, but require a view plane study to be conducted for structures over
100 feet to determine if they can be sited or designed to minimize visibility
from residential and commercial areas, public rights-of-way, or the shoreline.
Landscape Treatment
   •   Require landscaped setbacks and street trees along the edges of
industrial areas abutting arterial or major collector streets.
   •   In small-lot industrial areas, require outdoor work and storage areas
for vehicles, equipment and supplies to be visually screened from the street
and adjacent lots by privacy walls and buildings, with minimal reliance on
landscaping.
   •   Require visual screening in large-lot industrial subdivisions to be
accomplished primarily with landscaped setbacks and street trees.
3.11.3   RELATION TO URBAN LAND USE MAP
Industrial zoning should generally be limited to those areas shown as
“Industrial” on the Urban Land Use Map in Appendix A, provided that industrial
zoning may be granted for an individual activity which, because it is a public
transportation or utility use or because of its unique characteristics, is
unable to locate in a planned industrial area.
3.12   MILILANI TECHNOLOGY PARK
This section provides general policies and guidelines for development of
Mililani Technology Park.
Mililani Technology Park (MTP) is a unique development located on a strip of
land north of Mililani Mauka and east of the H-2 Freeway. It is bounded on the
north by Leilehua Golf Course and other military lands and on the south by the
upper part of Waikakalaua Gulch.
MTP was originally envisioned as a means for attracting “clean” high technology
research and development industry to O‘ahu and expanding the City’s economic
base. At least 45 percent of either the net marketable area of all the lots or
the total number of lots are required under existing approvals to initially be
sold or leased to and occupied by high technology firms and businesses.
In 1991, when Castle & Cooke sought IMX-1 Industrial-Commercial Mixed Use
zoning for Phase I of the MTP, they showed plans to develop an additional 115
acres of agricultural zoned lands east of Phase I as Phase II of MTP. However,
much of the 101 acres in Phase I remains undeveloped over twenty years after
the project opened.
The State has purchased approximately 150 acres of land from Castle & Cooke on
which to develop its first joint facility for federal, State, and City first
responders and public safety workers. The State also plans to relocate its
primary data center to the new joint facility campus. The campus site, formerly
referred to as Mililani Technology Park Phase II, was identified because of its
centralized location outside of O‘ahu’s inundation zone, and its close
proximity to military facilities, an airfield, and an ample workforce due to
the many surrounding communities. The technology facility and data center are
expected to create jobs, decrease peak traffic by reversing traffic flow in the
opposite direction of the Honolulu urban core, create regional economic
development, and allow for a live-work-play community. Development of the
former Mililani Technology Park Phase II area as a First Responder Technology
Campus will not be subject to the policies and guidelines of this section.
3.12.1   GENERAL POLICIES
3.12.1   Uses
   •   Continue Mililani Technology Park as a campus-like business park
primarily intended for emerging technology-intensive industries, including but
not limited to electronics firms, computer software developers, biotechnology
firms and their support services.
   •   Allow appropriate and compatible commercial and industrial uses which
desire fee simple lots and can conform to the low density campus design of MTP.
   •   Do not permit the following in the business park:
         Uses that produce noise and noxious emissions;
         Uses connected with agricultural production;
         Large-scale retailing/wholesaling operations such as factory outlets;
department stores, home improvement centers, warehouse outlets; and similar
commercial activities; and
         Dwelling units or overnight accommodations of any kind.
3.12.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Mililani
Technology Park should be implemented.
   Uses
   •   Allow individual lots to mix light industrial uses with office use, with
no limitation on the allocation of floor area.
   •   Limit retail and service uses supporting activities in the business park
to ten percent of the total floor area of the business park.
   Building Height and Density
   •   Limit building heights to generally not exceed 40 feet, except for
necessary communications antennas.
   •   Allow the floor area ratio and maximum building coverage for lots
appropriate to an open, landscaped campus environment.
3.12.3   RELATION TO URBAN LAND USE MAP
The Mililani Technology Park is shown as “Technology Park” on the Urban Land
Use Map in Appendix A.
3.13   MILITARY AREAS
This section contains general policies and guidelines regarding military areas
in Central O‘ahu.
The major military bases of Schofield Barracks/Wheeler Army Airfield and Joint
Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam are expected to remain, but they are not expected to
expand beyond their existing boundaries in the foreseeable future.
Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, Wahiawā Annex, located north of Wahiawā, is the
center of communications for the U.S. Navy in the Pacific providing high-speed
connectivity to naval forces from San Diego and Puget Sound to Singapore and
beyond. The Wahiawā Annex is the largest naval communications station in the
world and is known as the “Pacific Voice of Command.”
Schofield Barracks/Wheeler Army Airfield
Schofield Barracks/Wheeler Army Airfield supports the 25th Infantry Division
and consequently has large areas committed to residential use, including
commercial and recreational facilities. The bases also support quasi-industrial
uses including operation and maintenance of heavy equipment and helicopter
airfield operations and maintenance.
In addition to these urban uses, the base also includes large areas of open
space, most of which is used for infantry training. These areas extend beyond
the Community Growth Boundary. One area is west of Schofield Barracks urban
areas, extending to the Wai‘anae Mountains, and a second area known as the East
Range extends south and east from Wahiawā to the Ko‘olau Mountains.
Recent changes at Schofield Barracks include:
   •   Reorganization and establishment of a Stryker Brigade Combat Team (which
may become an infantry brigade combat team, according to recent reports);
   •   Construction of new family housing;
   •   Closure of the Kalakaua golf course; and
   •   Acquisition of approximately 1,400 acres to extend the western training
area to the south.
In addition, Island Palm Communities, a partnership between the U.S. Army and
Lendlease, purchased over 2,500 acres of land south of Schofield Barracks along
Kunia Road in 2008. Most of these lands were former pineapple lands farmed by
Del Monte under a long-term lease from Campbell Estate.
The lands are expected to remain in agricultural use or be left as open space
for the foreseeable future, although there is the possibility at some point in
the future, a portion might be used for housing for the military.
   •   Monsanto has leased approximately 2,300 acres of the land for thirty
years with the intent to use most of the land to grow seed corn.
   •   In 2011, the Hawai‘i Agricultural Foundation, with cooperation of
Monsanto and Island Palm Communities, established the Kunia Agricultural Park
on 182 acres of the land Monsanto is leasing from Island Palm Communities, and
in less than a year, leased all of the land to 17 farmers on parcels of
generally five to ten acres in size.
JOINT BASE PEARL HARBOR-HICKAM
Waipi‘o Peninsula
Most of the Waipi‘o Peninsula lies within the Navy restricted area arc of the
Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam West Loch Annex. Waipi‘o Peninsula lands were
used mostly for sugar cultivation in the past. Since 1998, a portion of the
northernmost part of the Waipi‘o Peninsula has been leased to the City and
County for the Waipi‘o Peninsula Soccer Park complex. Current Navy use of the
rest of the peninsula includes disposal of material dredged from Pearl Harbor.
Waikele Gulch and Bluffs
As part of the compensation for redevelopment of the Ford Island complex, Navy
lands in Waikele Gulch and on Waikele Bluff were leased to the Hunt Companies
with an option for purchase. As military lands, the Waikele Gulch and Bluff
lands had F-1 Military and Federal District zoning, and were used for intensive
industrial activities and operational support activities.
Under the City Land Use Ordinance, once F-1 zoned lands are no longer being
used for military or Federal government purposes, permitted structures and
development standards are those specified for the P-2 General Preservation
District.
However, the Hunt Companies sub-leases were for uses not permitted under P-
2 zoning. When the City expressed concerns and said that the uses under the
leases had to conform to P-2 zoning, the Navy stated that the uses were exempt
from City land use plans and regulations because the Navy still had ownership
of the lands.
Since then, Hunt has exercised its option to purchase the fee-simple ownership
of the properties, and has since sold the properties to another private
landowner.
The City has treated uses, such as storage in the former ammunition bunkers in
the Gulch, as nonconforming uses because they were uses the Navy made of the
property that have continued since the Navy turned over control of the
properties to the Hunt Companies, which then sold the properties to another
private landowner.
(Nonconforming uses are uses of a zoning lot or a structure that was previously
lawful, but do not conform to current applicable use regulations for the zoning
district in which it is located. The nonconforming uses are allowed to continue
but are subject to limits designed to restrict expansion of the nonconformity.)
The current owner has stated its intention to seek to include within the
Community Growth Boundary approximately 32 acres of the Waikele Gulch outside
of the 100-year flood plain that are approved for nonconforming industrial
uses.
3.13.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Consistent with the General Plan policies, support military uses at
Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, Schofield-Wheeler, and Joint Base Pearl Harbor-
Hickam Wahiawā Annex in order to encourage a high level of military-related
employment.
   •   Request Department of Defense co-operation with and support of the
City’s land use plans within limits set by the military mission.
   •   Require private uses operating under leases of Federal owned lands not
being used for Federal government or military uses to be consistent with the
Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan vision, policies, and guidelines and
to be in compliance with the Land Use Ordinance.
   •   Support renewed use of the Waipi‘o Peninsula lands for diversified
agriculture or aquaculture activities if feasible in light of Navy activities
and soil conditions.
   •   Request expansion of limited public access to the shoreline waters of
West Loch beyond the West Loch Shoreline Park.
   •   Support retention and enhancement of wetland areas along the Pearl
Harbor shoreline.
3.13.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for Military Areas
should apply to development on the two bases, and where appropriate, in areas
adjacent to the bases. The City will request the Department of Defense consider
them in planning for development at each of the bases.
   All Areas
   •   Apply the policies and guidelines for circulation systems and landscape
treatment in civilian areas (described previously in Section 3.9) to military
lands in residential use.
   •   Apply the planning guidelines for industrial areas (described previously
in Section 3.11.2) to the quasi-industrial uses on lands designated “Military.”
   Schofield Barracks/Wheeler Army Airfield
   •   Support expansion of uses within the base which include residential,
commercial, recreational and civic areas for the support of military personnel
and their dependents to accommodate additional residents on base and/or
augmented activities which do not significantly conflict with surrounding
residential communities.
   •   Minimize the visibility of security fencing and utilitarian military
facilities from off-base through the planting of a landscape screen, consisting
of trees and hedges, along highway frontages.
   •   Provide adequate buffers for residential developments immediately
adjacent to the Central O‘ahu training areas to ensure that residents will not
be adversely impacted by noise or other environmental impacts of the training
activities.
   Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam
   •   Request Navy approval to expand limited public access to the shoreline
waters of West Loch for recreational purposes beyond the West Loch Shoreline
Park.
   •   Protect and enhance wetlands along the West Loch and Middle Loch
shorelines.
   •   Allow agricultural uses to be renewed on the Waipi‘o Peninsula within
the Navy restricted areas around the Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam West Loch
Annex.
3.13.3   RELATION TO URBAN LAND USE MAP
The “Military” designation on the Urban Land Use Map in Appendix A shows those
parts of military bases planned primarily for military activities that are
quasi-industrial in nature. Areas used by the military for typical urban
activities are shown according to their planned use. Portions of military
installations that are planned to remain in open space are represented as on
the Open Space Map in Appendix A as “Military Training Areas,” “Preservation,”
“Agriculture,” and “Drainageways/Gulches.”
4. PUBLIC FACILITIES AND INFRASTRUCTURE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
This chapter sets forth policies and guidelines for the planning and
construction of proposed public and private facility projects and
infrastructure systems to carry out the vision for the future development of
Central O‘ahu, as described in Chapter 2. These policies and guidelines are not
regulations, but provide guidance that decision makers and administrators
should follow, where sensible, in approving projects and revising rules,
regulations, and best practices standards.
Information on timing and phasing of both planned and proposed infrastructure
and public facility projects, which was available during the plan revision
period, is also included. However, each project proposal is only identified and
presented conceptually; not on a site-specific basis. More detailed information
on the specific need, route alignment, site boundaries, capacity, and other
specifications for each project, as applicable, will be prepared at the master
planning stage required before a specific project can be approved.
As noted in Chapter 5, existing Unilateral Agreements, Zoning and Urban Design
Plans will continue to guide development in the area.
Policies and guidelines are provided for the following public facilities and
infrastructure systems:
4.1   Transportation Systems
4.2   Water Allocation and System Development
4.3   Wastewater Treatment
4.4   Electrical Power Development
4.5   Solid Waste Handling and Disposal
4.6   Drainage Systems
4.7   School Facilities
4.8   Public Safety Facilities
4.9   Other Community Facilities
4.1   TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
This section describes the existing conditions and the plans and proposals for
development of Central O‘ahu’s roadways, transit system, and bikeways. (See the
Public Facilities Map in Appendix A, and the Roadway Network listing below in
Table 4.1.) The section concludes with policies and guidelines to guide future
transportation system development in Central O‘ahu.
The planned and proposed roadway elements and other transportation system
features which are listed as potentially being needed to meet the projected
development in Central O‘ahu were identified through the regional planning and
transportation analysis done for the initial Central O‘ahu Sustainable
Communities Plan Revision Program (2000-2002), the O‘ahu Regional
Transportation Plan 2040 (2016), and the Honolulu Rail Transit system.
The topography of Central O‘ahu is characterized by plateaus divided by
gulches. Major arterials run north-south, generally parallel to the major
gulches - Waikele and Kīpapa.
Central O‘ahu’s topography has a number of disadvantages for transportation
system development:
   •   The gulches, because of their depth and width, represent a barrier to
eastwest connections.
   •   Since both the H-2 and Kamehameha Highway have to cross Kīpapa Gulch and
other smaller gulches, widening of those arterials would involve major costs.
   •   The topography also makes rail transit a costly long-range prospect for
Central O‘ahu. In addition to the gulch crossings, the requirement to be able
to ascend and descend the steep incline from Waipahū to Mililani may limit the
number of potential suppliers of train systems.
   •   Traffic going from Central O‘ahu to the Primary Urban Center - where the
major peak-hour demand occurs - must transition through interchanges to get
onto the H-1 Freeway. A major bottleneck occurs at the Waiawa Interchange,
where the major Central O‘ahu arterial, the H-2 Freeway, joins the H-1 Freeway.
TABLE 4.1 PLANNED AND PROPOSED CENTRAL O‘AHU ROADWAY NETWORK IMPROVEMENTS
                                                 ORTP 2040        ORTP 2040
Planned and Proposed Extensions and Improvements Project Number   Phasing
                                                 (Responsibility)
TABLE 4.1 PLANNED AND PROPOSED CENTRAL O‘AHU ROADWAY NETWORK IMPROVEMENTS
                                                                                     ORTP 2040        ORTP 2040
Planned and Proposed Extensions and Improvements                                     Project Number   Phasing
                                                                                     (Responsibility)
North-South Corridors
   •   Widen Kamehameha Hwy (4 lanes, Ka Uka Blvd to Lanikūhana Ave)        207 (S)          2019-2029
   •   Widen Kunia Road (6 lanes, H-1 to Royal Kunia)                        702 (S)          Illustrative
   •   Widen Kunia Road (4 lanes, Royal Kunia to Wahiawā)                   702 (S)          Illustrative
   •   Kolekole Pass Road (alternative access to Waianae)                    708 (S)          Illustrative
   •   Widen Kamehameha Highway (3 lanes, Wahiawā Interchange to California 857 (S)          2011-2018
   •   Central Mauka Road, Whitmore to Waiawa(1)
   •   Pāiwa Street extension to Ka Uka Blvd.(1)
East-West Corridors                                                                  356 (S)          2030-2040
   •   Widen Farrington Hwy, Kunia to Waiawa (2 more lanes)                  306 (S)          2019-2020
   •   Widen H-1 Freeway, Waiawa to Pāiwa
Interchange Improvements                                                             307 (S)          2019-2029
   •   Waipi‘o Interchange (H-2)                                           702 (S)          Illustrative
   •   Waiawa Interchange (H-1)                                              704 (S)          Illustrative
   •   H-1/H-2 Interchange ramps
New Interchanges                                                                     308 (S)          2019-2029
   •   New H-2 Interchange (Pineapple Road Overpass)
Transit Projects                                                                     852 (C)          2011-2018
   •   Honolulu Rail Transit Project                                         603 (C)          2019-2029
   •   Bus service expansion                                                 604 (C)          2019-2029
   •   Construct transit centers                                             754 (C)          Illustrative
   •   Fixed guideway, Central O‘ahu
Notes:
(1)   Projects in O‘ahu Regional Transportation Plan 2030 (ORTP 2030), but omitted from ORTP 2035 and ORTP 2040.
   Projects are identified as C (City) or S (State) projects.
   Project numbers from ORTP 2040 Table 6-1.
   Illustrative projects were not included in the financially-constrained ORTP 2040 due to funding limitations. If
additional funding becomes available, they may be considered for amendment to the ORTP.
Source: O‘ahu Regional Transportation Plan 2040, April 2016.
 
The City and County adopted a Complete Streets policy as Ord. 12-15 in May 2012
with the intent that all transportation facilities be planned, designed,
operated, and maintained to provide safe mobility and access for all users,
including pedestrians, bicyclists, transit users, motorists, and persons of all
abilities. The City Department of Transportation Services has published a City
and County of Honolulu Complete Streets Design Manual, as well as
Implementation Study Location Reports for sixteen sites around the island that
serve as illustration projects for Complete Streets implementation.
4.1.1   EXISTING ROADWAY NETWORK
The major east-west arterials of the Central O‘ahu roadway system includes:
   •   The H-1 Freeway which is the major arterial road connecting Central
O‘ahu with the Primary Urban Center (PUC); and
   •   Farrington Highway, which functions as a secondary east-west route and
as a commercial district street through Waipahū.
The three major north-south arterial highways are:
   •   The H-2 Freeway which extends from the H-1 Freeway at the Waiawa
Interchange to Wahiawā;
   •   Kamehameha Highway which is the island’s original major circle island
route and serves as a parallel alternate route to the H-2 Freeway during peak
periods and as a carrier for local traffic between Waipahū, Waikele, Waipi‘o,
Mililani, and Wahiawā; and
   •   Kunia Road which links Schofield Barracks and Wahiawā with ‘Ewa.
According to the O‘ahu Regional Transportation Plan 2035,(April 2011), the
number of people traveling on Kunia Road, Kamehameha Highway, and H-2 Freeway
is projected to increase from 248,900 trips per day in 2007 to 332,700 in 2035,
an increase of 33 percent. However, congested conditions in 2035 are expected
to be close to 2007 levels, and peak hour automobile travel times are expected
to be better than 2007 due to the completion of the first segment of the
Honolulu Rail Transit system and the completion of the transportation projects
in the O‘ahu Regional Transportation Plan 2035. (The updated O ‘ahu Regional
Transportation Plan 2040 was approved in April 2016.)
The substantial development of jobs in ‘Ewa and Central O‘ahu (from 70,500 jobs
in 2000 to over 187,000 jobs by 2035) is projected to increase the number of
Central O‘ahu residents who work in ‘Ewa or Central O‘ahu from existing levels.
However, it is also projected that the number of commuters traveling to the PUC
from ‘Ewa and Central O‘ahu will still increase, although at a lower rate than
would occur if development of jobs in the Secondary Urban Center in ‘Ewa was
not supported.
The following two sections describe improvements needed to meet these existing
and projected transportation needs.
4.1.2   PLANNED EXTENSIONS OF THE ROADWAY NETWORK
Planning and development of major roadways is the shared responsibility of the
State Department of Transportation and the City Department of Transportation
Services. Planning and use of federal transportation funds is coordinated
through the O‘ahu Metropolitan Planning Organization (OMPO), a joint City-State
agency.
The O‘ahu Regional Transportation Plan (ORTP) 2035 was adopted in April 2011.
It is the fiscally-constrained long-range State and County plan that identifies
the transportation projects needed through 2035 for O‘ahu, based on the City’s
Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans. In order to receive
Federal funding, projects need to be listed in the ORTP. See
Table 4.1 for listing of the Central O‘ahu projects in the ORTP 2035.
The ORTP 2035 includes a number of major improvements for Central O‘ahu
including:
   •   Widening of Kamehameha Highway to four lanes between Ka Uka Boulevard
and the Lanikuhana Avenue intersections;
   •   Development of a P. M. contraflow or zipper lane from Ke‘ehi Interchange
to Kunia Interchange;
   •   Improvement to existing interchanges at Waipi‘o and Waiawa;
   •   Widening of Farrington Highway from Fort Weaver Road to the Waiawa
Interchange; and
   •   A new H-2 interchange.
The ORTP 2035 also includes three “illustrative” projects for Central O‘ahu,
including:
   •   Widening of Kunia Road from Wilikina Drive to Farrington Highway;
   •   Adding a westbound lane to H-1 from the Waiau Interchange to the Waiawa
Interchange; and
   •   Improvements to the Waiawa Interchange.
(Illustrative projects are not included in the ORTP 2035 due to funding
limitations. If additional funding becomes available, they may be considered
for amendments to the ORTP.)
As a condition of State Land Use Commission approval of Urban District
designation and City approval of zone changes for the Koa Ridge project, the
developer is required to mitigate impacts of the Koa Ridge project on the
transportation network as determined by the State Department of Transportation,
the City Department of Transportation Services, and the Department of Planning
and Permitting, based on the most current updated Traffic Impact Analysis
Report (TIAR).
The May 2012 TIAR for the project recommended making the following improvements
in the vicinity of the project site:
   •   Improvements to the Ka Uka Boulevard H-2 Interchange;
   •   Widening of Ka Uka Boulevard;
   •   Improvements to the Kamehameha/Ka Uka Boulevard intersection;
   •   Widening and other improvements to Kamehameha Highway between Waipahū
Street and a new temporary project access road north of Ka Uka Boulevard; and
   •   A new Pineapple Road H-2 Interchange.
4.1.3   TRANSIT
Currently, transit service is provided to Central O‘ahu by the City bus system
and Handi-Van para-transit service. The first increment of the Honolulu Rail
Transit System is planned to operate between East Kapolei and the Ala Moana
Shopping Center. Two rail transit stations in Waipahū, and rail transit
stations at Leeward Community College and at Pearl Highlands will provide
service to Central O‘ahu commuters.
4.1.3.1   Bus Service
Bus service is provided through the Department of Transportation Services,
which currently contracts with O‘ahu Transit Services (OTS) for operation of
TheBus. OTS also operates the City’s para-transit service, the Handi-Van.
As of May 2013, there were 24 regular service bus routes serving the Central
O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan area, and 12 express bus routes operating
during the peak commuting hours. The number of routes has increased greatly
since 2002.
The City has converted its bus system into a combination of express, local, and
“Hub-and-Spoke” community circulator buses which meet at transit centers
throughout the island.
The City has also addressed the need for transit centers and park-and-ride
facilities in Central O‘ahu.
   •   Transit centers are bus transfer points having a protected environment
for waiting passengers. Transit centers have been developed on Hikimoe Street
near the Civic Center in Waipahū, in Mililani, and in Wahiawā. Two new bus
transit centers are planned to be developed: one in Waipahū as part of the West
Loch Rail Station, and another in Koa Ridge.
   •   Park-and-rides are transit centers where commuters can leave their cars
during the day and catch TheBus. There are three park-and-ride facilities in
Central O‘ahu located at Royal Kunia, Mililani Mauka, and the Hawai‘i Army
National Guard Armory in Wahiawā.
Once the Honolulu Rail Transit System begins operating, express buses using the
H-2 High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) lane and a flyover ramp from H-2 to the Pearl
Highlands park-and-ride facility will provide convenient access to and from the
rail system for Central O‘ahu residents commuting to downtown Honolulu jobs.
4.1.3.2   Planned Rail Transit System
In 2006, the City Department of Transportation Services completed a planning
Alternatives Analysis to evaluate alternatives that would provide high-capacity
transit for the corridor between the University of Hawaii at Mānoa, downtown
Honolulu, and the fast growing areas in Leeward O‘ahu and Kapolei.
On December 22, 2006, the City Council selected as the Locally Preferred
Alternative, an elevated fixed-guideway rail transit system extending from the
City of Kapolei to the University of Hawaii Manoa with a connection to Waikīkī.
The initial phase of the rail transit system begins in East Kapolei near the
Kroc Center and the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands headquarters, and ends at
the Ala Moana Shopping Center. Extensions to the City of Kapolei in the west,
and to Waikīkī and the University of Hawaii Mānoa in the east are planned after
the first segment is completed.
The O‘ahu Regional Transportation Plan 2035 (ORTP 2035) includes an
“illustrative project” to plan, design, and construct a fixed guideway transit
system between Pearl City and Mililani. (Illustrative projects are not
officially part of the ORTP 2035, but may be considered for addition to the
ORTP if additional funding becomes available.) Technical issues and associated
costs caused by the topography and the steep change in elevation on the route,
and efficiency issues caused by the dispersed character of development along
the proposed route may make it difficult to justify building such a system.
As shown on the Public Facilities Map in Appendix A, the rail transit system
will connect Waipahū
A 43-acre Rail Operations Center will be located near Leeward Community
College. The Center will be where staff monitor and control all the trains as
they move through the system and where the trains will be maintained and
stored.
The Honolulu Rail Transit system, when extended to the City of Kapolei, will
provide both a shuttle service connecting Waipahū, the University of Hawaii
West O‘ahu campus, Kalaeloa, the City of Kapolei, and Kapolei West, and peak-
hour express commuter service to and from the Primary Urban Center, running on
a route separated from rush hour highway traffic.
Two rail transit stations in Waipahū (West Loch Rail Station and Waipahū
Transit Center Rail Station), and the rail station at Leeward Community College
will be the centers of medium density residential and commercial development.
The objective is to create a land use pattern along the transit corridor and
around the rail transit stations that would allow Central O‘ahu residents to
minimize use of the private automobile and encourage use of rail transit for
longer trips and walking or biking for short trips.
City bus routes will be integrated with the rail system and will provide feeder
bus service, making it easier for residents to get to the stations. The Hikimoe
bus transit center is within easy walking distance of the planned Waipahū
Transit Center Rail Station; and a bus transit center is planned to be built
adjacent to the makai entrance to the West Loch Rail Station.
A “flyover” access ramp from the H-2 freeway will provide access to the Pearl
Highland station’s park-and-ride and bus transit center for express bus riders
and automobile traffic from the mauka areas of Central O‘ahu and from the North
Shore.
4.1.4   BIKEWAYS
The proposed bikeway system for Central O‘ahu shown in
Exhibit 4.1 is from the O‘ahu Bike Plan (2012) and generally incorporates
facilities recommended previously in Bike Plan Hawai‘i (the 2003 State Bikeway
Plan), and the Waipahū Town Plan (1995).
The Exhibit shows existing and planned locations for three types of bicycle
facilities:
   •   Bike paths which are separated from roadways and are for the exclusive
use of bicycles and pedestrians;
   •   Bike lanes, four- to six-foot lanes exclusively for bike use which are
included in the roadway; and
   •   Bike routes/signed shared roadways, typically wide outside lanes on
streets, with street signage and, in some cases, pavement markings, where bikes
share the lane with automobiles.
Central O‘ahu currently includes about 20 miles of bikeways (including shared
routes, bike lanes, and bike paths). The O‘ahu Bike Plan proposes a total of 71
additional miles of bikeway projects in Central O‘ahu, of which 36 miles would
be City projects.
   Exhibit 4.1: Central O‘ahu Bikeway System
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9381.png]
 
Recognizing that implementation of all the planned bikeway projects for O‘ahu
would far outstrip funds now available, the Plan sorts the projects into three
priority levels.
Highest priority projects in Central O‘ahu are:
   •   Central O‘ahu Regional Park: (Kamehameha Highway to Paiwa Street) 0.95
miles of City bike path;
   •   Lanikuhana Avenue: (South end of Mehe‘ula Parkway to Mililani Shopping
Center) 2.64 miles of City bike path;
   •   Leeward Bikeway (Phase 1): (Waipi‘o Point Access Road to Hawaiian
Railroad Society Train Station) 5.99 miles of State bike path; and
   •   Waipi‘o Point Access Road (Southern Section): (Pearl Harbor Bike Path to
Waipi‘o Soccer Park) .72 miles of City bike path
4.1.5   GENERAL POLICIES
The following general transportation system policies support the vision for
development of Central O‘ahu.
Transportation System Functions. Central O‘ahu’s transportation system should:
   •   Central O‘ahu’s transportation system should:
   •   Provide adequate access between jobs, shopping, and recreation centers
in Central O‘ahu;
   •   Provide improved access to and from adjacent areas, especially the
employment centers of the Secondary Urban Center in ‘Ewa; and
   •   Provide adequate capacity for peak-hour commuting to work in the Primary
Urban Center. (Although the share of residents who will be able to live in
Central O‘ahu and work either in ‘Ewa or Central O‘ahu is projected to increase
by 2035, a majority of workers will continue to commute to jobs outside ‘Ewa
and Central O‘ahu).
Transportation Development Priorities. Projected demand for peak-hour
transportation in Central O‘ahu should be met by:
   •   Meet projected demand for peak-hour transportation in Central O‘ahu by:
      °   Increased use of transit; and
      °   Transportation demand management through:
            Provision of improved services on High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV)
facilities;
            Provision of park-and-ride facilities; and
            Use of other programs which encourage reduced use of the single
occupant private automobile.
Relying on adding private automobile commuting capacity to meet the projected
growth in demand from O‘ahu’s Leeward areas would be prohibitively expensive
and have undesirable results. To increase commuting capacity from Central O‘ahu
to Honolulu would require widening or double-decking the freeways in the ‘Āiea/
Pearl City area. Even if this extra capacity was added in the ‘Āiea/Pearl City
area, destructive, divisive, and expensive street widening would have to be
done in downtown Honolulu to create sufficient capacity to absorb the extra
cars that the expanded freeways could bring to the central city.
Adequate Access and Services
   •   Before zoning approval is given by the City Council for new residential
and commercial development in Central O‘ahu, the Department of Planning and
Permitting, the Department of Transportation Services, and State Department of
Transportation, as appropriate, should:
      °   Report if adequate transportation access and services can be provided
with existing facilities and systems; and
      °   If adequate capacity cannot be provided by existing facilities,
recommend conditions that should be included as part of the zone change
approval in order to assure adequacy, including the timing of any necessary
improvements.
Transit-Oriented Community Street Systems
   •   Design circulation systems within residential communities and commercial
centers to emphasize accessibility from residences to bus routes, parks,
schools, and commercial centers.
   •   Design circulation systems to facilitate bicycle and pedestrian travel,
to increase transit use, and to reduce dependence on automobile travel.
Complete Streets
   •   Design streets to provide safe access and mobility for all users,
including pedestrians, bicyclists, transit users, motorists, and persons of all
abilities, as determined through a context sensitive solution process that
integrates community context and the surrounding environment, including land
use, and balances the needs and comfort of all modes and users.
See Chapter 3, Sections 3.9 and 3.10, for more detailed planning policies and
guidelines for circulation in residential communities and commercial centers.
Roadways
   •   Develop the roadway elements and other transportation projects listed in
the O‘ahu Regional Transportation Plan to meet the existing and projected
transportation needs in Central O‘ahu.
Transit (Bus and Rail)
   •   Increase transit service in Central O‘ahu in order to enhance
circulation among Central O‘ahu communities and between Central O‘ahu and the
adjacent ‘Ewa and North Shore areas, and to provide convenient service for
peak-hour commuting.
   •   Orient increases in arterial lanes to high occupancy vehicles (HOV) and
mass transit. Develop exclusive lanes and park-and-ride facilities to improve
bus transit speed and to provide enhanced incentive for commuters to opt for
mass transit or HOV use.
   •   Provide sites for bus transit centers and park-and-ride facilities as
new communities are developed.
   •   Create a land use pattern along the rail transit corridor and around the
two Honolulu Rail Transit stations that would allow Waipahū residents to
minimize use of the private automobile and encourage use of transit for longer
trips and walking or biking for short trips.
      °   Permit medium density apartment and commercial mixed-use development
in Waipahū generally within 1/4 mile from the rail transit station/park-and-
ride facility sites.
      °   Use express bus service, shuttle feeder buses, bus rapid transit, and
park-and-ride facilities to link other Central O‘ahu communities to the Waipahū
rail stations and the Pearl Highlands rail station and to reinforce Transit
Oriented Development around the rail stations.
See Sec. 3.6 for more specific land use policy guidelines for Waipahū.
Bikeway System
   •   Develop bikeways as indicated in the Waipahū Neighborhood TOD Plan and
the City’s O‘ahu Bike Plan.
   •   Develop a major bike path, as part of the Pearl Harbor Historic Trail,
running east-west along the OR&L right-of-way (with branch routes to the
Waipahū Cultural Garden and Leeward Community College).
   •   Develop major bike paths, running north-south, on Kunia Road between
Farrington and H-1 Freeway, Managers Drive/Mokuola Street, Waipi‘o Uka Street,
and Lanikuhana Avenue between Kamehameha Highway and Meheula Parkway.
   •   Provide bike lanes on Waipahū Street, the Village Park connector between
Village Park and Waipahū, Hikimoe Street, Waipahū Depot Road, Mehe‘ula Parkway,
Kīlani Avenue, and California Avenue.
   •   Designate Kamehameha Highway, Kunia Road north of H-1, and Wilikina
Drive as bike routes with a curbside vehicle land of minimum 12-foot width
allowing shared use by bikes and automobiles.
4.1.6 GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for a transportation
system in Central O‘ahu should be implemented.
   Reduction in Automobile Use
   •   Reduce reliance on the private passenger vehicle by:
         Providing circulation systems with separated pedestrian and bicycle
paths and convenient routes for public transit service;
         Designing street systems in new development areas with layouts that
reduce the length of dead-end streets and provide for smaller blocks in order
to facilitate bus routes, encourage walking and biking, and provide better
access for emergency and utility vehicles;
         Providing supporting facilities and amenities for pedestrian,
bicycle, and public transit use, including the provision of bicycle racks at
commercial centers, bicycle storage facilities at employment centers, and bus
shelters at bus stops; and
         Supporting medium-density and high-traffic land uses along the
Farrington Highway rail transit corridor, especially generally within a 1/
4 mile of the Honolulu Rail transit stations in accordance with the adopted
Waipahu Neighborhood TOD Plan.
   Community-Level Street Standards
   •   Revise standards for public streets within residential communities and
commercial centers to support and improve pedestrian and bicycle travel and on-
street parking. While average motor vehicle speed may be reduced, safety and
enjoyability would be increased and greater efficiency in land use, reduced
construction costs, and improved street function would likely be achieved.
   •   Design the street network to provide multiple options for reaching major
amenities such as the Main Street/Village Center shops, schools, parks and
community facilities, without having to access an arterial boulevard.
   •   Identify safe routes to schools and ensure that these are pedestrian and
bicycle-friendly.
   •   Consider view corridors to the mountains, open space, and other local
and regional landmarks in the arrangement of streets, commercial centers, and
shared spaces within both residential and mixed-use districts.
   •   Connect existing adjacent neighborhoods to new streets, bike ways,
paths, and trails.
   •   Use traffic calming measures to slow traffic making short cuts through
residential neighborhoods and to support a desirable living environment.
   •   Use multiple connecting streets within and between residential
neighborhoods to knit neighborhoods together.
   •   Use streets, bikeways, and walkways to create a unifying circulation
network that provides convenient routes throughout the community.
   •   Establish specific connectivity standards (minimum intersection
frequency, maximum dead end length, number of dwellings or building on a cul-
de- sac, and minimum street spacing) for each zoning district.
4.2   WATER ALLOCATION AND SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT
In 1987, the State enacted the State Water Code in order to protect, control,
and regulate the use of the State’s water resources for the benefit of its
people. The State Commission on Water Resource Management (CWRM) has final
authority in all matters regarding administration of the State Water Code. By
City Charter, the Board of Water Supply (BWS) has the authority to manage,
control, and operate the water systems of the City, and therefore coordinate
development of potable water sources and systems based on BWS rules and
regulations and water commitment policies. Under the State Water Code, the City
is responsible for preparing the water use and development plan for the City
and County of Honolulu.
This plan, called the O‘ahu Water Management Plan (OWMP), is prepared by the
Department of Planning and Permitting in conjunction with the Board of Water
Supply and with the assistance of the State Commission on Water Resource
Management (CWRM).
The OWMP consists of overall policies and strategies and regional Watershed
Management Plans which guide the activities of the City and County of Honolulu
and advise the CWRM in the areas of planning, management, water development and
use, and allocation of O‘ahu’s limited water resources.
Watershed Management Plans for each of the eight Development Plan and
Sustainable Communities Plan areas, when completed, will together comprise the
updated OWMP and provide a long-range 20-year plan for the preservation,
restoration, and balanced management of ground water, surface water, and
related watershed resources.
Each Watershed Management Plan (WMP) is submitted to the City Council for
adoption by ordinance.
The Wai‘anae Watershed Management Plan (August 2009), Ko‘olau Loa Watershed
Management Plan (August 2009), and Ko‘olau Poko Watershed Management Plan
(September 2012) have been completed and approved. Plans for the North Shore,
Central O ‘ahu, and ‘Ewa are under preparation, and will be followed by plans
for the Primary Urban Center, and East Honolulu.
For Central O‘ahu, until a WMP has been adopted, Sections 1 (General
Provisions), 2 (O‘ahu Water Management Policies and Strategies), and 3
(Severability) of Chapter 30 (Water Management) of the Revised Ordinances of
Honolulu and the OWMP Technical Reference Document (March 1990) serve as the
water use and development plan.
The Board of Water Supply (BWS) evaluated available water supplies and the
water development needs of the existing and new residential, commercial
(including retail, office, recreational, and industrial), diversified
agriculture, and military uses likely by 2040 as a result of implementation of
the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan.
   •   The BWS projects that, due to the decreasing trend in per capita demand
as a result of water conservation, only an additional 2.0 million gallons per
day (mgd) of potable (or drinkable) water above the 17.7 mgd used in 2010 will
be needed in Central O‘ahu by 2040. (This estimate is based on a preliminary
projection of a BWS served population of 164,600 in 2040).
   •   In addition, long term demand for nonpotable water for irrigation of the
10,350 acres of agricultural land in Central O‘ahu protected from development
by this plan is estimated to be 26 mgd (2,500 gallons per acre day). (The
Waiahole Ditch currently provides 12.6 mgd of nonpotable water for agriculture
and other uses in Central O‘ahu.)
The Board of Water Supply has master planned potable water system
infrastructure to accommodate Central O‘ahu’s planned growth. Ultimately,
potable water demands of the remaining lands within the Community Growth
Boundary should be met by additional groundwater sources in Central O‘ahu if
sustainable yield is determined available.
The Central O‘ahu watersheds are important to the recharge of the Pearl Harbor
Aquifer, one of O‘ahu’s most important sources of potable water. The Pearl
Harbor aquifer is the most cost-effective and accessible water resource of
potable quality on O‘ahu, and it is needed to support existing and future
domestic potable water uses described in the development plans. As a result,
the demand for nonpotable water for agricultural and urban irrigation of lands
over the Pearl Harbor aquifer should be met with low chloride irrigation water
such as the Waiahole Ditch, freshwater wells, or low chloride recycled water.
Experience with increasing chloride, nitrate, and pesticide contamination of
groundwater indicates that activities on the surface of the land can have a
detrimental effect on the quality of drinking water. As a result, nonpotable
water used on lands above the Pearl Harbor aquifer should be low in total
dissolved solids to protect the quality of drinking water withdrawn from wells
located down-gradient (i.e., in the direction that groundwater flows) from
where the nonpotable water is being applied. As shown in
Table 4.2, the Board of Water Supply has identified potential sources of
potable and nonpotable water to meet the projected demand in Central O‘ahu
through 2030. These sources will be pursued as part of the Board’s development
and operation of a diversified and integrated island-wide water system.
Strategies in the Watershed Management Plan promote on-going groundwater source
development coupled with efforts to increase water delivery efficiency, water
conservation, and continued development of alternative sources of water, such
as recycled water recovered from wastewater.
4.2.1   GENERAL POLICIES
Adequacy of Water Supply. 
   •   Before zoning approval is given for new residential or commercial
development in Central O‘ahu, the Board of Water Supply should:
      °   Report if adequate potable and nonpotable water is available; and
      °   If adequate potable and nonpotable water is not available, recommend
conditions that should be included as part of the zone change approval in order
to assure adequacy.
   •   Confirm adequacy of existing capacity at the time of land subdivision or
building permit applications for existing lots.
Watershed Protection 
   •   To ensure maximum recharge of the Pearl Harbor aquifer, protect lands
above the Pearl Harbor aquifer in Central O‘ahu which receive more than 50
inches of rainfall annually and are zoned for agricultural or preservation uses
from urban development unless it can be demonstrated that use of Low Intensity
Development practices will sustain or increase the amount of recharge.
   •   Manage urban and agricultural land uses to ensure chemicals and
nutrients do not contaminate the underlying potable aquifers. Require best
practices for controlling potentially contaminating activities in accordance
with the State Department of Health’s Source Water Assessment Program and the
City’s Stormwater Management Program.
   •   Support watershed infiltration enhancement through replanting of native
species and removal of invasive species in forest areas, soil conservation
practices in agricultural areas, and low impact development practices in urban
areas.
Table 4.2 Potential Sources of Potable and Non-Potable Water for Central
O‘ahu
Table 4.2 Potential Sources of Potable and Non-Potable Water for Central
O‘ahu
POTABLE GROUNDWATER RESOURCES
Groundwater Sources(1)                           Available Estimated Source
                                                 Yield (mgd)(2)
1. Wahiawā Well III                            3.0
2. Waipi‘o Heights Well II(3)                 0.5
3. Waipi‘o Heights Well III(3                 1.0
4. Mililani Well IV(3)                          1.0
5. Waiawa Wells I-IV(4)                         6.0
6. Waipahū Wells II(3)                         1.0
7. Koa Ridge Makai Wells                        2.0
   Total                                     14.5
ALTERNATIVE WATER RESOURCES
Non-Potable Sources            Available Resource (mgd)
                               Minimum Estimate  Maximum Estimate (mgd)
                               (mgd)
Recycled Water
   Wahiawā Recycled Water(51.6               2.0
   Mililani Recycled Water(50.0               4.0
   Schofield Recycled Water(2.0               3.0
Non-Potable Water
   Waiāhole Ditch          12.6              15.0
   Wahiawā Reservoir(6)    8.5               22.0
      Total              24.7              46.0
Notes:
All quantities are in million gallons per day (mgd).
(1)   Allocation of groundwater sources requires the approval of the State
Commission on Water Resource Management (CWRM).
(2)   Estimated Source Yield not already being pumped or committed to an
existing development.
(3)   Source already has an existing permitted use equal to or a portion of
the estimated yield.
(4)   Honolulu Board of Water Supply, Waiawa Water Master Plan (Revised Dec.
14, 2004).
(5)   Wahiawā Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) Avg. Flow = 2 mgd, Schofield
(Army) Avg. flow = 2 mgd. Mililani WWTP Avg. Flow = 4 mgd.
(6)   Kaukonahua Stream’s minimum average month = 8.5 mgd, 2002 annual
average = 22 mgd. Wahiawā Reservoir storage capacity = 9,200 ac-ft or 3,066
mgd.
Source:
Honolulu Board of Water Supply, Watershed Management Plan (2008).
CWRM Database (2005)
Honolulu Board of Water Supply, O‘ahu Water Management Plan: Overview
Section (2009).
 
Water Use Efficiency and Conservation
   •   Require developments to conserve water resources by implementing water
efficiency and conservation measures, such as monitoring water use and loss,
installing low-flow plumbing fixtures, drought-tolerant landscaping, sub-
metering and efficient irrigation systems with soil moisture sensors. Such
requirements will be determined during review of building permit applications.
   •   Encourage owners of existing plumbing systems to conduct regular water
audits and make repairs to reduce water loss.
Use of Nonpotable Water
   •   Develop an adequate supply of non-potable water for irrigation and other
suitable uses in Central O‘ahu in order to conserve the supply of potable
water.
   •   Use non-potable water low in total dissolved solids and chlorides for
irrigation of lands above the Pearl Harbor aquifer to protect the quality of
drinking water withdrawn from wells located down-gradient (i.e., in the
direction groundwater flows) of the application.
   •   Dual Water Lines - Require developments with large landscaped areas
(such as golf courses, parks, or schools), roadway landscaping, and industrial
processes to have dual water lines to allow conservation of potable water and
use of nonpotable water for irrigation and other appropriate uses. Such
requirements shall be determined during review of project water master plans
for new developments and approval of zoning and subdivision applications and
construction plans.
Agricultural Water Sources
   •   Allocate a sufficient amount of water to meet the diversified
agricultural needs for Central O‘ahu along with high quality recharge of the
Pearl Harbor aquifer.
   •   Request the State Commission on Water Resource Management consider all
sources of water in making allocations. (A number of potential sources are
identified in
Table 4.2, including: Waiahole Ditch water, Wahiawā Reservoir water, and
recycled water recovered from wastewater. The amount of water available and the
potential use of each of these sources vary according to location.)
Recycled Water
   •   Promote large-scale use of recycled water from the Army’s Schofield
Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) and the City’s Wahiawā WWTP and Mililani
Wastewater Pre-Treatment Facility for urban and agricultural irrigation in
Central O‘ahu to conserve potable water where consistent with State Department
of Health and Board of Water Supply standards.
   •   Promote gray water reuse for on-site irrigation as allowed by State
Department of Health Gray Water Reuse Guidelines and the Uniform Plumbing Code.
   •   Promote public and private partnerships and leverage State revolving
funds and other grant funds and appropriations to plan, design, and construct
recycled water treatment and distribution infrastructure to keep recycled water
rates affordable.
Stormwater Reclamation
   •   Promote individual rain catchments connected to rain gutters for
landscape irrigation, reducing both demand for municipal water and the volume
of storm water runoff into streams and nearshore waters.
   •   Promote large-scale storm water impoundments and treatment systems to
enhance watershed infiltration and supplement nonpotable irrigation systems in
Central O‘ahu for urban and agricultural irrigation.
4.3   WASTEWATER TREATMENT
Existing treatment plants in Central O‘ahu are shown on the Urban Land Use Map
and Public Facilities Map in Appendix A.
The Department of Environmental Services estimates treatment/disposal capacity
at the Honouliuli Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) will need to be increased
from existing capacity for treatment of 38 million gallons per day (mgd) to
56.6 mgd by 2035 to meet projected population and economic growth in ‘Ewa and
Central O‘ahu resulting from implementation of the ‘Ewa Development Plan and
the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan. In addition, the capacity of
specific sewer lines and pump stations will need to be increased.
The City does primary treatment of all wastewater effluent at the Honouliuli
Wastewater Treatment Plant, and secondary and tertiary treatment of a portion
of the effluent to produce reclaimed water used for irrigation and other non-
potable uses. Until 2010, the plant operated under a waiver granted by the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) that allowed discharge of primary treated
effluent through a deep ocean outfall. Under the December 2010 Consent Decree
with the EPA, the City has until 2024 to upgrade the plant so that all
wastewater discharged through the ocean outfall receives secondary treatment.
The City’s Wahiawā WWTP is operating under a Consent Decree from the State
Department of Health. Under the Consent Decree, the City upgraded the WWTP to
tertiary treatment and deepened the outfall in order to continue discharging
recycled water into Wahiawā Reservoir (Lake Wilson). The plant now treats
approximately 2.0 mgd domestic wastewater collected from Wahiawā Town, Whitmore
Village, and the Navy Joint Base Pearl Harbor - Hickam, Wahiawā Annex
communities. Current plans also call for providing sewerage to small areas in
Wahiawā not yet linked to the WWTP.
The City has upgraded the Wahiawā WWTP’s secondary treatment system by
installing a Membrane Bioreactor Facility to produce R-1 quality recycled
water. (R-1 water is suitable for irrigating food crops and recreational
areas.) Potential use of the R-1 water in parks and golf courses in Central
O‘ahu is now being evaluated.
The Army operates a 4.2 million gallon per day (mgd) wastewater treatment plant
located at Wheeler Army Airfield that treats flows from Schofield Barracks,
Wheeler Army Airfield, Helemano Military Reservation, and the East Range.
Treatment levels have been upgraded to allow recovery of R-1 quality water from
the effluent which can be used for landscape irrigation. In recent years,
recycled water from the plant was discharged into an irrigation flume, for use
on Dole Foods lands. The Army is now considering other uses for the water.
4.3.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Require all new developments in Central O‘ahu to be connected to a
regional or municipal sewer service system.
   •   Where feasible, use recycled water recovered from treated wastewater
effluent as a source of non-potable water for irrigation and other uses where
appropriate and approved by the Department of Health and Board of Water Supply.
   •   Locate wastewater treatment plants in areas shown as planned for
industrial use and away from residential areas shown on the Urban Land Use Map
in Appendix A.
   •   Use a City review and approval process which provides adequate public
notice and input for any major new private wastewater treatment plant. Do not
require such comprehensive review and approval for other system elements, such
as pump stations and mains.
4.4   ELECTRICAL POWER DEVELOPMENT
The Hawaiian Electric Company (HECO) forecasts that increased electrical
demand, the need for different types of generation to help reliably integrate
additional renewable energy from intermittent sources, and the possible
retirement of the Honolulu Power Plant from service will create a need for
additional power generation capacity by 2025. Additional substations, and
transmission lines may also be needed.
Overall economic development, the associated increase in electrical demand, the
effectiveness of energy conservation and efficiency programs, and the
development of new energy-related technologies will all play a role in
determining how soon additional generation capacity will be required. No new
power plant sites are being considered for Central O‘ahu by HECO at this time.
However, the U.S. Army has announced plans for a 50 megawatt (MW) generating
station at Schofield Barracks, to provide power to the HECO grid by 2017. The
facility would be “biofuel-capable,” powered by a mix of diesel fuel and
biofuels. It would be designed as a “quick-start” plant, able to respond to
reductions in power feeding into the grid. While the Army’s objective is to
assure adequate power for its facilities in Central O‘ahu, the project would
increase the reliability of the entire island grid.
The Hawaii Clean Energy Initiative, a 2008 partnership between the State and
the U.S. Department of Energy, set goals for the state to improve energy
efficiency by 30 percent and to produce 40 percent of the needed energy from
renewable sources by 2030.
Renewable energy-related initiatives underway or under consideration for
Central O‘ahu include:
   •   Photovoltaics
      °   Sun Edison’s First Wind Solar Group plans to build three solar energy
generating facilities totaling 82 MW in the Mililani area and near the
Pineapple Overpass above Koa Ridge Makai;
      °   SunEdison is proposing two photovoltaic (PV) facilities totaling 115
MW on a portion of the Waiawa project site;
      °   Solar Hub, Inc. is proposing a 500-kilowatt PV facility near Kunia
Plantation Village;
      °   Ho‘ohana Solar is proposing a 20 MW PV facility on a portion of the
Royal Kunia II project site; and
      °   HECO has installed PV systems on three Central O‘ahu schools as part
of its Sun Power for Schools program.
   •   Biofuels
      °   HECO provides funding for biofuels crop research conducted with the
University of Hawai‘i. Some of this research includes the evaluation of
promising oil crops within test plantings in Central O‘ahu;
      °   As noted above, the Army’s proposed 50 MW power plant will be
“biofuel-capable;” and
      °   Phycal LLC has announced plans to build a 40-acre algae farm at
Poamoho which will be used to produce biofuel.
4.4.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Support efforts to increase the share of energy from clean sources
through increased efficiency and production of energy from renewable sources.
   •   In approving solar facilities on agricultural lands, require protection
of high quality agricultural lands and maintenance of aquifer recharge, and
encourage incorporation of complementary agricultural uses where feasible
   •   Analyze and approve major system improvements - such as development of a
new power generating plant and/or major new transmission lines - based on
island-wide studies and siting evaluations.
   •   Give strong consideration to placing any new transmission lines
underground where possible under criteria specified in State law.
   •   Locate electrical power plants in areas shown as planned for industrial
use and away from residential areas shown on the Urban Land Use Map in Appendix
A.
   •   Consider any proposed major new electrical power plant within a City
review and approval process which provides public notification and opportunity
to comment and public agency analysis of impacts and mitigations.
4.5   SOLID WASTE HANDLING AND DISPOSAL
There are no operating landfills in Central O‘ahu because of concerns about the
potential impacts on O‘ahu’s water supply. The entire Sustainable Communities
Plan area, with the exception of a small area bordering Pearl Harbor, is
considered one of O‘ahu’s most important groundwater recharge areas. The sole
City solid waste facility in the region, the Waipahū Incinerator, was closed in
1995.
The City is determining the location of a new landfill site to supplement or
replace the Waimanalo Gulch Sanitary Landfill (WGSL), O‘ahu’s only landfill for
municipal solid waste. A Landfill Site Advisory Committee established by Mayor
Carlisle identified and ranked eleven potential landfill sites in 2012. None of
the sites are in Central O‘ahu.
4.5.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Analyze and approve siting and/or expansion of sanitary landfills based
on island-wide studies and siting evaluations.
   •   Analyze and approve siting and/or expansion of sanitary landfills above
the UIC line and the “No Pass” line only if recommended by the Department of
Health and the Board of Water Supply.
   •   Use a City review and approval process which provides adequate public
notice and input, complete technical analysis of the project, and approval by
the City Council, for any new or major modification of private landfills,
incinerators, garbage-to-energy plants, refuse convenience centers, or other
major solid waste handling or disposal facility.
   •   For master-planned communities, consult with the Department of
Environmental Services for how solid waste will be handled, to include
estimates of solid waste to be generated by the communities, provisions for
collection of solid waste, and provisions for and encouragement of recycling.
4.6   DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
Central O‘ahu can be divided into two areas for assessing drainage needs: the
uplands mauka of the H-1 Freeway and the lowlands makai of the freeway. (See
Exhibit 4.2.)
The urban developments on high plateaus in the Central O‘ahu uplands benefit
from the natural flood protection provided by the deep gulches which drain
storm waters and filter some pollutants. Historically, flooding problems in the
uplands have mainly occurred in the portion of Waikakalaua Gulch which has been
developed with houses and apartments.
Still, parts of Wahiawā may flood during heavy rains, and the amount of water
released from Lake Wilson into Kaukonahua Stream may be so great that flooding
occurs in Otake Camp in Waialua (North Shore).
   Exhibit 4.2: Central O‘ahu Drainage Basins
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9387.png]
 
Flooding has been more prevalent in the Central O‘ahu lowlands, particularly in
Waipahū around Waikele Stream and in Waiawa around the lower reaches of Waiawa
Stream where flood plain and wetland areas have been developed.
Much of Waipahū Town is shown on Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
maps as within Special Flood Hazard Areas, indicating the area has a one-
percent chance of being flooded by water from Waikele Stream, Kapakahi Stream,
and the Wailani channel in any given year.
As noted in the adopted Waipahū Neighborhood TOD Plan (2014), before
substantial redevelopment can occur in the Transit-Oriented Development Special
District around the Waipahū Transit Center Rail Station, flood control measures
to reduce the risk of flooding and increase resiliency must be implemented.
The discharge of drainage to Pearl Harbor has caused serious siltation problems
and has aggravated water pollution which was already a significant problem due
to shipyard uses. Siltation causes navigation problems in the harbor and forces
the Navy to dredge at frequent intervals.
The City, in response to a federal government mandate, has initiated a major
program to reduce non-point-source pollution. The City rules for storm drainage
standards, adopted in 2000 and amended in 2013, include provisions for storm
water quality and retention.
   •   In general, the City requires residential, commercial, public
facilities, and transportation development and redevelopment projects of one
acre or more to address storm water quality through the use of Low Impact
Development best management practices (BMPs).
   •   In addition, projects involving development or redevelopment of gas
stations, automobile repair shops, restaurants, and parking lots with at least
10,000 square feet of impervious surfaces must use these Low Impact Development
BMPs.
The intent behind these Low Impact Development requirements is to mimic natural
processes and protect water quality by requiring infiltration,
evapotranspiration, or reuse of storm water at the site where it falls or an
off-site facility. All water from storms delivering up to an inch of rain is to
either be retained on site or biotreated.
In many watersheds, however, undeveloped mountain areas generate a
disproportionately large share of the total storm flow, and it is difficult to
determine who is responsible for mitigating the environmental impact.
The remainder of the section provides general policies and guidelines for
drainage systems in Central O‘ahu.
4.6.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Design drainage systems to emphasize flood control, minimization of
nonpoint source pollution, and the retention and/or detention of storm water
on-site and in appropriate open space and wetland areas.
   •   Use storm water as a potential irregular source of water for recharge of
the aquifer that should be retained for absorption rather than quickly moved to
coastal waters.
   •   Use natural and man-made vegetated drainageways and retention basins as
the preferred solution to drainage problems wherever they could promote water
recharge, help control non-point source pollutants, and provide passive
recreation benefits. However, concrete-lined channels can be permitted, despite
their potential adverse environmental impacts, if there is no other reasonable
alternative to meet specific design challenges.
   •   Reduce the volume of sediment in Central O‘ahu streams by identifying
sources and volumes of sediment polluting Central O‘ahu streams and Pearl
Harbor, and developing projects to address problem areas.
4.6.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for drainage systems
in Central O‘ahu should be implemented.
   •   Retention and Detention.  Employ methods of retaining or detaining storm
water to minimize non-point source pollution in storm water. Where feasible,
use any open space, including parking lots; landscaped areas; mini and
community parks, and private and public golf courses, to detain or infiltrate
storm water in order to reduce the volume, runoff rates and the amount of
sediments and pollutants transported.
   •   Relation to the Regional Open Space Network.  o the extent possible,
integrate planned improvements to the drainage system into the regional open
space network by emphasizing the use of retention basins, creation of passive
recreational areas, and recreational access for pedestrians and bicycles.
   •   Preservation of Gulches as Natural Drainageways.  Retain the major
gulches listed in
Table 2.2 as flood plains and open space resources.
   •   Avoid further development of residential, commercial or industrial uses
within the gulches.
   •   Prohibit grading or other disturbance of gulch walls, other than
necessary to clear the gulches of debris or other floodway obstructions or to
construct and maintain drainage, access and utility facilities.
   •   Restrictions on Stream Channelization.  Avoid stream channelization and
leave existing flood plains intact except where absolutely necessary to protect
existing development from flooding.
   •   Reduction of Stream Erosion. Identify stream erosion problem areas and
develop and maintain appropriate erosion control projects, including sediment
basins, other catchments, velocity dissipators, stream channel renovations, and
sediment dissipation structures.
   •   Best Management Practices. Increase incentives for and improve
enforcement of use of Best Management Practices to reduce erosion and storm
water impacts on surface water quality.
   •   Vegetated Stream Buffer Zones. Establish riparian buffer zones along
Central O‘ahu streams to help protect against surface water pollution, stream
bank erosion, and flooding.
   •   Preservation of Flood Plain Capacity around Pearl Harbor. Restrict
urbanization in the lowlands around Pearl Harbor if that potential development
reduces flood plain capacity or allows increased siltation and pollution of
Pearl Harbor.
   •   Control of Flooding in Waipahū. Reduce the risk of flooding and improve
resilience to impacts of flooding to portions of Waipahū currently in the 100-
year flood way by improvements to channels and berms, use of upstream flood
retention basins, or other appropriate measures.
4.7   SCHOOL FACILITIES
Statewide, the State Department of Education (DOE) faces an enormous shortfall
in funding to meet projected needs for new classrooms.
Act 245 (2007) established a system for collecting school impact fees from new
residential developments. Developers are required to provide “their
proportionate share of the land and construction cost of new or expanded school
facilities needed to serve new residential developments.” The act requires that
developers contribute 100 percent of land, but only 10 percent of school
construction costs.
DOE has established school impact districts required under the Act in order to
collect land and money from developers. In January 2012, the Board of Education
approved creation of a Leeward O‘ahu Impact District that includes the Waipahū
Complex and the Pearl City Complex areas in Central O‘ahu. (The Pearl City
Complex includes the proposed Koa Ridge and Waiawa development areas.)
As shown in
Table 4.3, based on expected development, the DOE projects a need for five new
elementary schools, one new intermediate school, and one new high school in
Central O‘ahu by 2035. The site size recommended by the DOE for elementary
schools is 8 to 15 acres, for intermediate schools is 15 to 20 acres, and for
high schools is 45 to 55 acres.
The conceptual locations for one new intermediate school and one new high
school are shown on the Public Facilities Map in Appendix A. Elementary schools
are not mapped, because their sites are of community rather than regional
concern. Sites have been reserved for all five of the planned elementary
schools and the planned middle school. The remainder of the section provides
general policies and guidelines for school facilities development in Central
O‘ahu.
4.7.1   GENERAL POLICIES
Project Review and Approval Assessment.  As new residential developments are
reviewed as part of the project application review and approval process,
request that the DOE report to the Department of Planning and Permitting
whether the DOE will be able to provide adequate school facilities, either at
existing schools or at new school sites, so that needs from the proposed
development can be met.
Fair-Share Provisions. Require developers to comply with DOE school impact fee
requirements and pay their fair share of all costs needed to provide adequate
school facilities for the children living in their developments.
TABLE 4.3: EXISTING AND PLANNED SCHOOLS IN THE CENTRAL O‘AHU SCP AREA
       School Year          School Year
School 2013-2014 Enrollment 2012-2013          Site Reserved Opening Date
                            Classroom Count(1)
TABLE 4.3: EXISTING AND PLANNED SCHOOLS IN THE CENTRAL O‘AHU SCP AREA
                                                      School     School
                                                      Year       Year      Site     Opening
School                                                2013-2014  2012-2013 Reserved Date
                                                      Enrollment Classroom
                                                                 Count(1)
Elementary Schools                                                                
   Leilehua Complex                                                            
      Hale Kula Elementary School               892        974       Existing NA
      Helemano Elementary School                621        624       Existing NA
      ‘Iliahi Elementary School               454        484       Existing NA
      Ka‘ala Elementary School                505        579       Existing NA
      Solomon Elementary School                 1,053      1,125     Existing NA
      Wahiawā Elementary School                531        766       Existing NA
      Wheeler Elementary School                 627        681       Existing NA
Elementary Schools                                                                
   Mililiani Complex                                                           
      Kīpapa Elementary School                 630        776       Existing NA
      Mililani ‘Ike Elementary School         979        914       Existing NA
      Mililani Mauka Elementary School          853        857       Existing NA
      Mililani Uka Elementary School            669        926       Existing NA
      Mililani Waena elementary School          719        778       Existing NA
   Pearl City Complex(2)                                                       
      Kanoelani Elementary School               767        702       Existing NA
   Waipahū Complex                                                            
      August Ahrens Elementary School        1,403      1,540     Existing NA
      Honowai Elementary School                 794        767       Existing NA
      Kalei‘ōpu‘u Elementary School        982        938       Existing NA
      Waikele Elementary School                 653        689       Existing NA
      Waipahū Elementary School                1,130      1,019     Existing NA
         Total                               13,662     15,139             
Planned Elementary Schools                                                        
Royal Kunia                                                     400 to    YES      ND
                                                                 750
Koa Ridge I                                                     400 to    YES      ND
                                                                 750
Waiawa I                                                        400 to    YES      ND
                                                                 750
Waiawa II                                                       400 to    YES      ND
                                                                 750
Waiawa III                                                      400 to    YES      ND< /
                                                                 750                ce>
   Intermediate/Middle Schools                                                   
      Highlands Intermediate School (Pearl City 937        500       Existing NA
Complex)
      Mililani Middle School (Mililani Complex) 1,743      1,941     Existing NA
      Waipahū Intermediate School (Waipahū Com1,314      1,296     Existing NA
      Wahiawā Middle School (Leilehua Complex) 818        970       Existing NA
         Total                               4,812      4,707              
Planned Intermediate/Middle Schools                                               
   Waiawa Middle School                                      1,500 to  YES      ND
                                                                 3,000
High Schools                                                                      
   Leilehua High School                            1,803      2,100     Existing NA
   Mililani High School                            2,476      2,269     Existing NA
   Pearl City High School                          1,697      2,007     Existing NA
   Waipahū High School                            2,441      2,503     Existing NA
      Total                                     8,417      8,879              
Planned High Schools                                                              
   Waiawa High School                                        800 to    NO       ND
                                                                 1,600
NOTES:
(1)   Classroom Count is an estimate of the number of students who can be housed at the
school based on the DOE’s Annual Room Tracking Survey for School Year 2012-2013, the most
recent survey available.
(2)   Kanoelani Elementary is the only school in the Pearl City complex located in the
Central O‘ahu SCP area. The Koa Ridge and Waiawa proposed developments are currently
located in the Pearl City Complex area.
ND   Date Not Determined
NA   Not Applicable
Source: State Department of Education Facilities Development Branch, 2014
 
4.7.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines suggest how the general policies for schools
facilities development in Central O‘ahu should be implemented.
   •   Schools as Community Centers. Request that the State DOE design school
facilities to facilitate community use during non-school hours and weekends.
Because of the difficult financial problems for all sectors, new communities
are likely to have fewer churches, private social halls, and recreation
facilities. As a result, schools may be one of the only ways that important
functions such as cultural and recreational centers and meeting facilities can
be provided.
   •   Co-location with Parks. Pursue co-locating neighborhood or community
parks with elementary and intermediate schools, and coordinating designs of
facilities with the State DOE when needless duplication of parking and of
athletic, recreation, and meeting facilities can be avoided.
   •   Shared Facilities. Coordinate the development and use of athletic
facilities such as swimming pools and gymnasiums with the DOE where such
facilities would maximize use and reduce duplication of function.
   •   Fair-Share Contribution.  Support the State DOE’s establishment of
impact districts to obtain fair share requirements from developers of
residential projects and enforce existing agreements so that the DOE can
provide adequate school facilities at existing and new schools to meet the
needs of residents.
4.8   PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES
Table 4.4 provides a listing of existing and planned public safety facilities
in the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan area.
Fire Stations - To meet projected population and economic growth by 2035, the
Fire Department proposes stations be built in the Royal Kunia Phase II and Koa
Ridge Makai developments.
Police Station - Because police operate primarily in the field and do not have
a need for outlying stations, the Police Department plans no new regional
stations in Central O‘ahu. A sub-station at Waikele was proposed in the late
eighties, but there are no plans to proceed with the project.
Emergency Medical Services Facilities - The expected population growth and
development of new communities and community facilities in Central O‘ahu will
result in a need for additional emergency medical service facilities and
response units. The specific needs will depend on the size, demographics, and
location of the future population. A Central O‘ahu Ambulance Facility is
planned for a site on ‘Uke‘e Street in Waipi‘o Gentry, but no additional
facilities are planned at this time by the State Department of Health.
Civic and Public Safety Facilities and Community Resilience - Community
resilience is the ability of a community to prepare for anticipated hazards,
adapt to changing conditions, and withstand and recover rapidly from
disruptions.
TABLE 4.4: EXISTING AND PLANNED PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES IN THE CENTRAL
O‘AHU SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN AREA
Facilities Site Service Area Service Date
TABLE 4.4: EXISTING AND PLANNED PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES IN THE CENTRAL O‘AHU SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN AREA
Facilities        Site                               Service Area                                                                   Service
                                                                                                                                    Date
Fire Stations                                                                                                                      
Wahiawā          Wahiawā                           Wahiawā, Schofield, Wheeler, Whitmore Village                                 Existing
Mililani          Mililani                           Mililani, Leilehua, Waikakalaua                                                Existing
Mililani Mauka    Mililani Mauka                     Mililani Mauka, Waikakalaua                                                    Existing
Waikele           Waikele                            Waikele, Waipio-Gentry, Waipahu                                                Existing
Waipahū          Waipahū                           Waipahū, Royal Kunia, Waikele, ‘Ewa Villages, West Loch, Crestview, Waipio- Existing
                                                     Gentry
Royal Kunia       Waipahū                           Royal Kunia, Village Park                                                      ND
Koa Ridge         Koa Ridge                          Waiawa, Koa Ridge                                                              ND
Police Stations                                                                                                                    
Wahiawā District Wahiawā                           Wahiawā, Schofield, Wheeler, Whitmore Village, Leilehua, and Waikakalaua      Existing
Station
Pearl City        Pearl City                         Waipahū, Royal Kunia, Waikele, Crestview, Waipi‘o-Gentry                    Existing
District Station
Waikele           Waikele                            Waikele                                                                        N.D.
Substation
Emergency Medical
Services                                                                                                                           
Facilities
Wahiawā          Next to Wahiawā Fire Station      Wahiawā, Schofield, Wheeler, Whitmore Village                                 Existing
Mililani Mauka    Stand-alone facility               Mililani, Mililani Mauka, Leilehua, Waikakalaua                                Existing
Waipi‘o(1)      co-located with Kaiser clinic      Waipi‘o, Waikele                                                             Existing
Waipi‘o(1)      Planned stand-alone on ‘Ūke‘e Waipi‘o, Waikele                                                             2017
                  Street
Waipahū          Within Waipahū Fire Station       Waipahū, Royal Kunia, Waikele, ‘Ewa Villages, West Loch, Crestview, Waipio- Existing
                                                     Gentry
(1)   Existing facility would be relocated to new stand alone facility planned for site on ‘Ūke‘e Street.
ND   Date Not Determined.         
0
Source: Department of Planning and Permitting, Department of Design and Construction, Honolulu Fire Department, and the Emergency Medical
Services Division of the Honolulu Emergency Services Department, 2014
 
In order to protect lives, livelihoods, and quality of life, communities should
plan for damages and disruptions to buildings and infrastructure systems from
natural, technological, and human-caused hazards. Planning for a more resilient
community involves a comprehensive, risk-based approach that is tailored to
their community’s needs for maintaining vital services.
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the National Institute of
Standards and Technology, U.S. Department of Commerce, provides policy, support
information and guidelines for community resilience planning and implementation
strategies that will better prepare communities for future hazard events. The
City and County of Honolulu, Department of Emergency Management, has prepared
various plans and operations guides to prepare, prevent, protect, respond and
recover from hazards.
Public Emergency Shelters - Population growth will also result in need for
additional public emergency shelters.
Table 4.5 lists existing Central O‘ahu hurricane evacuation shelters and their
capacity (either using the adopted standard of 10 square feet per person or the
more generous “planning” standard of 15 square feet per person).
There is a state-wide shortage of shelters, compounded by the fact that two-
thirds of the existing shelters need to be retrofitted if they are to withstand
any hurricane strength winds, and that few of the existing shelters are capable
of withstanding a Category 1 hurricane like Hurricane ‘Iwa.
Emergency shelter planners use a rule of thumb that enough shelters need to be
provided to house 35 percent of the population in a disaster, because most
people will choose to shelter in place.
According to the 2010 Census, the resident population of Schofield Barracks and
Wheeler Army Air Field, including both military personnel and their households,
was around 18,000. These households could be expected to seek shelter in
military facilities and shelters located on the bases.
TABLE 4.5 EXISTING HURRICANE EVACUATION SHELTERS IN THE CENTRAL O‘AHU
SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN AREA
Shelter Location Maximum Shelter Capacity(1) Preferable Shelter Capacity(2)
TABLE 4.5 EXISTING HURRICANE EVACUATION SHELTERS IN THE CENTRAL O‘AHU
SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN AREA
Shelter Location           Maximum Shelter Capacity Preferable Shelter Capacity
                           (1)                      (2)
Leilehua Complex
   Hanalani Elementary  1,767                    1,178
   Helemano Elementary  992                      661
   ‘Iliahi Elementary 1,538                    1,025
   Ka‘ala Elementary  780                      520
   Leilehua High (P)    1,676                    1,117
   Wahiawā Elementary  1,564                    1,043
   Wahiawā Middle      2,018                    1,345
Mililani Complex
   Kīpapa Elementary   1,906                    1,271
   Mililani High (P)    4,456                    2,971
   Mililani ‘Ike      396                      264
Elementary
   Mililani Mauka       2,145                    143
Elementary
   Mililani Middle (P)  998                      665
   Mililani Uka Elementa2,256                    1,504
   Mililani Waena       1,696                    1,131
Elementary
Waipahū Complex
   August Ahrens        3,504                    2,336
Elementary
   Honowai Elementary   3,386                    2,257
   Kalei‘ōpu‘u Elem2,433y                   1,622
   Kanoelani Elementary 1,792                    1,195
   Waipahū Elementary (2,116                    1,411
   Waipahū High (P)    5,072                    3,381
   Waipahū Middle (P)  334                      2,233
TOTAL                      43,912                   29,275
2035 Need(3)               57,200                   57,200
NOTES:
(1)   Estimates of capacity based on the adopted standard of 10 square feet
(sf) per person which is the minimum amount of space needed to protect
occupants during the period that the hurricane conditions pose a threat of
injury or death. Under this standard, individuals stand with their belongings
or sit on top of their belongings in a square only a bit bigger than three feet
on a side.
(2)   Estimates of capacity based on the proposed planning standard of 15
square feet per person (a square close to four feet on a side) which provides
enough room that individuals can sit with their belongings next to them during
the duration of the period of threat of injury or death.
(3)   Based on 35% of population (not on military bases) needing emergency
shelter.
P:   Pet Friendly Shelter co-located with General Population Shelter (pets in
carriers, in separate room)
Source: Shelter Inventory listing from Hawaii Emergency Management Agency
(2015); Capacity estimates based on information provided by Honolulu Department
of Emergency Management, 2014.
 
To provide shelter for 35 percent of the non-military Central O‘ahu population,
Central O‘ahu needed public shelter space for 52,700 non-military residents in
2010, and will need space for 57,200 in 2035. As can be seen, the capacity of
existing public shelters (even at the very restrictive standard of 10 square
feet per person) was only 85 percent of what was needed for the 2010 population
and would need to be increased by 30% to provide the minimum amount of space
required for the projected 2035 need.
Since most of the population is not expected to seek a public shelter during a
disaster and because there is a shortage of shelter space, it makes sense to
supplement the public shelters with shelters in private buildings.
   •   A State law provides legal immunity to private organizations which
create hurricane resistant shelters that meet State standards.
   •   There are no State or City programs providing incentives or support for
private organizations who create hurricane shelters or individuals who build
hurricane-resistant “safe rooms” in their homes.
   •   However, as of 2012, the building code requires that all new homes in
areas susceptible to wind borne debris due to high wind speed to either have a
safe room or be equipped with hurricane resistant glass. The base wind used for
designing buildings is the fastest wind that the structure is likely to have to
withstand once in 50 years.
   •   The requirement to either have a safe room or window protection that is
hurricane resistant applies to buildings either in areas where the estimated
base winds is 120 miles per hour and greater or in areas within a mile of the
coast line where base wind is 110 miles per hour or greater. See
Exhibit 4.3 for the basic wind speed mapping for O‘ahu.
Outdoor Warning Sirens. The Outdoor Warning Siren system, tested monthly,
provides emergency warning and notification of tsunamis and other disasters. It
is a critical element in providing warnings and notifications to the public.
   Exhibit 4.3: Wind Speed Contour Map for O‘ahu
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9403.png]
 
4.8.1   GENERAL POLICIES
   •   Provide adequate staffing and facilities to ensure public safety.
   •   Approve new development only if staffing and facilities will be adequate
to provide fire and police protection and emergency medical services when
development is completed.
   •   Encourage disaster resilient communities.
      °   Approve new development only if adequate Outdoor Warning Siren
coverage, and a safe and effective emergency evacuation and shelter program can
be ensured.
      °   Survey and retrofit, as appropriate, DOE and other public buildings
to make up the shortfall in hurricane resistant shelters.
      °   Require new City buildings which are “critical facilities used for
public assembly and able to perform as shelters” to be designed and built to
withstand a Category 3 hurricane.
      °   Provide incentives for private organizations to create hurricane
resistant shelter areas in their facilities and for homes to include hurricane
resistant “safe rooms”.
4.9   OTHER COMMUNITY FACILITIES
Other existing community facilities shown on the Public Facilities Map in
Appendix A-3 include Leeward Community College, Wahiawā General Hospital, and
the Waiawa Correctional Facility. A 28-acre medical center, including an acute
care hospital, ambulatory care services, emergency services, a medical office
building, and a skilled nursing facility, is proposed for a portion of Koa
Ridge, a substantial reduction from the previously proposed 100 acre medical
park.
Antennas and City Plans - Antennas have been around as long as we have had
radio and television services. Antennas associated with communication purposes
have grown tremendously especially since the U.S. introduction of mobile
communication devices in the early 1980s. While the telecommunication industry
has provided more convenient communication capabilities for individuals, it has
also increased the public agencies’ ability to provide faster and more
efficient response to those in need, particularly on an emergency basis.
While the benefits of the telecommunications industry cannot be disputed,
communities have opposed the antennas due to aesthetic impacts, particularly on
public views and on neighborhood character. Their visibility has increased,
especially where antennas are mounted on free-standing towers.
The general public has also raised concerns about the environmental effects of
electromagnetic field exposure associated with radio transmissions, as
evidenced by the presence of antennas. However, the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) is responsible for evaluating the human environmental effects
of radio frequency (RF) emissions from FCC-regulated transmitters. The federal
guidelines specifically preclude local decisions affecting environmental
effects of radio frequency emissions, assuming that the provider is in
compliance with the Commission’s RF rules.
4.9.1   GENERAL POLICIES
Location of new community facilities should comply with the following policies:
   •   Colleges and Hospitals. Locate colleges and hospitals in urban areas
near transit stations, commercial centers, or high-density residential areas.
   •   First Responder Technology Campus. Develop the campus to be consistent
with the spirit and intent of the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan
vision, policies, and guidelines.
   •   Correctional Facilities. Locate correctional facilities on lands planned
for industrial and agricultural use. If such a facility is proposed for lands
not planned for industrial or agricultural use, a City review and approval
process which provides public review, complete project analysis, and City
Council approval should be used.
   •   Antennas. Encourage co-location of antennas and minimization of visual
impacts.
      °   Towers should host the facilities of more than one service provider
to minimize their proliferation and reduce visual impacts.
      °   Mount antennas onto existing buildings or structures so that public
scenic views and open spaces will not be negatively affected. Except for the
occupant’s personal use, antennas on single-family dwelling roofs in
residential districts are not appropriate.
      °   Use stealth technology (e.g. towers disguised as trees) especially on
free-standing antenna towers in order to blend in with the surrounding
environment and minimize visual impacts.
5. IMPLEMENTATION
Implementation of the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan will be
accomplished by:
   •   Limiting residential and non-residential development to areas within the
Community Growth Boundary to support the vision for protection of agricultural
and conservation lands in Central O‘ahu; for development of the Primary Urban
Center and the Secondary Urban Center at Kapolei, and for ending infrastructure
investments which promote urban sprawl;
   •   Guiding development in areas of critical concern including Waipahū and
Wahiawā through Special Area Plans;
   •   Guiding public investment in infrastructure through Functional Plans
which support the vision and implement the policies and guidelines of the
Sustainable Communities Plan;
   •   Recommending approval, approval with modifications and/or conditions, or
denial of developments seeking zoning and other development approvals based on
how well they support the vision for Central O‘ahu’s development and implement
the Plan’s policies and guidelines;
   •   Implementing Sustainable Communities Plan priorities through Public
Infrastructure Map amendments and the City’s annual budget process;
   •   Evaluating progress in fulfilling the vision of the Central O‘ahu
Sustainable Communities Plan every two years and presenting the results of the
evaluation in the Biennial Report;
   •   Conducting a review of the vision, policies, guidelines, and Capital
Improvement Program priorities of the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities
Plan every five years and recommending revisions as necessary; and
   •   Encouraging public-private partnerships and developing new financing
mechanisms to facilitate implementation of the vision, policies, and guidelines
for Central O‘ahu’s development.
5.1   DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES
5.1.1   PUBLIC FACILITY INVESTMENT PRIORITIES
The regional directed growth strategy requires the cooperation of both public
and private agencies in planning, financing, and constructing infrastructure.
The City should take an active role in planning and coordinating construction
of needed infrastructure and public facilities, such as the Honolulu Rail
Transit project, the expansion of Honouliuli Wastewater Treatment Plant and
recycling of nonpotable water recovered from its effluent, improvement of the
Wahiawā Treatment Plant, provision of recreational open spaces, and development
of the regional transportation system, parks, and police and fire facilities.
5.1.2   PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES
The Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan provides a clear signal to
private landowners and developers as to where development will be supported.
The Urban Expansion area is shown on the Development Capacity Map in Appendix
A. The Urban Expansion Area shows where new urban development is occurring and
where application for new urban development will be accepted for processing. As
shown in
Table 2.1, several projects in this area already have Land Use Commission Urban
Boundary approvals and zoning needed for proceeding with development
immediately.
Projects in the Urban Expansion Area needing zone changes and other development
approvals will be supported if:
   •   The project implements the vision for Central O‘ahu and relevant
policies and guidelines; and
   •   Adequate infrastructure will be available to meet the demand resulting
from the project.
No additional areas should be approved for urban development beyond the
Community Growth Boundary in order to protect agricultural and preservation
lands.
5.2   SPECIAL AREA PLANS
Special Area Plans provide more detailed policies and guidelines than the
Sustainable Communities Plan for areas requiring particular attention. The form
and content of Special Area Plans depends on what characteristics and issues
need to be addressed in greater detail in planning and guiding development or
uses within the Special Area.
Special Area Plans can be used to guide land use development and infrastructure
investment in Special Districts, Redevelopment Districts, or Resource Areas.
Plans for Special Districts would provide guidance for development and
infrastructure investment in areas with distinct historic or design character
or significant public views. Plans for Redevelopment Districts would provide
strategies for the revitalization or redevelopment of an area. Plans for
Resource Areas would provide resource management strategies for areas with
particular natural or cultural resource values.
Waipahū and Wahiawā are the only areas in Central O‘ahu currently designated
for a Special Area Plan.
Waipahū. The Waipahū Town Plan, the Special Area Plan for Waipahū, was
completed in December 1995. More recently, Waipahū community members helped DPP
prepare the proposed Waipahū Neighborhood TOD Plan (November 2012) currently
under review for approval by the City Council. These plans provide the basis
for policies and guidelines for Waipahū in Section 3.2. The policies in Section
3.6 will be used to evaluate both applications for zone changes and development
approvals, and proposals for public and private infrastructure in Waipahū.
Wahiawā. A Special Area Plan, the Wahiawā Urban Design Plan, was prepared for
Wahiawā and transmitted to the City Council in 1998. The Plan focuses on urban
design issues and implementation proposals and builds on the Wahiawā Town
Master Plan (prepared in 1994 by members of the Wahiawā community).
5.3   FUNCTIONAL PLANS
Functional Plans are meant to provide guiding principles and strategies which
will be used by the various functional agencies to determine needs, assign
priorities, phase infrastructure and facilities development, and secure
financing to meet the needs identified in the Sustainable Communities Plan.
City agencies responsible for developing infrastructure and public facilities
shall review existing Functional Plans, and in consultation with the Director
of the Department of Planning and Permitting, update the existing Plans or
prepare and submit to the Mayor new long-range Functional Plans for providing
facilities and services for Central O‘ahu to the year 2035.
Agencies with Functional Planning responsibilities (and representative plans)
include:
   •   Board of Water Supply (O‘ahu Water Management Plan)
   •   Department of Budget and Fiscal Services (Consolidated Plan for Housing
and Community Development Needs)
   •   Department of Design and Construction
   •   Department of Environmental Services (Solid Waste Management Plan)
   •   Department of Parks and Recreation
   •   Department of Planning and Permitting
   •   Department of Transportation Services
   •   Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
   •   Honolulu Fire Department
   •   Honolulu Emergency Services Department
   •   Honolulu Police Department
   •   O‘ahu Metropolitan Planning Organization (O‘ahu Regional Transportation
Plan)
The Functional Plans should provide:
   •   A Resource-constrained Long-Range Capital Improvement Program with
priorities;
   •   A Long-Range Financing Plan, with any necessary new revenue measures;
   •   A Development Schedule with first priority to areas designated for
earliest development; and
   •   Service and facility design standards, including Level of Service
Guidelines for determining infrastructure adequacy.
A resource-constrained program is one which identifies the fiscal resources
that can be reasonably expected to be available to finance the improvements.
Level of Service Guidelines for determining adequacy of public facilities and
infrastructure to support new development should be established by the
responsible City agencies as part of their review and update of Functional
Plans. Level of Service guidelines for infrastructure and utilities which are
primarily State agency responsibilities (such as schools) shall be developed by
the Department of Planning and Permitting in consultation with the responsible
State agencies.
In preparing the Functional Plans, a proactive public participation process
should be established which provides the public with access to complete
information about infrastructure and public facility needs assessment,
alternatives evaluation, and financing. Outreach activities should involve the
Neighborhood Boards, community organizations, landowners, and others who might
be significantly affected by the infrastructure or public facilities projects
to be developed under the Functional Plan.
The process should be characterized by opportunities for early and continuing
participation, timely public notice, public access to information needed to
review the decision, and the opportunity to suggest alternatives and to express
preferences.
5.4   REVIEW OF ZONING AND OTHER APPLICATIONS
A primary way in which the vision of the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities
Plan will guide land use will be through the review of applications for zoning
changes and other development approvals. Approval for all development projects
should be based on the extent to which the project supports the policies and
guidelines of the Sustainable Communities Plan.
All applications for projects requiring zone changes will be reviewed by the
Department of Planning and Permitting for consistency with the policies and
guidelines of the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan during the Zone
Change Application process. Those projects requiring environmental assessments
shall follow the provisions of Hawai‘i Revised Statutes, Chapter 343.
All projects involving significant zone changes will require either an
Environmental Assessment or Environmental Impact Statement which must include a
Project Master Plan when 25 acres or more are involved. This is submitted to
the Department of Planning and Permitting for review and acceptance prior to
initiation of the first Zone Change Application for the project. (See
definition of significant zone change in Section 5.4.1 and the definition of
Project Master Plan in Section 5.4.2.)
Zone change applications to permit urban uses on parcels outside the Urban
Community Boundary or on parcels identified as part of the Open Space Network
should be denied without submittal to the Planning Commission and City for
review and action (as permitted by Sec. 21-2-2.40-2(c) of the Land Use
Ordinance) since such urban uses would be clearly inconsistent with the intent
of the adopted Community Growth Boundary or Open Space Network vision,
policies, and guidelines.
5.4.1   ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
Projects involving a significant zone change should be required to submit an
Environmental Assessment (prepared in compliance with procedures for Chapter
343, Hawai‘i Revised Statutes) to the Department of Planning and Permitting to
help the Department determine whether the project involves a significant
environmental impact and if the project supports the vision for Central O‘ahu’s
development.
A zone change will be considered to be a significant zone change if it involves
at least one of the following:
   •   Any change in zoning of 25 acres or more to any zoning district or
combination of zoning districts, excluding preservation and agricultural zoning
districts; or
   •   Any change in zoning of more than 10 acres to a Residential or Country
zoning district; or
   •   Any change in zoning of more than 5 acres to an Apartment, Resort,
Commercial, Industrial, or Mixed Use zoning district; or
   •   The project would have major social, environmental, or policy impacts,
or cumulative impacts due to a series of applications in the same area.
The Director of the Department of Planning and Permitting will determine, based
on review of the Environmental Assessment, whether an Environmental Impact
Statement (prepared in compliance with procedures for Chapter 343, Hawai‘i
Revised Statutes) will be required or whether a Finding of No Significant
Impact (FONSI) should be issued.
In applying for a zoning change, the applicant must either:
   •   Receive a determination from the Director of Planning and Permitting
that the project does not involve a significant zone change; or
   •   Submit an Environmental Assessment or Environmental Impact Statement
with the zone change application.
Before an application for a significant zone change can be accepted for
processing by the Department of Planning and Permitting, the applicant must
either:
   •   Receive a Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI) from the Director of
Planning and Permitting; or
   •   Receive an acceptance of a Final Environmental Impact Statement (FEIS)
for the project from the Director of Planning and Permitting.
All Environmental Assessments/Environmental Impact Statements (EA/EIS) required
for a significant zone change involving 25 acres or more should include a
Project Master Plan (See Section 5.4.2 following). The scope of the EA/EIS must
cover, at a minimum, the specific development associated with a particular zone
change application, but at the option of the applicant, may cover subsequent
phases of a larger project, as well.
Zone change applications for a project already assessed under the National
Environmental Policy Act, Hawai‘i Revised Statutes Chapter 343, Revised
Ordinances of Honolulu Chapter 25 (Shoreline Management), or a preceding zoning
change application, may not require a new Environmental Assessment so long as
the Director of Planning and Permitting determines that the desired zoning and
land use generally conform to that described in the existing Environmental
Assessment/Environmental Impact Statement.
However, if a project has changed substantially in size, scope, intensity, use,
location, or timing, among other things which may have a significant effect on
the environment, a new or supplemental Environmental Assessment may be
required.
5.4.2   PROJECT MASTER PLANS
The Project Master Plan is intended solely as a guide to help describe in words
and illustrations how a project promotes the vision, policies, and guidelines
for Central O‘ahu.
Projects associated with a significant zone change for 25 acres or more, should
include a Project Master Plan as part of the Environmental Assessment or
Environmental Impact Statement submitted to the Department of Planning and
Permitting.
The Project Master Plan should cover all project phases. It shall be reviewed
to determine whether the project supports the vision, policies, and guidelines
of the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan. In the event a FONSI or
Final EIS has already been accepted by the City for a particular project, a
subsequent Project Master Plan will not be required.
The Project Master Plan should be based on the best information available to
the applicant at the time the Zone Change Application is submitted to the City.
5.4.2.1   Coverage and Scope
The Project Master Plan should cover all phases of the project and should
describe, using narrative and graphic illustration, how the project conforms to
the vision for Central O‘ahu, and the relevant policies, and guidelines for the
project site, the surrounding lands, and the region.
5.4.2.2   Key Elements
While the scope and detail will vary according to the scope and complexity of
the project, the Project Master Plan should contain the following elements.
When a key element enumerated below is adequately addressed elsewhere in an EA/
EIS, discussion of related issues should be referenced within the Master Plan
portion of the document.
   •   Statement of Consistency with the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities
Plan Vision. The Master Plan should indicate how the project supports the
vision, policies, and guidelines of the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities
Plan.
   •   Site Analysis. The Master Plan should identify how the proposed
development physically relates to prominent existing site features, views
identified in
Table 3.2 and on the Open Space Map in Appendix A, and surrounding urban or
urbanizing areas and should describe any related opportunities and constraints.
   •   Land Use. The Master Plan should indicate the proposed pattern of land
uses by general zoning district category.
      °   Land uses proposed for lands in any future development phases that
are not included in the current Zone Change Application will be considered only
conceptual and intended to serve only as a working guide for future
development.
      °   In larger projects, residential neighborhoods should be designated,
and concepts intended to create a sense of neighborhood should be described.
      °   The Master Plan should identify where the community’s “main street”
or village or town center is located and show how any planned commercial
development will help create a pedestrian friendly environment for that center.
      °   For projects that involve multiple uses, the intended relationship
between zoning districts should be described.
   •   Open Space. The Master Plan should discuss open space as a component of
the overall land use element, and should indicate how the proposed development
promotes the Development Plan open space and guidelines and the vision of an
integrated regional open space system.
   •   Circulation.  The Master Plan should indicate:
      °   General street patterns and the application of street and block
standards which minimize dead end streets and provide adequate connectivity;
      °   Intended connections to the regional roadway network and adjacent
communities; and
      °   Potential transit routes and pedestrian and bicycle routes.
   •   Design Theme or Character.  The Master Plan should depict, with
sketches, photos or descriptions, the intended general urban design of the
area. These vignettes should be represented and understood to be conceptual
depictions of the potential general design theme of the project.
   •   Telecommunications. The Master Plan should indicate the sites and
network conduit facilities that would be provided to meet expected
telecommunications infrastructure needs, if applicable.
5.4.2.3   Review Procedures
The Department of Planning and Permitting should review the Project Master Plan
concurrently with the Environmental Assessment/Environmental Impact Statement
and determine whether the Project Master Plan supports the Central O‘ahu
Sustainable Communities Plan vision or whether changes are needed.
5.4.2.4   Modification of Master Plans for Future Phases
Often, projects are developed in phases. As a result, the Project Master Plan
is likely to cover more land than the developer is currently requesting for a
zone change. The feasibility and desirability of plans for later phases of the
Project Master Plan can be greatly altered in light of more detailed study of
site characteristics and site planning, or change in market forces or
government policies.
As a result, elements of Master Plans covering lands in phases which are not
included in a current Zone Change Application should be considered only
conceptual and intended to serve only as a working guide for future
development. Changes to these parts of a Master Plan can be made by the
developer at any time without requiring approval by the City.
If a Master Plan has been revised in planning for a subsequent phase of a
project, an updated version of the Master Plan should be submitted with the
zone change application for that phase. No new Master Plan review should be
required unless there has been a major alteration in the project vision and
land uses from that proposed in the original Master Plan.
5.4.3   ADEQUATE FACILITIES REQUIREMENT
All projects requesting zone changes shall be reviewed to determine if adequate
public facilities and infrastructure will be available to meet the needs
created as a result of the development. Level of Service Guidelines to define
adequate public facilities and infrastructure requirements will be used for the
Capital Improvement Program.
In order to guide development and growth in an orderly manner as required by
the City’s General Plan, zoning and other development approvals for new
developments should be approved only if the responsible City and State agencies
indicate that adequate public facilities and utilities will be available at the
time of occupancy or if conditions the functional agency indicates are
necessary to assure adequacy are otherwise sufficiently addressed.
The Department of Planning and Permitting will review and summarize any
individual agency’s findings regarding public facilities and utilities adequacy
which are raised as part of the EA/EIS process or as part of the agency review
of the zone change application and recommend conditions that should be included
in the Unilateral Agreement or Development Agreement to insure adequacy of
facilities.
5.5   FIVE-YEAR SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN REVIEW
The Department of Planning and Permitting shall conduct a comprehensive review
of the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan and shall report its findings
and recommended revisions to the City Council five years after adoption and
every five years thereafter.
In the Five Year review, all the elements of the Central O‘ahu Sustainable
Communities Plan (regional vision, policies and guidelines, and implementing
actions) will be evaluated to see if they are still appropriate.
The Plan review will include an evaluation of the Community Growth Boundary
since it is a key vision element of the Plan. However, the Community Growth
Boundary (CGB) was drawn with the intent that it will remain fixed through the
2035 planning horizon, because of the vision that key agricultural and
preservation lands should be protected for the foreseeable future and because
there are ample developable lands to meet the urban development needs for the
foreseeable future within the Community Growth Boundary in ‘Ewa and Central
O‘ahu.
5.6   DEVELOPMENT PLAN COMMON PROVISIONS AND EXISTING LAND USE APPROVALS
This Sustainable Communities Plan will go into effect upon adoption by
ordinance. At that time, the revised Sustainable Communities Plan will become a
self-contained document, not reliant on the Development Plan Common Provisions
which formerly applied to the Central O‘ahu Development Plan as well as all the
other Development Plans.
Land use approvals granted under previously approved Development Plan
amendments will remain in force and guide zoning decisions unless clearly
inconsistent with the vision and policies of the Central O‘ahu Sustainable
Communities Plan.
Development can proceed in accordance with existing zoning, Unilateral
Agreements, and approved Urban Design Plans.
If an Environmental Assessment or Environmental Impact Statement (EA/EIS) was
accepted in the course of a Development Plan land use approval for a project,
it should be acceptable to meet the requirement for an initial project EA/EIS
when zone change applications are submitted for subsequent phases of the
project unless the project scope and land uses are being significantly changed
from that described in the initial EA/EIS.
5.7   RELATION TO GENERAL PLAN POPULATION GUIDELINES
The Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan implements the General Plan
population distribution policies (in Population Objective C) as follows.
   •   Central O‘ahu’s projected share of O‘ahu population in 2025 (17.25
percent) will be quite close to the General Plan 2025 population distribution
guideline (17 percent). Central O‘ahu’s share in 2010 was 17.7 percent.
   •   Planned developments in the Central O‘ahu urban-fringe will implement
Population Objective C, Policy 2 which encourages such development in order to
“relieve developmental pressures in the remaining urban-fringe and rural areas
and to meet housing needs not readily provided in the primary urban center.”
The General Plan population distribution guidelines are used as a guide to
direct the pattern of growth and development in the Central O‘ahu Sustainable
Communities Plan Area. Assessments of this performance will be reported in both
the Biennial Report and the Five Year Review of the Sustainable Communities
Plan.
Under the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan, projects will be
evaluated against how well they fulfill the vision for Central O‘ahu enunciated
in the Sustainable Communities Plan and how closely they meet the policies and
guidelines selected to implement that vision.
5.8   REVIEW AND REVISION OF DEVELOPMENT CODES
To ensure that the vision, policies, and guidelines of the Central O‘ahu
Sustainable Communities Plan ‘Ewa Development Plan and other Development Plans
and Sustainable Communities Plans are implemented, current regulatory codes and
standards should be reviewed and revised, as necessary, including the
following:
   •   Land Use Ordinance (Department of Planning and Permitting, pursuant to
Chapter 21, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu). Zoning code standards and the
zoning map for Central O‘ahu may need to be updated to reflect policies and
guidelines in the Sustainable Communities Plan.
   •   Subdivision Rules and Regulations (Department of Planning and
Permitting, pursuant to Chapter 22, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu). Public
right-of-way standards used for subdivision and consolidation of land need to
be updated to reflect transportation policies and guidelines in the Sustainable
Communities Plan. Also, regulations need to be revised to create a better
enforcement mechanism, including thresholds and standards, to assure that
“gentlemen’s estates” are not developed on valuable agricultural land.
   •   Traffic Standard Manual (Department of Transportation Services, July
1976, as revised April 1979). Standards which are applied to local and most
collector/connector streets need to be revised to reflect transportation
policies and guidelines in the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan.
   •   State Highways Division Procedures Manual, Vol. 8, Chapter 5, Section 4
(State Department of Transportation). These State highway standards need to be
reviewed to identify provisions which may conflict with the transportation
policies and guidelines in the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan.
   •   Standard Details for Public Works Construction (Honolulu Department of
Public Works with Kaua‘i, Maui, and Hawai‘i County Departments of Public Works,
September 1984. Engineering standards for the dedication of public works
construction need to be revised to reflect Central O‘ahu Sustainable
Communities Plan policies and guidelines.
   •   Storm Drainage Standards (Department of Planning and Permitting, January
2000). Standards for the dedication of drainage systems to incorporate grassed
swales and retention basins into the design need to be created to reflect the
Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan policies and guidelines for open
space.
   •   Park Dedication Rules and Regulations (Department of Planning and
Permitting, pursuant to Chapter 22, Article 7, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu).
Regulations need to be reviewed to determine if passive drainage systems which
are designed for recreation use should count toward park dedication
requirements, especially in cases where the area would exceed the amount of
land that would be required under current rules and regulations.
   •   Wastewater Management Design Standards (Department of Wastewater
Management, Vol. I: 1993, Vol. II: 1984; pursuant to Chapter 14, Revised
Ordinances of Honolulu). These standards and ordinance may require review to
further implement Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan policies and
guidelines.
5.9   IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
This section provides a summary of the Plan’s policies and guidelines from
Chapters 3 and 4 to help understand how the Plan will be implemented.
This implementation matrix presents the policies and guidelines as generalized
and consolidated statements, and is not meant to be used as a complete summary
of the vision, policies, and guidelines to be found in the body of the Plan.
Chapter 2 should be consulted for the specific language of the vision elements.
Chapters 3 and 4 should be consulted for the specific language of each policy
or guideline.
The focus of the matrix is on showing how the vision, policies, and guidelines
in the Plan relate to existing Federal, State, and City and County programs,
who has responsibility for those programs, and what the agency’s role is in
implementing the Plan.
For each policy and guideline statement, the matrix identifies:
   •   The regulatory code or program for effecting implementation,
   •   Agencies with responsibility for implementation, and
   •   The role of each agency.
Implementation of the policies and guidelines will depend on each agency’s
priorities and availability of resources.
The Department of Planning and Permitting is either a regulator or an
implementer for many plan components, while simultaneously acting as the
advocate for implementation of all the Plan vision elements and policies.
 
KEYS TO ABBREVIATIONS
Programs                                                                       Agencies                                                                        Roles
• Agric Distr: State Agriculture District, Ch. 205, Hawaii Revised Statutes
(HRS)
• BC: Building Code,
Ch. 16, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu (ROH)
• BID: Business Improvement District,                                        • AOHO: Association of Home Owners
Ch. 34, ROH                                                                    • BFS: Dept. of Budget and Fiscal Services
• BPH: Bike Plan Hawaii (State DOT, 2003)                                    • BWS: Board of Water Supply
• CDBG: Community Development Block Grant, HUD                               • CWRM: State Commission on Water
• CFD: Community Facilities Districts,                                       Resource Management
Ch. 34, ROH                                                                    • DA: Business Improvement District
• CIP: Capital Improvement Program (State or City)                           Association
• ons Distr: State Conservation District, Ch. 205, HRS                       • DCS: Dept. of Community Services
• Conserv Plan: SWCD Conservation Plan                                       • DDC: Dept. of Design and Construction
• CZM: Coastal Zone Management, Ch. 205A, HRS                                • DEM: Dept. of Emergency Management
• Drain MP: Drainage Master Plan                                             • DES: Dept. of Enterprise Services
• EA/EIS: Environmental Assessment/                                          • DFM: Dept. of Facility Maintenance
Environmental Impact Statement, Ch. 343 HRS                                    • DLNR: State Department of Land and Natural Resources                        • Implementer
• EPA Act: Environmental Protection Agency Act                               • DOC: State Department of Corrections                                        • Advocate
• ESA: Endangered Species Act                                                • DOD: United States Department of Defense                                    • Regulator
• Forest: State Forestry Programs                                            • DOE: State Department of Education                                           
• Gen Flood Pl: Hawaii General Flood Control Plan, DLNR                      • DOH: State Department of Health
• HOME: Home Investment Partnerships Program, HUD                            • DOT: State Department of Transportation
• Hist Pres: Historic Preservation, Ch. 6E, HRS                              • DPP: Dept. of Planning and Permitting
• HSCD: Hawai‘i State Civil Defense                                        • DPR: Dept. of Parks and Recreation
• INRMP: Integrated Natural Resource Master Plan                             • DTS: Dept. of Transportation Services
• LID: Low Impact Development Standards                                      • ENV: Dept. of Environmental Services
• LUO: Land Use Ordinance,                                                   • EPA: Environmental Protection Agency
Ch. 21, ROH                                                                    • HECO: Hawaiian Electric Company
• MBTA: Migratory Bird Treaty Act                                            • HFD: Honolulu Fire Department
• NPDES: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System                     • HSCD: Hawaii State Civil Defense
• OBP: O‘ahu Bike Plan (City DTS, 2012)                                    • HUD: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
• Op Budget: City Operating Budget
• ORTP: O‘ahu Regional Transportation Plan
• OWMP: O‘ahu Water Management Plan
• Park Dedic: Park Dedication,
Ch. 22, ROH
• Park MP: Park Master Plan
• PRU: Plan Review Use
• PUC: Public Utilities Commission , Ch. 269, HRS
• Rivr & Harbor: River and Harbor Act
• Road MP: Road Master Plan
• RPT: City Real Property Transactions,
Ch. 37, ROH
• SEWER: Sewer Connection Permit
• SIF: School Impact Fees, Ch. 302A-1601 to 1611, HRS
• Shore Stbk: Shoreline Setback,                                             • LUC: State Land Use Commission
Ch. 23, ROH                                                                    • NOAA: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
• SLUBDA: State Land Use District Boundary Amendment                         • NRCS: US Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service
• SMA: Special Management Area,                                              • OHA: Office of Hawaiian Affairs
Ch. 25, ROH                                                                    • OMPO: O‘ahu Metropolitan Planning Organization
• State Parks: DLNR State Parks; Division of Forestry and Wildlife Camping   • OP: State Office of Planning
permits                                                                        • ORC&D: O‘ahu Resource Conservation and Development
• State Trails: DLNR Na Ala Hele StateTrails and                             • PUC: State Public Utilities Commission
Access Program                                                                 • SHPD: State Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Land and
• SUB: Subdivision                                                           Natural Resources
• SUP: Special Use Permit                                                    • SWCD: Soil and Water Conservation District
• SWIMP: Solid Waste Integrated Management Plan                              • UHWO: University of Hawaii West O‘ahu
• TIP: Transportation Improvement Plan                                       • USACE: United States Army Corps of Engineers
• TOD: Transit Oriented Development                                          • USFWS: United States Fish and Wildlife Service
• U&OA: Use and Occupancy Agreement                                          • UTIL: Private utilities providing services such as phone, cable, gas, water
• Urban Forest: Urban Forestry Program, DPR                                  and wastewater
• UDP: Urban Design Plan
• State Water: State Water Code, Ch. 174C, HRS
• Water MP: Water Master Plan
• WPFPA: Watershed Protection & Flood Prevention Act
• WMBFP: West Mamala Bay Facilities Plan
• WNTODP: Waipahū Neighborhood Transit-Oriented Development Plan (2014)
• WP: Water Pollution, Ch. 342D, HRS
• WUP: Water Use Permit/Well Permit, CWRM
• WQP: State Water Quality Plan
• ZC: Zone Change
 
Policies and Guidelines Statements Programs Agencies Roles
Policies and Guidelines Statements                                                 Programs   Agencies     Roles
Sec. 3.1   Open Space Preservation and Development
Provide long range protection for diversified agriculture on lands outside the     SLUDBA     LUC          Regulator/
Community Growth Boundary and for two agricultural areas located inside the                   DPP          Advocate
Community Growth Boundary (Pine Spur and Honbushin). Protect scenic views and                              Advocate/
natural, cultural, and historic resources. Use open space to provide recreation    ZC         DPP          Regulator
areas and fire buffers, and to define the boundaries of communities.
Mountain Areas
                                                                                   State
Protect and expand access to recreational resources in the mountains. Acquire and  Trails     DLNR         Implementer
maintain public campgrounds and access to hiking trails with parking at trail      State                   Regulator
heads and campgrounds in the areas beyond the Community Growth Boundary on the     Parks
slopes of both the Wai‘anae and Ko‘olau Ranges.                                ZC         DPP          Advocate/
                                                                                   UDP                     Regulator
Maintain the forest at higher elevations in the State Conservation District. Plan  Conserv.   LUC          Regulator
utility corridors and other uses to avoid disturbances to areas with high          District   DLNR         Implementer/
concentrations of native species.                                                                          Regulator
Identify endangered species, their habitats and other important ecological zones   Conserv.   USFWS        Regulator
and protect them from threats such as fire, weeds, feral animals, and human        District   DLNR         Implementer
activity.                                                                          ESA/MBTA
                                                                                   SLUDBA     LUC          Regulator
Protect the Leeward Ko‘olau water recharge areas and the Hydrologic Zone of                 DPP          Advocate
Contribution to the Navy Shaft in Waiawa from urban development.                   ZC         DPP          Advocate
                                                                                   LID        DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   Cons.      LUC          Regulator
Identify and protect areas that are important to Native Hawaiian cultural          Dist.      DLNR         Implementer
practices.                                                                         Hist.      DLNR         Regulator
                                                                                   Pres.
Natural Gulches and Drainageways
                                                                                   SLUDBA     LUC          Regulator
Preserve the major natural gulches within the Community Growth Boundary as part of            DPP          Advocate
the open space system, serving as natural drainageways, storm water retention      ZC                      Advocate/
areas, and potential components of a regional trail system.                        LUO        DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   SUB
Integrate planned improvements to Central O‘ahu drainage systems into the regionaZC/UDP
open space network by emphasizing the use of retention basins, recreational        Drain MP   DPP          Advocate/
access, and opportunities to link major open spaces with pedestrian and bike       SUB                     Regulator
paths.
                                                                                   Drain MP   DPP          Regulator
Where practical, retain drainageways as natural or man-made vegetated channels     SUB
rather than concrete channels.                                                     CIP        DFM          Implementer
                                                                                              DDC          Implementer
Shoreline Areas
                                                                                   Military
                                                                                   Base       US Navy      Regulator
Provide public access to the Pearl Harbor shoreline with adequate parking except   Security
where access is restricted by the military for security reasons.                   Policy
                                                                                   EA/EIS     DPP          Advocate
                                                                                   CZM        OP           Advocate
                                                                                              USFWS/N OAA  Implementer/
                                                                                                           Regulator
Maintain and enhance, where necessary, nearshore wetlands and mangroves as         ESA/MBTA   USACE        Regulator
wildlife habitats.                                                                            DLNR         Implementer
                                                                                                           Regulator
                                                                                   INRMP      DOD          Implementer
                                                                                              DPP          Advocate
Provide at a minimum a 60 foot setback along the shoreline, and, where possible,   EA/EIS     DPP          Regulator
expand the setback to 150 feet where justified, based on historic or adopted       SMA                     Advocate/
projections of coastal erosion rates.                                              SUB        DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   Shore Stbk              Regulator
                                                                                   CZM        OP           Regulator
                                                                                   EA/EIS     DPP          Advocate/
Analyze the possible impact of sea level rise for new public and private projects                          Regulator
in shoreline areas and incorporate, where appropriate and feasible, measures to    ZC/SMA     DPP          Advocate/
reduce risks and increase resiliency to impacts of sea level rise.                                         Regulator
                                                                                   SUB        DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   Shore Stbk              Regulator
Agricultural Areas
Permit facilities necessary to support intensive cultivation of arable             Agric.     LUC          Regulator
agricultural lands, including distribution, sales or agri-tourism facilities.      Distr.
                                                                                   LUO        DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   Agric.     LUC          Regulator
Permit facilities to support limited outdoor recreation use, such as camping,      District   DPP          Advocate
horseback riding and hiking, in areas where agricultural use is not feasible.      SUP        LUC          Regulator
                                                                                              DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   LUO        DPP          Regulator
Permit residential use only to the extent that it is accessory to the agricultural LUO        DPP          Regulator
use.                                                                                                        
Design and locate buildings and other facilities that are accessory to an
agricultural operation to minimize impacts on nearby urban areas, arterial roads,  LUO        DPP          Regulator
and major collector streets.
Parks
Maintain distant views of the Wai‘anae Range from Kamehameha Highway in the
development and siting of facilities and landscaping in the Patsy T. Mink Central  Park MP    DPR          Implementer
O‘ahu Regional Park.
Develop trails leading from Patsy T. Mink Central O‘ahu Regional Park to Waikele CIP        DPR          Implementer
Gulch and connecting to a Central O‘ahu gulches trail system.                               DDC          Implementer
Establish a new shoreline park at Waipi‘o Peninsula, giving access from Waipahū CIP        DPR          Implementer
the Pearl Harbor shoreline on the West Loch and Middle Loch.                                  DDC          Implementer
Retain Wahiawā Botanical garden as primarily a gulch in its natural state.        Park MP    DPR          Implementer
Expand Wahiawā Freshwater Park to include most of the area adjacent to the Wahiawā
Reservoir, limiting public access only as necessary to protect water quality and   CIP        DLNR         Implementer
public safety.
Golf Courses
                                                                                   ZC         DPP          Advocate
Locate and design golf courses to optimize their function as drainage retention                            Regulator
areas and as buffers between developments.                                         LUO Drain
                                                                                   MP         DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   SUB
Design golf courses to consider public safety and potential impacts on views and   ZC         DPP          Advocate
recreational resources, and to accommodate and incorporate pedestrian paths and                            Regulator
bikeways.                                                                          LUO        DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   SUB
Wildland - Urban Fire Hazard Setbacks
As determined appropriate by the Honolulu Fire Department, require residential or
commercial developments that are adjacent either to preservation areas within the             DPP          Regulator
Community Growth Boundary or to lands within the State Conservation District to    SUB        HFD          Advocate
provide a setback to reduce the risk of fire spreading from the “wildlands” to the
developed area.
Greenways and Open Space Corridors         
                                                                                   Cons.      DLNR         Regulator
Provide sufficient easement width for the major trunk lines and transmission and   Distr.     DPP          Regulator
distribution lines for utility systems, to allow landscaping within and adjacent   SUB        DPP          Regulator
to the easement, consistent with all applicable operations, maintenance, and       CIP        DDC          Implementer
safety requirements. Place new transmission lines underground, where possible,                PUC          Regulator
under criteria specified in State law.                                             BID/CFD    BFS          Regulator
                                                                                              HECO         Implementer
                                                                                              DA           Implementer
Permit use of utility easements for pedestrian and bicycle routes, consistent with Road MP    DPP          Regulator
all applicable operations, maintenance, and safety requirements.                   SUB        HECO         Implementer
                                                                                              UTIL         Implementer
                                                                                   Road MP    DPP          Regulator
Design the rights-of-way for major and minor arterials as landscaped parkways or   SUB        DTS          Implementer
greenways, complete with a landscaped median strip, landscaped sidewalks, and                 Developers   Implementer
bikeways.                                                                          CIP        DOT          Implementer
                                                                                              DDC          Implementer
Where urban development abuts the H-2 Freeway, provide an open space/landscaped    ZC         DPP          Advocate
buffer of sufficient size to preserve a view of green, minimize the visual
intrusiveness of the development, and reduce the noise and air quality impact of   SUB        DPP          Regulator
the freeway traffic on the abutting development.
Sec. 3.2   Regional Parks and Recreation Complexes
                                                                                   CIP        DPR          Implementer
Consider using public-private partnerships to build and maintain regional parks               DDC          Implementer
and recreation complexes in order to sustain economic development                             BFS          Regulator
                                                                                   BID/CFD    DA           Implementor
                                                                                              DES          Implementor
Use best practices in the architectural and landscaping design, incorporation of   Park MP    DPR          Implementer
natural features and indigenous plants, siting of facilities, and provision of     CIP        DDC          Implementer
connectivity and transit services for regional parks and recreation complexes.     UDP        DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   SUB
                                                                                              USFWS        Regulator
                                                                                   ESA/MBTA   USACE DLNR   Regulator
Retain, protect, and incorporate wetland and other wildife habitat areas as                                Regulator
passive recreational resources.                                                               DOD          Regulator
                                                                                   INRMP                   Implementer
                                                                                              DPP          Advocate
Island Wide and Regional Parks
Continue developing planned facilities at Patsy T. Mink Central O‘ahu Regional   Park MP    DPR          Implementer
Park                                                                               CIP        DDC          Implementer
Make improvements to the Waipahū Cultural Gardens consistent with the historical/ Park MP    DPR          Implementer
cultural theme of the park and enhancing open space and passive recreation values. CIP        DDC          Implementer
Golf Courses
Limit municipal golf course improvements to enhancement of Ted Makalena Golf       CIP        DPR          Implementer
Course.                                                                                       DDC          Implementer
                                                                                   ZC         DPP          Advocate
Use golf courses, where appropriate, to protect open space, retain storm water,    LUO Drain               Regulator
and reduce non-point pollution and sedimentation of streams and coastal waters.    MP         DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   SUB                     Regulator
Sec. 3.3   Community-Based Parks
                                                                                   Park       DPP          Regulator
Provide adequate parks and supporting amenities to meet residents’ recreational  Dedic.     DPR          Implementer
needs.                                                                             Park MP    DPR          Implementer
                                                                                   CIP        DDC          Implementer
Development of Community-Based Parks
Co-locate parks with elementary or intermediate schools. Coordinate design,        CIP        DOE          Implementer
development and use of facilities with DOE where efficient and effective.          Park MP    DPR          Implementer
                                                                                   CIP        DDC          Implementer
Where feasible, site parks near the center of neighborhoods, in order to maximize  UDP Road
accessibility and connectivity. Provide pathways to parks from surrounding         MP         DPP          Regulator
streets.                                                                           SUB
                                                                                   ZC         DPP          Advocate
                                                                                   LUO        DPP          Regulator
Use xeriscaping, non-potable water for irrigation, and efficient irrigation        Water MP   BWS          Regulator
systems wherever possible to conserve groundwater resources.                       SUB        DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   Park MP    DPR          Implementer
                                                                                   City       DDC          Implementer
                                                                                   CIP
Sec. 3.4   HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
Emphasize physical references to Central O‘ahu’s history and cultural roots to ZC UDP     DPP          Advocate
help define Central O‘ahu’s unique sense of place. Protect existing visual                             Regulator
landmarks and support creation of new culturally appropriate landmarks. Preserve   Hist.      SHPD OHA     Regulator
significant historic features from the plantation era and earlier periods as       Pres.                   Implementer
recommended by the State Historic Preservation Officer. Vary the treatment of                 DDC          Implementer
sites according to their characteristics and potential value. Ensure protection of CIP        DFM          Implementer
Kukaniloko. Retain significant vistas whenever possible.
                                                                                   ZC UDP     DPP          Advocate
Assume that historic, cultural, and archaeological site mitigations approved as                            Regulator
part of prior development approvals carry out the Plan vision and policies.        Hist.      SHPD         Regulator
                                                                                   Pres.
Sites Under Review
Vary the treatment of sites according to their characteristics and potential       Hist.      SHPD         Regulator
value. Use in situ preservation and appropriate protection measures for historic,  Pres.
cultural, or archaeological sites with high preservation value. Allow historic     ZC LUO     DPP          Advocate
sites to be converted from their original intended use to serve a new function if                          Regulator
historic value is maintained, especially if interpretative value is enhanced.      CIP        DDC          Implementer
                                                                                              DFM          Implementer
                                                                                   Hist.      SHPD         Regulator
Plan and design adjacent uses to avoid conflicts or abrupt contrasts that detract  Pres.
from or destroy the physical integrity and historic or cultural value of the site. CIP        DDC          Implementer
                                                                                              DFM          Implementer
                                                                                   ZC         DPP          Advocate
                                                                                   UDP                     Regulator
Design and site all structures, where feasible, to reflect the need to maintain    Hist.      SHPD         Regulator
and enhance available views of significant landmarks and vistas. Whenever          Pres.
possible, relocate or place underground overhead utility lines and poles that                 PUC          Regulator
significantly obstruct public views, under criteria specified in State law.                   BFS          Regulator
                                                                                  BID/CFD    HECO         Implementer
                                                                                              UTIL         Implementer
                                                                                              DA           Implementer
OR&L Historic Railway
Develop the right-of-way as a world-class heritage and educational corridor to     Hist.      SHPD         Regulator
enhance neighboring communities and serve as a major visitor and cultural          Pres.
attraction. Design structures and elements to reflect the historic nature of the   BPH                     Implementer
railway. Set back new development as specified in Neighborhood Transit-Oriented    CIP        DOT          Regulator
Development (TOD) Plans, TOD development regulations, or as otherwise specified in U&OA                    Regulator
existing land use approvals, policies, and regulations. Allow reconstruction of
historic structures and construction of structures consistent with open space or   WNTODNP                 Advocate
bikeway uses in the right of way (R-O-W) and setback areas. Develop a parallel     ZC         DPP          Advocate
paved shared-use bikeway along the length of the OR&L R-O-W, as part of the Pearl  LUO                     Regulator
Harbor Historic Trail, either within or adjacent to the R-O-W. Provide
landscaping, interpretive signs, and occasional rest stops.
Waipahū Sugar Mill Environs
Retain the sugar mill stack and boiler room as visual symbols of Waipahū’s      Hist.      SHPD         Regulator
plantation town history. Maintain the historic theme of the Waipahū Cultural      Pres.
Garden Park and strengthen links between the mill site and the park. Maintain the  WNTODNP                 Advocate
historic character of the old commercial core of Waipahū.                         ZC         DPP          Advocate
                                                                                   LUO                     Regulator
Native Hawaiian Cultural and Archaeological Sites
Determine the appropriate preservation method, site boundaries, setbacks, and      Hist.      SHPD         Regulator
restrictions for adjacent uses on a site-by-site basis, in consultation with the   Pres.
State Historic Preservation Officer.                                               ZC         DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   UDP
Determine the appropriate level of public access on a site-by-site basis, in       Hist.      SHPD         Regulator
consultation with the State Historic Preservation Officer, Hawaiian cultural       Pres.      OHA          Advocate/
organizations and the land owner.                                                  ZC UDP     OHA          Implementer
                                                                                              DPP          Regulator
Sec. 3.5   Natural Resources
                                                                                   WUP        CWRM BWS     Regulator
Conserve potable water by supporting water conservation measures (e.g. non potable                         Advocate
irrigation, xeriscaping, storm water retention and use).                           SUB LID    DPP          Regulator
                                                                                                            
                                                                                              USFWS/N OAA  Regulator
                                                                                   ESA/MBTA   USACE        Regulator
Protect valuable habitat for waterbirds, fish, invertebrates and other endangered             DLNR         Regulator
animals and plants. Require surveys for proposed new developments to identify      EA/EIS     DPP          Regulator
endangered species habitat and require appropriate mitigations for adverse                                  
impacts.                                                                           SMA ZC                  Advocate
                                                                                   UDP        DPP          Advocate
                                                                                                           Regulator
Retain the major Central O‘ahu ravines as natural drainageways, storm water      SLUDBA     LUC          Regulator
retention areas, and open space resources by restricting further development and              DPP          Advocate
minimizing grading or other disturbances of the gulch walls.                       ZC LUO SUB DPP          Advocate
                                                                                                           Regulator
                                                                                   SLUDBA     LUC          Regulator
Protect prime watershed recharge areas and the Pearl Harbor potable aquifer.                  DPP          Advocate
                                                                                   ZC         DPP          Advocate
                                                                                   LID        DPP          Regulator
                                                                                                           Regulator
Reduce light pollution’s adverse impact on wildlife and human health and its     ESA/MBTA   USFWS DLNR   Regulator
unnecessary consumption of energy by using, where possible, fully shielded                    DOT DTS      Implementer
lighting fixtures using lower wattage.                                                                     Implementer
                                                                                   LUO UDP BC DPP          Regulator
Sec. 3.6   Waipahū Town
Develop Waipahū as a harmonious blend of the old and new, retaining and embracing WNTODP     DPP          Advocate
its cultural plantation heritage. Revitalize the town, providing jobs, economic    ZC                      Advocate
opportunities, and social, cultural, and recreational enhancements. Preserve and   LUO        DPP          Regulator
enhance greenery, community gardens, and open spaces. Encourage mixed-use, medium  SUB
density transit-oriented development around the two Honolulu Rail Transit          CIP        DDC          Implementer
stations. Create a network of green spaces, parks, paths, trails and shaded        Urban      DPR          Regulator
streets linking the Waipahū Cultural Garden, the two Honolulu Rail Transit        Forest                  Implementer
stations, the Pearl Harbor Historic Trail, and the Waipahū Shoreline Park and     BID/CFD    BFS DA       Regulator
Preservation Area.                                                                                         Implementer
Sec. 3.7   Wahiawā Town
Maintain and enhance Wahiawā’s plantation heritage and rural, small town        ZC         DPP          Advocate
atmosphere. Enhance Wahiawā’s role as a “gateway” between town and country. LUO        DPP          Regulator
Strengthen the town center’s role as a commercial, social, and civic center,     SUB
particularly as a support center for Central O‘ahu and North Shore diversified   CIP        DDC          Implementer
agriculture. Protect and enhance Wahiawā’s unique forest and lake features.     Urban      DPR          Regulator
Explore the possibility of establishing a geriatric research and technology        Forest                  Implementer
center.                                                                            BID/CFD    BFS          Regulator
                                                                                              DA           Implementer
Sec. 3.8   Central O‘ahu Plantation Villages
Preserve and enhance the historic character and appearance of the villages. Use
the villages as affordable housing for workers from new diversified agricultural
activities on lands along Kunia Road and north of Wahiawā. Rehabilitate existing  LUO
village structures or adapt them for reuse. Perpetuate rural agricultural          SUB        DPP          Regulator
functions and activities in the surrounding area in conjunction with village land
uses. Replace razed structures with in-fill development that respects the historic
character of the original village.
Sec. 3.9   Existing and Planned Residential Communities
Develop suburban residential areas with housing density of 10 to 15 units per      WNTODP     DPP          Advocate
acre. Develop residential areas along the rail transit corridor at housing         ZC                      Advocate
densities of 25 units per acre, and mixed use residential/commercial areas within
1/4 mile of transit stations at densities from 25 to 90 units per acre. Require    LUO
that housing units affordable to low and low-moderate income households be         SUB        DPP          Regulator
provided in new residential developments. Provide land for meeting facilities,
community centers, and elderly and child-care centers.
Develop or redevelop residential communities to have an identified pedestrian-     ZC         DPP          Advocate
friendly town center or “Main Street” area, and design commercial development to
help establish and support that center. Encourage walking and biking and bus       UDP                     Regulator
transit usage by providing ample path and roadway connectivity both to the town    Road MP    DPP          Regulator
center and throughout the community, and by providing sufficient right-of-way to   SUB                     Regulator
provide bus shelters and pull-outs.
Use xeriscaping, non-potable water for irrigation, and efficient irrigation        Water MP   BWS          Regulator
systems wherever possible to conserve groundwater resources.                       SUB        DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   LID                     Regulator
Sec. 3.10   Planned Commercial Retail Center
Develop planned commercial centers to provide retail shopping and offices          WNTODP     DPP          Advocate
delivering services for the Central O‘ahu residential communities in which they  ZC                      Advocate
are located. Concentrate commercial uses in central locations instead of in
continuous commercial strips along arterial roads, and design the centers to
support pedestrian-friendly centers or “Main Streets” for their communities. WhUDP        DPP          Regulator
compatible and with appropriate conditions, allow business hotels in Major         SUB        DPP          Regulator
Community Commercial Centers. Allow medium density mixed use residential-
commercial development generally within a quarter-mile of the two rail transit
stations in Waipahū and the station at Leeward Community College.
Follow best practices for architectural character, building siting, build height   ZC         DPP          Advocate
and density, accessibility, connectivity, pedestrian and bicycle facilities,       UDP                     Regulator
visual screening, lighting, and signage. Use xeriscaping, non-potable water for    LUO        DPP          Regulator
irrigation, and efficient irrigation systems wherever possible to conserve         SUB        BWS          Regulator
groundwater resources.                                                             Water MP   DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   LID                     Regulator
Permit multi-family residential use above the first floor and include it wherever  ZC         DPP          Advocate
possible in commercial centers.                                                    LUO                     Regulator
Sec. 3.11   Industrial Centers
                                                                                   ZC         DPP          Advocate
Follow best practices for appropriate scale, environmental compatibility, building UDP                     Regulator
height and mass, access roadway setbacks, water conservation and landscape         LUO        DPP          Regulator
treatment. Buffer industrial areas from residential areas and minimize negative    SUB                     Regulator
impacts. Use xeriscaping, non-potable water for irrigation, and efficient          Water MP   BWS          Regulator
irrigation systems wherever possible to conserve groundwater resources.            SUB        DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   LID                     Regulator
Allow limited industrial uses needed to provide direct services and storage to     WNTODP     DPP          Advocate
adjacent residential communities. Provide support for diversified agricultural     ZC                      Advocate
jobs in Central O‘ahu and the North Shore from industrial areas in Wahiawā. Allow
industrial areas within the master-planned communities of Waipi‘o-Gentry, Royal
Kunia, Koa Ridge and Waiawa. Allow industrial areas oriented to small businesses   LUO        DPP          Regulator
providing consumer services within Wahiawā and Waipahū and consistent with their UDP
Special Area Plans and the Waipahū Neighborhood Transit Oriented Development
Plans.
Sec. 3.12   Mililani Technology Park
Continue Mililani Technology Park as an open, landscaped, low density campus style
business park intended for technology-intensive businesses. Allow light industrial ZC                      Advocate
uses to be mixed with office uses. Limit retail and support service uses. Limit    LUO        DPP          Regulator
building heights to generally not exceed 40 feet, except for necessary             SUB
communication antennas.
Sec. 3.13   Military Areas
Support military uses at Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, Schofield-Wheeler, and    INRMP      DOD          Regulator
Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam Wahiawā Annex. Request DOD co-operation with City             DPP          Advocate
land use plans. Provide adequate buffers between adjoining residential areas and   ZC
military training areas. Require private uses leasing DOD lands for non-DOD uses   LUO        DPP          Advocate
to comply with City land use plans and regulations. Request expanded public access SUB                     Regulator
to West Loch waters for recreational purposes.
Sec. 4.1   Transportation Systems
                                                                                   ORTP       OMPO         Implementer
                                                                                   TIP                     Implementer
Provide adequate access between residences and jobs, shopping, and recreation      BPH        DOT          Implementer
centers within Central O‘ahu as development occurs. To improve connectivity,     CIP
provide a multi-modal network of interconnected routes that safely accommodate     OBP        DTS          Implementer
walkways, bikeways, and streets throughout Central O‘ahu and efficiently link    CIP        DDC          Implementer
arterials, residences, schools, parks, community facilities, commercial and        WNTODP                  Advocate
employment centers, and transit stops. Ensure sites are provided for bus transit   ZC                      Advocate
centers, park-and-ride facilities, bus shelters, and bus pullouts in new           LUO        DPP          Regulator
developments.                                                                      UDP                     Regulator
                                                                                   Road MP                 Regulator
                                                                                   SUB                     Regulator
                                                                                   ORTP       OMPO         Implementer
                                                                                   TIP                     Implementer
                                                                                   BPH        DOT          Implementer
Provide improved access and capacity to and from adjacent areas, especially to     CIP
‘Ewa, to the two Honolulu Rail stations in Waipahū in accordance with the adopteOBP        DTS          Implementer
Waipahū Neighborhood TOD Plan, and to the Pearl Highlands Rail Station.           CIP        DDC          Implementer
                                                                                   WNTODP                  Advocate
                                                                                   ZC         DPP          Advocate
                                                                                   LUO                     Regulator
Provide adequate capacity for peak hour commuting to work in the Primary Urban     ORTP       OMPO         Implementer
Center and ‘Ewa. Meet demand for peak-period transportation capacity by increasedTIP
use of transit, and by transportation demand management (improved HOV lane         CIP        DOT          Implementer
service, provision of park-and-ride facilities, and reduction of single occupant              HART         Implementer
automobile traffic).                                                               CIP        DTS          Implementer
                                                                                              DDC
Sec. 4.2   Water Allocation and System Development
Require new development to provide adequate potable and nonpotable water and use   ZC         DPP          Advocate
water efficiency and conservation measures. Require development with large         LUO        DPP          Regulator
landscaped areas, roadway landscaping, or industrial processes to have dual water  Water MP   BWS          Regulator
lines (potable and non-potable) to allow use of non-potable water for irrigation
and other appropriate uses. Encourage water audits and repairs to reduce water     SUB        DPP          Regulator
losses from existing systems.
Sec. 4.1   Transportation Systems
Develop an adequate supply of nonpotable water for irrigation and other suitable   State      CWRM         Regulator
uses in Central O‘ahu. Promote individual rain catchments and large scale storm  Water
water impoundments and treatment systems. Require use of nonpotable water low in   WQP        DOH          Regulator
chlorides and total dissolved solids for irrigation above the Pearl Harbor         OWMP       BWS          Regulator/
aquifer. Request that the State Commission on Water Resource Management consider                           Implementer
all sources of water in making allocation of nonpotable water.                     LID        DPP          Regulator
                                                                                  CIP        ENV          Implementer
                                                                                              DDC          Implementer
                                                                                   SLUBDA     LUC          Regulator
                                                                                              DPP          Advocate
Protect high recharge areas from urban development. Support water infiltration by  Forestry   DLNR         Implementer
replacing non-native species with native trees in forest areas, using best soil    Conserv.   SWCD         Implementer
conservation practices in agricultural areas, and using low impact development     Plan
(LID) practices in urban areas. Manage agricultural and urban lands to protect     WQP        DOH          Regulator
against contamination of the underlying potable aquifers.                          ZC                      Advocate
                                                                                   LUO        DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   LID                     Regulator
Sec. 4.3   Wastewater Treatment
                                                                                   SUB        DPP          Regulator
Require all wastewater produced by new developments in Central O‘ahu to be       BC                      Regulator
connected to a regional or municipal sewer service system.                         SEWER      DPP          Regulator
                                                                                              ENV          Implementer
                                                                                   WP         DOH          Regulator
Where feasible, use recycled water recovered from treated wastewater effluent for  WQP
irrigation and other non-potable water uses where appropriate and approved by the  OWMP       BWS          Regulator/
State Department of Health and Honolulu Board of Water Supply. Promote gray water                          Implementer
reuse for on-site irrigation as allowed by State DOH Gray Water Reuse guidelines              ENV          Implementer
and the Uniform Plumbing Code.                                                     CIP        DPR          Implementer
                                                                                              DDC          Implementer
                                                                                   WP         DOH          Regulator
Locate wastewater treatment plants in areas shown as planned for industrial use    WMBFP      ENV          Implementer
and away from residential areas.                                                   CIP        DDC          Implementer
                                                                                   ZC         DPP          Advocate
                                                                                   LUO                     Regulator
Sec. 4.4   Electric Power Development
                                                                                                           Regulator
Analyze and approve major system improvements based on island-wide studies and     PUC        PUC HECO     Implementer
siting evaluations. Give strong consideration to placing any new transmission      LUO ID/CFD DPP BFS DA   Regulator
lines underground where possible under criteria specified in State law.                                    Regulator
                                                                                                           Implementer
Support efforts to increase the share of energy from clean sources through         BC         DPP          Regulator
increased efficiency and through production of energy from renewable sources.
In approving solar facilities, protect high quality agricultural lands and
maintenance of aquifer recharge, and encourage incorporation of complementary      SUP LUO    DPP          Regulator
agricultural uses, where feasible.
Locate electrical power plants in areas shown as planned for industrial use and    PUC        PUC          Regulator
away from residential areas.                                                                  HECO         Implementer
                                                                                   LUO        DPP          Regulator
Sec. 4.5   Solid Waste Handling and Disposal
                                                                                   SUP        LUC          Regulator
Analyze and approve siting and/or expansion of sanitary landfills based on island-            DPP          Advocate
wide studies and siting evaluations and as recommended by the Department of Health WP         DOH          Regulator
and the Board of Water Supply.                                                     OWMP       BWS          Regulator
                                                                                   SWIMP      ENV          Implementer
For master-planned communities, consult with the Department of Environmental       ZC         DPP          Advocate
Services for how solid waste will be handled, to include estimates of solid waste  LUO        DPP          Regulator
to be generated by the communities, provisions for collection of solid waste, and  SUB
provisions for and encouragement of recycling.                                     SWIMP      ENV          Implementer
Sec. 4.6   Drainage Systems
Design drainage systems to emphasize flood control, minimize non-point source      NPDES      DOH          Regulator
pollution, reduce sedimentation, and retain and/or detain storm water for aquifer  Drain MP                Regulator
recharge and pollution reduction. Use natural and man-made vegetated drainageways  SUB LID    DPP          Regulator
and retention basins as the preferred solution to drainage problems, and use                               Regulator
concrete-lined channels only if there is no other reasonable alternative.          CIP        DFM          Implementer
                                                                                              DDC          Implementer
                                                                                   Drain MP                Regulator
Integrate planned drainage system improvements into the regional open space        SUB        DPP          Regulator
network by allowing recreational use of retention basins, and creating passive                              
recreational areas and pathways for pedestrians and bikers.                        CIP        DFM          Implementer
                                                                                              DDC          Implementer
                                                                                   SLUDBA     LUC          Regulator
                                                                                              DPP          Advocate
                                                                                   Cons.      DLNR         Implementer
Retain the major gulches as flood plains, storm water retention areas, and open    Distr.
space resources. Establish riparian buffer zones along Central O‘ahu streams.    Conserv.   SWCD         Implementer
Identify stream erosion problem areas and develop and maintain erosion control     Plan
projects.                                                                          ZC         DPP          Advocate
                                                                                   LUO Drain               Regulator
                                                                                   MP         DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   SUB                     Regulator
                                                                                   Gen. Flood DLNR         Implementer
                                                                                   PI
                                                                                   River &    USACE        Implementer
Reduce the risk of flooding and improve resilience to impacts of flooding for      Harbor
portions of Waipahū in the 100-year floodway by improvements to channel berms, useWPFPA      O‘ahu RC&D Implementer
of upstream flood retention basins, or other appropriate measures.                            NRCS         Implementer
                                                                                   Drain MP   DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   SUB                     Regulator
                                                                                   CIP        DDC          Implementer
Sec. 4.7   School Facilities
Request DOE to report to DPP if adequate school capacity can be provided as part   SIF        DOE          Implementer
of the project review and approval process, both at the entitlement and permit     ZC         DPP          Advocate
approval stages.                                                                   LUO        DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   SUB                     Regulator
Require developers to comply with DOE school impact fees requirements and/or       SIF        DOE          Implementer
existing UA school impact conditions and pay their fair share of all costs needed  ZC         DPP          Advocate
to provide adequate school facilities for the children living in their             LUO        DPP          Regulator
developments.                                                                      SUB                     Regulator
Design school facilities to facilitate community use during non-school hours and   State CIP  DOE          Implementer
weekends.                                                                                     DPP          Advocate
                                                                                   CIP        DOE          Implementer
Co-locate neighborhood or community parks with elementary and intermediate         ZC         DPP          Advocate
schools, and coordinate designs of facilities with the State DOE when duplication  UDP        DPP          Regulator
of parking and of athletic, recreation, and meeting facilities can be avoided.     SUB                     Regulator
                                                                                   CIP        DPR          Implementer
                                                                                              DDC          Implementer
Sec. 4.8   Public Safety Facilities
                                                                                   CIP        DDC          Implementer
Provide adequate facilities and staffing to ensure public safety and provide fire             BFS          Implementer
protection, police protection, and emergency medical service for existing and new  Op Budget  HFD          Implementer
development.                                                                                  HPD          Implementer
                                                                                              EMS          Implementer
Survey and retrofit, as appropriate, existing Department of Education and other    CIP        HSCD         Implementer
public buildings to make up the shortfall in hurricane resistant shelters. Require                         Implementer
new City buildings which are “critical facilities used for public assembly and   CIP        DDC          Implementer
able to perform as shelters” to be designed and built to withstand a Category 3  BC         DPP          Regulator
hurricane.
                                                                                   CDBG/HOME  DCS          Implementer
Provide incentives for private organizations to create hurricane resistant shelter Op Budget  BFS          Implementer
areas in their facilities and for homes to include hurricane resistant “safe     FEMA
rooms.”                                                                          Hazard     DEM          Implementer
                                                                                   Mitigation
Sec. 4.9   Other Community Facilities
                                                                                   PRU        DPP          Regulator
Locate colleges and hospitals in urban areas near transit stations, commercial     ZC         DPP          Advocate
centers, and high-density residential areas.                                       LUO        DPP          Regulator
                                                                                   SUB                     Regulator
Locate correctional facilities on lands planned for industrial and agricultural    PRU        DPP          Regulator
use. If such a facility is proposed for lands not planned for industrial or
agricultural use, use a City review and approval process which provides public     CIP        DOC          Implementer
review, complete project analysis, and City Council approval.
Encourage co-location of antennas on existing buildings or structures. Use stealth LUO        DPP          Regulator
technology to minimize visual impacts.
 
APPENDIX A: CONCEPTUAL MAPS
This appendix includes the four primary conceptual maps used to illustrate the
vision for Central O‘ahu’s future development. The maps include:
 
                     PAGE
OPEN SPACE           24-521
URBAN LAND USE       24-522
PUBLIC FACILITIES    24-523
DEVELOPMENT CAPACITY 24-524
 
These maps illustrate the long-range vision of the future of the plan area and
the major land use, open space, and public facility policies that are
articulated in the plan. In using these maps, the reader should keep in mind
that:
   1.   These maps are general and conceptual, and are not intended to be used
to determine specific land use boundaries. Such boundaries are to be determined
during the review of specific land use or public facilities investment
decisions, and their exact locations are to be guided by the vision and
policies of this Plan.
   2.   These maps illustrate the Plan’s vision, policies and guidelines that
are presented in Chapters Two, Three, and Four. These policy statements and
guidelines are considered the most important elements of the Plan.
The maps are considered illustrations of the policies and guidelines. However,
the text should be consulted to determine the appropriate application of the
Plan vision, policies, and guidelines for any specific project or location. In
cases of disagreement, the text should prevail over the map depiction.
A brief explanation of the terms used in each of these maps follows.
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Descriptions of elements common to each of the four maps are presented in the
following section. Descriptions of elements specific to each map (A-1 Open
Space, A-2 Land Use, A-3 Public Facilities, and A-4 Development Capacity) are
presented in separate sections for each map which follow the section on Common
Elements.
COMMON ELEMENTS
Agriculture Areas
Lands with agricultural value by virtue of current agricultural use or high
value for future agricultural use, including those areas identified as Prime,
Unique, or Other Important lands on the Agricultural Lands Important to the
State of Hawai‘i (ALISH) maps. “Agriculture” includes lands suitable for crop
growing, grazing and livestock raising, flower cultivation, nurseries,
orchards, aquaculture, or similar activities.
Under the state constitution, the state is to identify important agricultural
lands (IAL). Once identified, these lands cannot be rezoned except under a
“super majority” vote. In 2005, Act 183 was adopted to address this mandate. It
established a two-step process.
   •   The State Legislature would adopt incentives to assure the long term use
and protection of IAL.
   •   The State Legislature would approve adequate funding to allow the
counties to prepare maps identifying IAL lands which would then be adopted by
the State Land Use Commission (LUC).
Act 233, enacted in 2008 adopted the incentive programs.
In 2013, the State LUC, in response to an application from the landowner,
approved IAL designation for over 400 acres of Castle & Cooke lands in Central
O‘ahu.
The City has begun the process of identifying O‘ahu’s IAL to be proposed for
approval by the LUC. Lands identified for agricultural purposes by this plan
are being used as one of the factors considered in the IAL selection process.
Community Growth Boundary
The Community Growth Boundary (called the Urban Community Boundary in the 2002
CO SCP) defines and contains the intended extent of developed or “built up”
areas of urban and urban fringe communities. Its purpose is to provide adequate
land to support established or developing communities while protecting lands
outside this boundary for agriculture or open space values. Areas within this
boundary are generally characterized by extensive tracts of residential,
commercial, industrial, or mixed-use development clearly distinguishable from
undeveloped or more “natural” portions of a region’s environment.
In the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan, the Community Growth
Boundary:
   •   Generally circumscribes the existing communities of Village Park,
Waipahū, Waikele, Gentry Waipi‘o, Mililani, Mililani Mauka, and Wahiawā, and
planned developments of Royal Kunia, Koa Ridge Makai, Waiawa, and Mililani
Technology Park;
   •   Excludes most areas outside of the State Urban District, with the
exception of:
      °   Areas on military bases in urban uses (residential, office,
industrial, and community park/golf course),
      °   A former Castle & Cooke agricultural support area between Whitmore
Village and Wahiawā planned for future development as a packaging and
processing facility and agricultural technology park,
      °   Parts of the proposed Waiawa project,
      °   The Patsy T. Mink Central O‘ahu Regional Park,
      °   Areas on the Waipi‘o Peninsula which are outside the Navy restricted
areas arc around the Joint Base Pearl Harbor - Hickam West Loch Annex; and
      °   Approximately 32 acres of the Waikele Gulch outside of the 100-year
flood plain that are approved for nonconforming industrial uses.
   •   Includes most areas inside the State Urban District, with the exception
of lands on the east side of the Waiawa project which are above the Hydrologic
Zone of Contribution for the Navy Shaft.
Golf Courses
The maps show the locations of existing and proposed public and private golf
courses.
Highways, Arterials, and Major Collector Streets
The maps show the conceptual locations of existing and planned highways,
arterials, and major collector streets.
Parks
The maps show locations of existing public and private parks and recreational
facilities, including regional parks, district parks, shoreline parks, and
nature parks and conceptual locations for planned and proposed parks. Smaller
community-based parks including community parks, neighborhood parks, and mini-
parks are not shown.
Preservation Areas
Preservation lands include those lands not valued primarily for agriculture,
but which form an important part of a region’s open space fabric. They possess
natural, cultural, or scenic resource values, and include important wildlife
habitat, cultural sites, significant landforms, views, or hazard areas. They
include the following types of land:
   •   Land necessary for protecting watersheds, water resources and water
supplies.
   •   Lands necessary for the conservation, preservation and enhancement of
sites with scenic, historic, archaeological or ecological significance.
   •   Lands necessary for providing and preserving park lands, wilderness and
beach reserves, and for conserving natural ecosystems of endemic plants, fish
and wildlife, for forestry, and other activities related to these uses.
   •   Lands with topography, soils, climate or other related environmental
factors that may not be normally adaptable or presently needed for urban, rural
or agricultural use.
   •   Lands with general slopes of 20 percent or more which provide for open
space amenities and/or scenic values.
   •   Lands susceptible to floods and soil erosion, lands undergoing major
erosion damage and requiring corrective attention by the State or Federal
government, and lands necessary to the protection of the health, safety and
welfare of the public by reason of soil instability or the lands’
susceptibility to landslides and/or inundation by tsunami and flooding.
   •   Lands used for national, state, or city parks.
   •   Lands suitable for growing of commercial timber, grazing, hunting, and
recreation uses, including facilities accessory to such uses when said
facilities are compatible with the natural physical environment.
Wetlands
Habitat areas for endangered waterbirds, located on the shoreline of Pearl
Harbor, which are to be protected.
OPEN SPACE MAP
The Open Space Map illustrates the vision for the Central O‘ahu Open Space
Network, and shows the region’s major open space patterns and resources as
outlined in Chapter 3. It highlights major open space elements and resources,
including agricultural and preservation lands, major recreational facilities,
important “panoramic” views, natural stream corridors and drainageways, and
important boundaries.
The Open Space Network consists of large areas of preservation and agricultural
lands outside the Community Growth Boundary and a network of parks, wildlife
habitats, golf courses, agricultural lands, ravines, grass-lined drainageways,
and greenways along utility corridors and major arterials within the Community
Growth Boundary. (See definitions of terms and discussion in Section 2.2 and
Section 3.1.)
Cemetery
The existing Mililani Memorial Park and Mortuary. Cemeteries are a permitted
use in the P-2 General Preservation Zoning District and provide a form of
landscaped open space.
Historic Bikeway Corridor
Part of a continuous shoreline park and greenbelt stretching from West Loch to
Rainbow Marina near Aloha Stadium with a connection to the Waipahū Cultural
Garden Park. The corridor would include a shoreline bike path planned to extend
from Rainbow Marina to Nānākuli.
Kūkaniloko
Kūkaniloko Birthstones, a site where high chiefs were born, is located north of
Wahiawā. It is a State Monument managed and maintained through a partnership
between State Parks, the Hawaiian Civic Club of Wahiawā, and the Friends of
Kūkaniloko.
Lake Wilson
Lake Wilson or Wahiawā Reservoir surrounds Wahiawā on three sides and is the
second largest reservoir in Hawai‘i encompassing 330 acres of surface water. It
was built to irrigate agricultural fields on the North Shore. It is the site of
the Wahiawā Freshwater State Recreation Area providing access to recreational
boating and fishing, jogging paths, and picnic facilities.
Landscaped Boulevard/Greenway
Major arterials and major collector streets which should be developed as
landscaped park ways, complete with a landscaped median strip, landscaped
sidewalk, and bikeways. (See Section 3.9.2).
Military Training Areas
Open space areas used by the military for training purposes.
Natural Drainageways/Gulches
Natural waterways which are to be retained as flood plains and open space
resources and protected from development, disturbance, or channelization except
where absolutely necessary to protect existing urban development from flooding.
Panoramic Views
Significant views and vistas which are to be retained, whenever possible. (See
Exhibit 3.2 and
Table 3.2)
Urban Areas
Areas which have been developed, or are planned for development for
residential, commercial, and industrial uses.
URBAN LAND USE MAP
The Urban Land Use Map illustrates the vision for the foreseeable future for
Central O‘ahu’s land uses within the Community Growth Boundary. It portrays the
vision for revitalization of Waipahū and Wahiawā, for the development of master
planned residential communities, and for creation of new jobs in existing and
planned community shopping centers, and at the Mililani Technology Park. (See
definition of terms and discussion in Chapter 2, and in Chapter 3.)
This map illustrates the desired long-range land use pattern for Central O‘ahu
which should result from implementation of the plan’s vision and policies. The
map includes the following terms:
Airfield
The existing Wheeler Army Airfield near Wahiawā.
Cemetery
The existing Mililani Memorial Park and Mortuary. Cemeteries are a permitted
use in the P-2 General Preservation Zoning District and provide a form of
landscaped open space.
Civic Center
The existing regional centers in Waipahū and Wahiawā with City and State
offices and facilities providing services to all O‘ahu residents.
Commercial Centers
The following commercial designation descriptions summarize the types of
commercial centers within the region. As with the overall approach taken by the
plan, they indicate vision and intent. (For greater detail, see Sec. 3.10.)
   •   Neighborhood Commercial Center - (10 to 5 acres or less in size,
typically located within or adjacent to a residential area, up to 100,000
square feet [sq. ft.] of floor area.) An urban or urban fringe commercial
center cluster of commercial establishments intended for neighborhood service
in urban and urban fringe areas. Uses are typically grocery and sundry stores
and other services or shops catering to common household or neighborhood-level
convenience items. Neighborhood Commercial Centers can be located within any
residential community, and existing and planned locations are not shown on the
Urban Land Use Map.
   •   Community Commercial Center - (10 to 30 acres, typically located on an
arterial highway or at the intersection of two major collector streets, up to
250,000 sq. ft. floor area) An urban or urban fringe commercial center intended
to serve a specific community and its constituent neighborhoods. In addition to
facilities offered by Neighborhood Centers, this type of center often
incorporates “anchor” tenants and includes offices, service industrial
businesses, entertainment facilities, and social centers. Existing and
conceptual planned locations for five Community Commercial Centers are shown on
the Urban Land Use Map.
   •   Major Community Commercial Center - (up to 50 acres, up to 500,000 sq.
ft. floor area). A shopping center intended to serve large planned communities
which are not located near an Urban Center. These centers offer similar
shopping and service opportunities as Community Commercial Centers at greater
variety and large scale. Existing and conceptual planned locations for three
Major Community Commercial Centers are shown on the Urban Land Use Map.
   •   Regional Commercial Center - (more than 50 acres, located with frontage
on a major arterial highway and access from freeway interchange, more than
500,000 sq. ft.) An urban or urban fringe shopping center with major commercial
outlets and a regional or islandwide service area. Only one existing Regional
Shopping Center is shown on the Urban Land Use Map, reflecting the vision and
policies supporting revitalization of Waipahū and Wahiawā and the development
of the Second City in ‘Ewa.
   •   Regional Town Center - The core of an urban fringe town which serves as
a center for shopping, civic activity, and municipal services for its region.
It offers a wide range of shopping and dining opportunities and professional,
business and industrial services. Centers in Waipahū and Wahiawā are the two
Regional Town Centers shown on the Urban Land Use Map.
Correctional Facility
The existing Waiawa Correctional Facility located on the leeward slopes of the
Ko‘olau Range.
High School
Existing high schools (Leilehua High School, Mililani High School, and Waipahū
High School), and a conceptual location for a new high school at Waiawa. The
decision on where students from the Koa Ridge and Waiawa developments will
attend high school prior to construction of the Waiawa high school will be made
by complex administrators in the future.
Hospital
The existing Wahiawā General Hospital and the proposed acute-care hospital to
developed as part of a 28-acre medical center at Koa Ridge.
Industrial
Areas providing facilities for light and service-related industrial uses
associated with repair, processing, construction, manufacturing,
transportation, wholesaling, distribution, storage and similar economic
activities. Industrial areas also include a range of compatible commercial
activities, except where otherwise specified within the text of the Development
and Sustainable Communities Plans. (Areas intended primarily for more
intensive, noxious industrial uses are specified in the text of specific
Development and Sustainable Communities Plans.)
Institutional
Areas providing facilities for public use or benefit, including schools,
meeting facilities, hospitals, group living establishments, utilities and
infrastructure production or support facilities, civic, public, and social
services facilities, and government facilities.
Intermediate/Middle School
Existing intermediate/middle schools (Mililani Middle School, Waipahū
Intermediate School, and Wahiawā Middle School) and a conceptual location for
new middle school at Waiawa.
Military
Lands for military and military support purposes.
Military Training Areas
Open space areas used by the military for training purposes.
Residential Communities
Residential designations displayed on the map indicate the kind of community
that should be developed in the area, rather than the specific land use that
each parcel should have. For instance, an area identified as “Medium Density
Residential/Commercial Mixed Use” may contain minor pockets of “Low Density
Apartment.” See the discussions in Sec. 3.9.3. Terms used on the map include:
   •   Residential - Single-family detached and attached homes or townhouse
units with individual entries.
   •   Low Density Apartment - Low density, low rise, multi-family residences,
including townhouses, stacked flats, or apartment buildings.
   •   Medium Density Apartment - Medium density, low- to mid-rise multifamily
residences which may be in standalone buildings or as part of Medium Density
Apartment / Commercial Mixed Use - Medium density apartment developments with
the ground or lower floors occupied by retail, office, or service commercial
uses.
Technology Park
Facilities intended for light, technology and service-oriented industrial and
business uses, developed in a campus-like setting. Development intensity is
low, while open space and landscaping are the predominant visual and physical
elements.
Transit Node (Medium Density Residential and Commercial)
Center of medium density residential and commercial development located around
a rail transit station along the elevated rail transit corridor connecting
Waipahū with the City of Kapolei to the west and to the Primary Urban Center to
the east. (See Sections 3.6 and 4.1.3.2)
UH Leeward Community College
The existing campus located on Ala ‘Ike Street between Pearl City and Waipahū.
Wastewater Treatment Plant
The existing wastewater treatment plant at Wahiawā.
PUBLIC FACILITIES MAP
The Public Facilities Map illustrates the major infrastructure needed to
implement the vision for Central O‘ahu. It shows the location of existing
facilities and conceptual locations for some of the future required
infrastructure facilities.
The Public Facilities Map and the associated project descriptions in the
Central O‘ahu SCP text are not meant to be amended between revisions of the
Plan and should not be confused with amendments of the Public Infrastructure
Map which are used as part of the approval of projects in the Capital
Improvement Program budget process.
Major public facilities which are to be funded through the City’s Capital
Improvement Program budget appropriation must be shown on the Public
Infrastructure Map (PIM). The PIM is not part of the Central O‘ahu SCP and is
adopted and amended by resolution.
Projects which are not listed in the Central O‘ahu SCP or are not shown on the
Central O‘ahu SCP maps can still be added to the Public Infrastructure Map by
Council resolution if the Council finds them to be consistent with the vision
and policies of the Central O‘ahu SCP.
(For definitions, information about existing and planned public facilities, and
functional planning processes, see Chapter 4 and Sec. 5.3 in Chapter 5.)
For Central O‘ahu, terms on the Public Facilities Map include:
Agricultural Industry and Technology Park
Proposed agricultural support area adjacent to Whitmore Village providing
access to food safety, packaging and processing facilities, office space, and
agricultural technology support and development.
Agricultural Park
Land set aside to provide farm lots to small farmers at reasonable cost with
long-term tenure. Areas shown on the Public Facilities Map includes the 150
acre State Agricultural Park under development near Royal Kunia, the 182 acre
Kunia Ag Park operated by the Hawai‘i Agricultural Foundation, 580 acres
adjacent to Schofield Barracks and Wheeler Army Air Fields and 1,200 acres of
former Galbraith lands which are available for farming leases from the State
Agribusiness Development Corporation, and 500 acres around Kukaniloko, some
portion ofwhich may be available in the future for farming leases from the
Office of Hawaiian Affairs.
Airfield
The existing Wheeler Army Airfield near Wahiawā.
Bike Lane
A biking facility (bikeway) which is a four to six-foot lane exclusively for
bike use which is included in a roadway.
Bike Path
A biking facility (bikeway) which is separate from the roadway network.
Civic Center
The existing regional centers in Waipahū and Wahiawā with City and State
offices and facilities providing services to all O‘ahu residents.
Corporation Yard
The two existing City facilities for storage, maintenance, and repair of
vehicles and equipment in Wahiawā.
Correctional Facility
The existing Waiawa Correctional Facility located on the leeward slopes of the
Ko‘olau Range.
First Responder Technology Campus
The 150-acre area where a campus is proposed for federal, State, and City first
responder training and operational facilities. Facilities may include rescue
and rappel towers, a firing range, a driving course, and tactical training
buildings. The site was formerly known as the Mililani Technology Park Phase
II.
Grade Separated Interchange
Existing interchanges at Kunia Road and H-1 Freeway, Kunia Road and Farrington
Highway, Paiwa and H-1 Freeway, Waiawa (H-1 Freeway and H-2 Freeway), Ka Uka
Boulevard and H-2 Freeway, Meheula Parkway and H-2 Freeway, and Kamehameha
Highway and H-2 by Wahiawa and proposed interchanges at Pineapple Road and H-
2 Freeway and at a location on H-2 Freeway between Ka Uka Boulevard and the
Waiawa Interchange.
High School
Existing high schools (Leilehua High School, Mililani High School, and Waipahū
High School), and a conceptual location for a new high school at Waiawa. The
decision on where students from the Koa Ridge and Waiawa developments will
attend high school prior to construction of the Waiawa high school will be made
by complex administrators in the future.
HOV (High Occupancy Vehicle) Lane
An exclusive lane on a roadway reserved for transit and vehicles with more than
one occupant, and which is developed to improve transit speed and to provide
incentives for commuters to opt for mass transit or carpooling.
Historic Bikeway Corridor
Part of a continuous shoreline park and greenbelt stretching from West Loch to
Rainbow Marina near Aloha Stadium with a connection to the Waipahū Cultural
Garden Park. The corridor would include a shoreline bike path planned to extend
from Rainbow Marina to Nānākuli.
Hospital
The existing Wahiawā General Hospital and the proposed acute-care hospital to
be developed as part of a 28-acre medical center at Koa Ridge.
Intermediate/Middle School
Existing intermediate/middle schools (Mililani Middle School, Waipahū
Intermediate School, and Wahiawā Middle School) and a conceptual location for a
new middle school at Waiawa.
Park & Ride Site
Special parking lots where commuters park their cars and continue their commute
by mass transit.
Transit Corridor
The area along the route of the rapid transit system which is appropriate for
establishing communities that can reduce or eliminate automobile use because
they have access to high speed mass transit for long trips and because it is
easy to walk or bike to nearby areas. Areas along the corridor within easy
walking distance to rail stations will be supported for medium-density
residential and commercial development to support efficient operation of buses
and rail mass transit on the corridor.
Transit Node (Medium Density Residential and Commercial)
Center of medium density residential and commercial development located around
a rail transit station along the elevated rail transit corridor connecting
Waipahū with the City of Kapolei to the west and to the Primary Urban Center to
the east. (See Sections 3.6 and 4.1.3.2)
UH Leeward Community College
The existing campus located on Ala ‘Ike Street between Pearl City and Waipahū.
Urban Areas
Areas which have been developed, or are planned for development for
residential, commercial, and industrial uses.
Wastewater Treatment Plant
The existing wastewater treatment plant at Wahiawā.
DEVELOPMENT CAPACITY MAP
The Development Capacity Map shows where urban development has already occurred
in Central O‘ahu, where new development will take place within the Community
Growth Boundary, and the two areas in Central O‘ahu that have Special Area
Plans (Wahiawā and Waipahū).
Terms on the Development Capacity Map which are not common to all of the maps
include:
Existing Urban Areas
Areas which already have been developed for residential, retail, office,
institutional, or industrial uses. Growth in such areas can occur through re-
development or in-fill.
Military Training Areas
Open space areas used by the military for training purposes.
Special Areas
Special areas are areas which require more detailed planning than can be
provided in a Development Plan (See Section 5.2). Wahiawā and Waipahū are the
only areas in Central O‘ahu currently designated as Special Area Plan areas.
Special Area Plans for the two communities include:
   •   The Waipahū Town Plan (December 1995);
   •   The Waipahū Livable Communities Initiative (May 1998);
   •   The Wahiawā Urban Design Plan (January 1998).
Transit Corridor
The area along the route of the rapid transit system which is appropriate for
establishing communities that can reduce or eliminate automobile use because
they have access to high speed mass transit for long trips and because it is
easy to walk or bike to nearby areas. Areas along the corridor within easy
walking distance to rail stations will be supported for medium-density
residential and commercial development to support efficient operation of buses
and rail mass transit on the corridor.
Transit Node (Medium Density Residential and Commercial)
Center of medium density residential and commercial development located around
a rail transit station along the elevated rail transit corridor connecting
Waipahū with the City of Kapolei to the west and to the Primary Urban Center to
the east. (See Sections 3.6 and 4.1.3.2)
Urban Expansion Areas
Undeveloped areas formerly in agricultural uses which are either already
approved or will be considered for approval for development for residential,
retail, office, institutional, or industrial uses.
Applications for zone changes and other development approvals needed for new
urban development in the Urban Expansion Area will be accepted for processing,
and will be supported for approval if the project supports the vision and
implementing policies of the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan and if
adequate infrastructure can be provided. (See Sections 2.2.10, 5.1.2, and 5.3.)
Total acreage as of July 2014 was estimated at over 2,100 acres with capacity
for development of almost 24,000 housing units. (See
Table 2.1.)
   Map A-1: Open Space Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9423.png]
 
   Map A-2: Urban Land Use Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9421.png]
 
   Map A-3: Public Facilities Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9419.png]
 
   Map A-4: Development Capacity Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9417.png]
 
ARTICLE 6: KOOLAU POKO
Sections
   
24-6.1   Definitions
   
24-6.2   Applicability and intent
   
24-6.3   Adoption of the Koolau Poko sustainable communities plan
   
24-6.4   Existing zoning and subdivision ordinances, approvals, and
applications
   
24-6.5   Consistency
   
24-6.6   Review of development and other applications
   
24-6.7   Zoning change applications
   
24-6.8   Annual capital improvement program review
   
24-6.9   Five-year review
   
24-6.10   Authority
   
24-6.11   Severability
   
24-6.12   Conflicting provisions
§ 24-6.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Charter. The Revised Charter of the City and County of Honolulu.
City. The City and County of Honolulu.
City Council or Council. The council of the City and County of Honolulu.
County. The City and County of Honolulu.
Department or Department of Planning and Permitting. The department of planning
and permitting of the City and County of Honolulu.
Development. Any public improvement project, or any public or private project
requiring a zoning map amendment.
Development Plan or Sustainable Communities Plan. A plan document for a given
geographic area that consists of conceptual schemes for implementing and
accomplishing the development objectives and policies of the general plan for
the several parts of the City and County of Honolulu.
Director. The director of planning and permitting.
Environmental Assessment or EA. A written evaluation prepared in compliance
with the environmental council’s procedural rules implementing HRS Chapter 343
to determine whether an action may have a significant environmental effect.
Environmental Impact Statement or EIS. An informational document prepared in
compliance with the environmental council’s procedural rules implementing HRS
Chapter 343; and which discloses the environmental effects of a proposed
action, effects of a proposed action on the economic and social welfare of the
community and State, effects of the economic activities arising out of the
proposed action, measures proposed to minimize adverse effects, and
alternatives to the action and their environmental effects.
Finding of No Significant Impact or FONSI. A determination based on an
environmental assessment that the subject action will not have a significant
effect and, therefore, will not require the preparation of an environmental
impact statement.
Functional Plan. The public facility and infrastructure plans prepared by
public agencies to further implement the vision, policies, and guidelines set
forth in the Koolau Poko Sustainable Communities Plan.
General Plan. The general plan of the City and County of Honolulu as defined by
Charter § 6-1508.
Hawaii Revised Statutes or HRS. Hawaii Revised Statutes, as amended.
Koolau Poko SCP. The Koolau Poko Sustainable Communities Plan attached hereto
as Exhibit A and made a part hereof.
Planning Commission. The planning commission of the City and County of
Honolulu.
Project Master Plan. A conceptual plan that covers all phases of a development
project. The “project master plan” describes how the project conforms to the
vision for Koolau Poko, and the relevant policies and guidelines for the site,
the surrounding lands, and the region.
Significant Zone Change. A zone change that involves at least one of the
following:
   (A)   Changes in zoning of 10 or more acres of land to any zoning district
or combination of zoning districts, excluding preservation or agricultural
zoning districts;
   (B)   Any change in zoning of more than five acres to an apartment, resort,
commercial, industrial, or mixed use zoning district; or
   (C)   Any development that would have a major social, environmental, or
policy impact, or major cumulative impacts due to a series of applications in
the same area.
Special Area. A designated area within the Koolau Poko SCP area that requires
more detailed planning efforts beyond what is contained in the Koolau Poko SCP.
Special Area Plan. A plan for a special area.
Unilateral Agreement. A conditional zoning agreement made pursuant to §
21-2.80 or any predecessor provision that imposes conditions on a landowner or
developer’s use of the property at the time of the enactment of an ordinance
for a zone change.
Vision. The future outlook for the Koolau Poko region extending out to the year
2035 and beyond that seek to adapt the concept of ahupuaa in land use
management; preserve the region’s scenic, recreational, and cultural features;
protect and enhance residential character, and existing commercial and civic
districts; and retain the community growth boundary to protect agricultural,
open space, and natural resources.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.1) (Ord. 17-42)
§ 24-6.2 Applicability and intent.
(a)   The Koolau Poko SCP area encompasses the windward coastal and valley
areas of Oahu from Makapuu Point to Kaoio Point at the northern end of Kaneohe
Bay, and is bound by the Koolau mountain range and the sea. It includes the
rural communities of Waiahole, Waikane, Kahaluu, Heeia, and Waimanalo and the
urban fringe communities of Ahuimanu, Kaneohe, and Kailua.
(b)   The Koolau Poko SCP is intended to provide a guide for orderly and
coordinated public and private sector development in a manner that is
consistent with applicable general plan provisions, recognizing the region’s
urban fringe and rural areas as areas where growth will be managed to prevent
an undesirable spreading of development.
(c)   This article and the Koolau Poko SCP are not regulatory. Rather, they are
established with the explicit intent of providing a coherent vision to guide
all new public and private sector development within Koolau Poko. This article
will guide public investment in infrastructure, zoning, and other regulatory
procedures, and the preparation of the city’s annual capital improvement
program budget.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.2) (Ord. 17-42)
§ 24-6.3 Adoption of the Koolau Poko sustainable communities plan.
(a)   This article is adopted pursuant to Charter § 6-1509 and provides a self-
contained development plan document for Koolau Poko. Upon enactment of this
article, all proposed developments will be evaluated against how well they
fulfill the vision for Koolau Poko enunciated in the Koolau Poko SCP and how
closely they meet the policies and guidelines selected to implement that
vision.
(b)   The plan entitled, “Koolau Poko Sustainable Communities Plan,” attached
as Exhibit A is adopted by reference and made a part of this article.
(c)   
Chapter 24, Article 1, entitled “Development Plan Common Provisions,” in its
entirety is no longer applicable to the Koolau Poko SCP area. This article and
the Koolau Poko SCP, as adopted by reference by this ordinance, supersede any
and all common provisions previously applicable to the Koolau Poko SCP area.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.3) (Ord. 17-42)
§ 24-6.4 Existing zoning and subdivision ordinances, approvals, and
applications.
(a)   All existing subdivisions and zoning approved before August 24, 2017*
continue to remain in effect following August 24, 2017*.
(b)   Subdivision and zoning ordinances applicable to the Koolau Poko SCP area
enacted before August 24, 2017* continue to regulate the use of land within
demarcated zones of the Koolau Poko SCP area until such time as the subdivision
and zoning ordinances may be amended to be consistent with the Koolau Poko SCP.
(c)   Notwithstanding adoption of the revised Koolau Poko SCP, applications for
subdivision actions and land use permits accepted by the department for
processing before August 24, 2017* continue to be subject only to applicable
ordinances and rules in effect when the application is accepted for processing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.4) (Ord. 17-42)
Editor’s note:
   * “August 24, 2017” is substituted for “the effective date of this
ordinance” and “enactment of this ordinance.”
§ 24-6.5 Consistency.
(a)   The performance of prescribed powers, duties, and functions by all city
agencies shall conform to and implement the policies and provisions of this
article and the Koolau Poko SCP. Pursuant to Charter § 6-1511.3, public
improvement projects and subdivision and zoning ordinances must be consistent
with the Koolau Poko SCP, as adopted.
(b)   The council shall ultimately resolve any questions of interpretation
regarding the consistency of a proposed development with the Koolau Poko SCP
and the objectives and policies of the general plan.
(c)   In determining whether a proposed development is consistent with the
Koolau Poko SCP, the responsible agency shall primarily take into consideration
the extent to which the development is consistent with the vision, policies,
and guidelines set forth in the Koolau Poko SCP.
(d)   Whenever there is a question regarding consistency between existing
subdivision or zoning ordinances, including any unilateral agreement, and the
Koolau Poko SCP, the existing subdivision or zoning ordinances will prevail
until such time as they may be amended to be consistent with the Koolau Poko
SCP.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.5) (Ord. 17-42)
§ 24-6.6 Review of development and other applications.
   The review of applications for zone changes and other development approvals
will be guided by the vision of the Koolau Poko SCP. Decisions on all proposed
developments will be based on the extent to which the project enabled by the
development approval supports the policies and guidelines of the Koolau Poko
SCP.
   The director may review other applications for improvements to land to help
the responsible agency determine whether a proposed improvement supports the
policies and guidelines of the Koolau Poko SCP.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.6) (Ord. 17-42)
§ 24-6.7 Zoning change applications.
(a)   All zone change applications relating to land in the Koolau Poko SCP area
will be reviewed by the department of planning and permitting for consistency
with the general plan, the Koolau Poko SCP, and any applicable special area
plan.
(1)   The director shall recommend either approval, approval with changes, or
denial. The director’s written review of the application will become part of
the zone change report that will be sent to the planning commission and the
city council.
(2)   A project master plan must be part of an EA or EIS for any project
involving 10 acres or more of land. The director shall review the project
master plan for its consistency with the Koolau Poko SCP.
(3)   Any development or phase of development already covered by a project
master plan that has been fully reviewed under this article will not require a
new project master plan; provided that the director determines that the
proposed zone change is generally consistent with the existing project master
plan for the affected area.
(4)   If a final EIS has already been accepted for a development, including one
accepted before August 24, 2017*, then a subsequent project master plan will
not be required for the development.
(b)   Projects that involve a significant zone change will be required to
submit an EA to the department of planning and permitting before an application
for a zone change being accepted. Any development or phase of a development
that has already been assessed under the National Environmental Policy Act
(NEPA), HRS Chapter 343 (Hawaii Environmental Policy Act, HEPA), ROH
Chapter 25, or this article, and for which a FONSI has been filed or a required
EIS has been accepted, will not be subject to further EA or EIS requirements
under this chapter, unless otherwise required by NEPA or HEPA.
(c)   The department shall review the EA. Based on review of the EA, the
director shall determine whether an EIS will be required or whether a FONSI may
be issued.
(d)   If an EIS is required, the EIS must be accepted by the director before a
zone change application may be initiated.
(e)   Zone changes must be processed in accordance with this section, Section
5.6 of the Koolau Poko SCP, and
Chapter 21.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.7) (Ord. 17-42)
Editor’s note:
   * “August 24, 2017” is substituted for “the effective date of this
ordinance” and “enactment of this ordinance.”
§ 24-6.8 Annual capital improvement program review.
   Annually, the director shall work jointly with the director of budget and
fiscal services and the city agencies to review all projects in the city’s
capital improvement program and budget for compliance and consistency with the
general plan, the Koolau Poko SCP and other development plans, any applicable
special area plan provisions, and the appropriate functional plans. The
director of planning and permitting shall prepare a written report of findings
to be submitted to the council in accordance with Charter § 6-1503.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.8) (Ord. 17-42)
§ 24-6.9 Five-year review.
(a)   The department of planning and permitting shall conduct a comprehensive
review of the Koolau Poko SCP, adopted by reference in §
24-6.3(b), every five years after the plan’s adoption and shall report its
findings and recommended revisions to the council.
(b)   The Koolau Poko SCP will be evaluated to assess the appropriateness of
the plan’s regional vision, policies, guidelines, and implementing actions, as
well as its consistency with the general plan.
(c)   Nothing in this section prohibits the processing of a revision to the
Koolau Poko SCP in the event either the biennial report of the director of
planning and permitting or council recommends consideration of such a revision,
pursuant to the Charter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.9) (Ord. 17-42)
§ 24-6.10 Authority.
   Nothing in this article may be construed as an abridgement or delegation of
the responsibility of the director, or of the inherent legislative power of the
council, to review or revise the Koolau Poko SCP pursuant to the Charter and
the above procedures.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.10) (Ord. 17-42)
§ 24-6.11 Severability.
   If this article or the application thereof to any person or property or
circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity will not affect other provisions
or applications of this article that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are
declared to be severable.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.11) (Ord. 17-42)
§ 24-6.12 Conflicting provisions.
   This article will prevail should there be any conflict with the common
provisions or any other provisions under
Chapter 24.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.12) (Ord. 17-42)
KO'OLAU POKO SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8569.png]
LIST OF ACRONYMS
ADA   Americans with Disabilities Act
ALISH   Agricultural Lands of Importance to the State of Hawai’i
AFS   Air Force Station
BFS   Department of Budget and Fiscal Services
BLDG   Building Code and/or Fire Code
BLNR   State Board of Land and Natural Resources
BMPs   Best Management Practices
BPNAS   Barbers Point Naval Air Station
BWS   Board of Water Supply
CBO   Community-Based Organization (non-profits serving various purposes)
CGB   Community Growth Boundary
CIP      Capital Improvement Program
CWRM   Commission on Water Resource Management
CZM   Coastal Zone Management
DAGS   State Department of Accounting and General Services
DBEDT   State Department of Business, Economic Development and Tourism
DCS   Department of Customer Services
DDC   Department of Design and Construction
DEM   Department of Emergency Management
DES   Department of Emergency Services
DFM   Department of Facility Maintenance
DHHL   State Department of Hawaiian Home Lands
DLNR   State Department of Land and Natural Resources
DOA   State Department of Agriculture
DOE   State Department of Education
DOH   State Department of Health
DOT   State Department of Transportation
DPP   Department of Planning and Permitting
DPR   Department of Parks and Recreation
DTS   Department of Transportation Services
EA      Environmental Assessment
EIS      Environmental Impact Statement
ENT   Department of Enterprise Services
ENV   Department of Environmental Services
FCC   Federal Communications Commission
FED   Federal Government Agency (other than military)
HFD   Honolulu Fire Department
HPD   Honolulu Police Department
HPHA   Hawaii Public Housing Authority
HRS   Hawaii Revised Statutes
IAL      Important Agricultural Lands
INF      Infrastructure System Plan (e.g., for regional wastewater, water,
transportation systems)
KPWMP   Koolau Poko Watershed Management Plan
LUC   State Land Use Commission
LUO   Land Use Ordinance
mgd   million gallons per day
MCB Hawai’i   Marine Corps Base Hawaii
MCTAB   Marine Corps Training Area Bellows
MIL   Branch of the U.S. Military
OED   City Office of Economic Development
OMPO   O’ahu Metropolitan Planning Organization
OPS   Operations
PHS   Public Health Standards (e.g., for noise, sanitation, occupational
safety)
PRIV   Private Landowner or Developer
PUC   Public Utilities Commission
RF      radio frequency
SAP   Special Area Plan (e.g., for local towns, circulation, parks, beach
management)
SCPA   Sustainable Communities Plan Area
SHPD   State Historic Preservation Division
SR&R   Subdivision Rules and Regulations (including street standards and
planned widenings)
SWM   Stormwater Management Standards
TAX   Tax-Related Legislation, Rules or Practices
TBD   To Be Determined
TDM   Transportation Demand Management
UH      University of Hawaii
USFWS   U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
UTIL   Utility Company (i.e., Hawaiian Electric, Hawaiian Telephone, Oceanic
Cable, other communications providers)
WCDP   Windward Capital District Plan
WWPS   wastewater pump station
WWTP   wastewater treatment plant
WWTPF   wastewater preliminary treatment facility
PREFACE
The Koolau Poko Sustainable Communities Plan has been prepared in accordance
with the Charter-prescribed requirements for Development Plans and is to be
accorded force and effect as such for all Charter- and ordinance-prescribed
purposes. It is one of eight community-oriented plans intended to help guide
public policy, investment, and decision-making through the 2035 planning
horizon. Each of these eight plans addresses one of eight geographic planning
regions on Oahu, responding to the specific conditions and community values of
each region.
Two of the eight planning regions, ‘Ewa and the Primary Urban Center, are the
areas to which major growth in population and economic activity will be
directed over the next 20 years and beyond. The plans for these regions
continue to be titled “Development Plans” and will serve as the policy guides
for the development decisions and actions required to support that growth.
The remaining six planning regions, including Koolau Poko, are envisioned to
remain relatively stable. The plans for those regions have been titled
“Sustainable Communities Plans” and are focused on serving as policy guides for
public actions in support of that goal. The vision statement and supporting
provisions of the Koolau Poko Sustainable Communities Plan are oriented toward
maintaining and enhancing the region’s ability to sustain its unique character
and lifestyle.
P.1   THE SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN PROCESS
This document is the culmination of a planning effort led by the City and
County of Honolulu’s department of planning and permitting. This effort
comprised a process that encouraged and enabled significant involvement from
the community. In its final form, this Plan will have considered input received
from various community members and organizations, three community-wide
meetings, four focus group meetings, and interested government agencies.
P.2   THE HONOLULU LAND USE PLANNING AND MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
The City and County of Honolulu guides and directs land use and growth through
a three-tier system of objectives, policies, planning principles, guidelines
and regulations. The General Plan forms the first tier of this system. First
adopted by resolution in 1977, the General Plan is a relatively brief document,
providing a broad statement of objectives and policies to guide the City’s
future. It has been amended several times, but the basic objectives and
policies set forth in the 1977 plan remain intact.
The second tier of the system is formed by the Development Plans, which are
adopted and revised by ordinance and are required to implement objectives and
policies set forth in the General Plan. These plans address eight geographic
regions of the island: the Primary Urban Center, East Honolulu, Central Oahu,
‘Ewa, Waianae, North Shore, Koolau Loa, and Koolau Poko. The Koolau Poko
Development Plan was first adopted in 1983. The Development Plans for East
Honolulu, Central Oahu, Waianae, North Shore, Koolau Loa, and Koolau Poko are
now referred to as Sustainable Communities Plans.
The third tier of the system is composed of the implementing ordinances,
including the Land Use Ordinance (Honolulu’s zoning code) and the City’s
Capital Improvement Program. Mandated by the City Charter, these ordinances
constitute the principal means for implementing the City’s plans. These
ordinances are required to be consistent with, and carry out the purposes of,
the General Plan, the Development Plans (or Sustainable Communities Plans), and
each other.
In addition to these three Charter-mandated tiers, the Development Plans are
supplemented by two planning mechanisms that are not required by the Charter,
including the functional planning process and special area planning. Functional
planning activities, some of which are mandated by state or federal
regulations, provide long-range guidance for the development of public
facilities, such as the water system, wastewater disposal, and transportation.
Special area plans are intended to give specific guidance for neighborhoods,
communities, or specialized resources.
P.3   AUTHORITY OF THE DEVELOPMENT PLANS AND SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLANS
The authority for the Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans
(hereinafter referred to as “Development Plans” for simplicity) is derived from
the City Charter, which mandates preparation of a General Plan and Development
Plans to guide “the development and improvement of the city.” Together with the
General Plan, the Development Plans provide policy guidance for the land use
and budgetary actions of the City.
The Charter provides that “public improvement projects and subdivision and
zoning ordinances shall be consistent with the development plan for that area.”
Although the Development Plans are not themselves regulatory and require
implementing ordinances (the “third tier” discussed in Section P.2 above), they
guide the regulators and decision- makers who are the implementers. They are
policy tools and are to be used, in conjunction with the programs and budgets
of the City, to accomplish the objectives of the City and as guides for
decisions made by the private sector. Consistent with the Charter’s description
of the Development Plans as “conceptual schemes” and “a policy guide,” the
language, maps, and illustrations of the Development Plans should not be
regulatory.
P.4   1992 CHARTER AMENDMENT TO REVISE THE DEVELOPMENT PLANS
In 1992, the City Charter Commission recommended, and the voters of Honolulu
adopted, amendments to the City Charter. Chief among its findings, the Charter
Commission concluded that the Development Plans were overly detailed and had
created processes that duplicated the zoning process. To eliminate this
unnecessary duplication, the 1992 Charter amendments changed the definition of
Development Plans from “relatively detailed plans” to “conceptual schemes.”
The 1992 Charter amendments established that the purpose of the Development
Plans is to provide:
   ·   “priorities…(for the) coordination of major development activities;” and
   ·   sufficient description of the “desired urban character and the
significant natural, scenic and cultural resources…to serve as a policy guide
for more detailed zoning maps and regulations and public and private sector
investment decisions.”
In response to the 1992 Charter amendments, the planning and permitting
department launched a thorough review of the Development Plans. The goal of
that review was the revision of all eight of the Development Plans to bring
them into conformance with the Charter-mandated conceptual orientation. The
Plan presented in this document conforms to that mandate.
P.5   SUSTAINABILITY
There has been a recent surge in wide-spread community discussions, actions,
and laws to address sustainability. In 2005, the State Legislature convened a
state-wide group to draft a Hawaii 2050 Plan, whose primary purpose is to
provide policy recommendations for creating a sustainable Hawaii. In 2007,
greenhouse gas emissions goals for 2020 were enacted. Public service
announcements dealing with conserving water and electricity abound. The concept
of buildings that are designed, built and occupied with environmental
considerations at the forefront largely did not exist when the current
Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans were first adopted. This
setting raises the question of the role of the Development Plans and
Sustainable Communities Plans. Are they the City’s version of a sustainability
plan?
The answer is that they are the land development portion of a larger blueprint
for sustainability. As discussed below, the General Plan sets long term goals
for the City and County of Honolulu, across 11 major elements. Perhaps its most
substantive chapter deals with population, and hence land development. It sets
the growth management strategy for Oahu. The Development Plans and Sustainable
Communities Plans provide more detail on this land management strategy,
assuring that how we use the land now, and in the future, responds to the three
major elements of a sustainable place: economic health, social equity, and
environmental protection.
The issues addressed either directly or indirectly by these regional plans
certainly overlap with other planning responsibilities of other departments,
such as water delivery and consumption, crime reduction, increasing public
health, and developing responsive transportation systems. Collectively, these
efforts comprise the strategy of developing a sustainable future for Oahu.
P.6   INTEGRATING PRINCIPLES OF SUSTAINABILITY INTO DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES
A community that can successfully manage change will flourish and prosper in
the future. For this Plan, this means ensuring that planned growth and
development respects and adheres to the principles of sustainability.
The following principles of sustainability are intended to promote the long-
term health of Oahu, its people, and its community resources for current and
future generations:
   ·   Protect agricultural lands, physical, and biological resources, and
where appropriate, open spaces and view planes.
   ·   Use resources so they are not depleted, permanently damaged, or
destroyed.
   ·   Require planning, development, and construction technologies that
minimize negative environmental impacts.
   ·   Respect the cultural, social, and physical resources that shape and
reinforce residents’ sense of community and quality of life.
   ·   Guide the process of change. Strive to make decisions based on an
understanding of the effects such decision will have on the land and community
resources.
   ·   Strive for balance between economic prosperity, social and community
well-being, and environmental stewardship.
   ·   As an integral part of the planning process, consider the long-term
impact of proposed actions and prepare plans that can accommodate the needs of
future generations accordingly.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This Plan is organized in five chapters and an appendix, as follows:
   ·   Chapter 1: Koolau Poko’s Role in Oahu’s Development Pattern defines the
region’s role and identity within the overall framework of islandwide planning
and land use management.
   ·   Chapter 2: The Vision For Koolau Poko’s Future describes the vision for
the future of the region and lists important elements of that vision.
   ·   Chapter 3: Land Use Policies and Guidelines presents the Plan’s
policies, and provides policy guidance for the region’s various land use
elements.
   ·   Chapter 4: Public Facilities and Infrastructure Policies presents
policies and actions needed to support the land use policies of Chapter 3.
   ·   Chapter 5: Implementation addresses needs for carrying out provisions
outlined by the Plan.
The key recommendations contained in each chapter are briefly summarized in
Sections E.1 through E.5:
E.1   CHAPTER 1: KOOLAU POKO’S ROLE IN OAHU’S DEVELOPMENT PATTERN
In carrying out the purposes of the General Plan, Koolau Poko is expected to
experience essentially no growth over the 25 year projection horizon of this
Plan. Policies in support of this goal limit the potential for expansion of the
region’s housing stock, commercial centers and economic activity, and are
focused on maintaining the patterns of development characteristics of its urban
fringe and rural areas.
E.2   CHAPTER 2: THE VISION FOR KOOLAU POKO’S FUTURE
This vision is shaped around two principal concepts. The first of these calls
for protection of the communities’ natural, scenic, cultural, historic and
agricultural resources. The second principal concept addresses the need to
improve and replace, as necessary, the region’s aging infrastructure systems.
E.3   CHAPTER 3: LAND USE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
This chapter presents policies and guidelines for the principal types of land
uses in Koolau Poko. The vision for Koolau Poko’s future described in Chapter 2
is to be implemented through the application of these policies and guidelines.
Policies related to each land use type are:
E.3.1    OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION:
   ·   Protect scenic views, provide recreation and promote access to shoreline
and mountain areas.
   ·   Define the boundaries of communities and provide buffers between
agricultural uses, residential neighborhoods and other uses.
   ·   Create a system of linear greenways along roadways and drainage ways.
E.3.2    PARKS AND RECREATION:
   ·   Employ appropriate screening and siting.
   ·   Ensure environmental compatibility in the design and construction of
park facilities.
   ·   Integrate recreational opportunities with the characteristics of the
surrounding community.
   ·   Establish the Kāneohe area as the top priority for creating new
shoreline access and beach parks in Koolau Poko.
   ·   Take steps to make future beach accretion public land in perpetuity.
   ·   Increase the inventory of community-based parks to provide appropriately
located sports and recreation facilities.
   ·   Provide for more intensive use of some existing facilities serving areas
in which expansion of site area is constrained.
   ·   Require developers of new residential projects to provide land for open
space and recreation purposes, rather than paying the park dedication fee.
   ·   Pursue installation of greenways along streams and drainage channels
where feasible.
E.3.3    HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES:
   ·   Emphasize physical references to Koolau Poko’s history and cultural
roots.
   ·   Protect existing visual landmarks and support creation of new,
culturally appropriate landmarks.
   ·   Preserve significant historic features.
   ·   Retain significant vistas associated with archaeological features.
E.3.4    AGRICULTURE:
   ·   Encourage small-lot agricultural uses and prevent conversion of
agricultural lands to non-agricultural uses.
   ·   Adopt development and public works standards that are appropriate and
cost-effective for rural, agricultural areas.
   ·   Provide supporting infrastructure, services and facilities to foster and
sustain agricultural operations.
   ·   Implement policies and incentives to promote active, long-term
agricultural uses.
E.3.5    RESIDENTIAL USES:
   ·   Modify residential street design to provide emphasis on safe,
accessible, convenient and comfortable pedestrian routes, bus stops and bike
routes.
   ·   Maintain the predominantly low-rise, low-density, single-family
character of the region.
   ·   Protect the integrity of existing residential neighborhoods.
   ·   Establish average density guidelines of 2-6 units maximum per acre in
urban fringe areas and 0.2 - 4 units per acre in rural areas.
E.3.6    COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES:
   ·   Identify and define commercial and industrial uses in various categories
appropriate to the character and needs of Koolau Poko’s communities, including:
rural commercial centers; suburban commercial centers; community commercial
centers; regional town centers; and areas supporting light and extractive
industries.
   ·   Limit the area devoted to commercial and industrial centers to current
sites.
   ·   Expand the use of mixed-use commercial-residential designations, and
apply mixed-use industrial- commercial designations to existing industrial
sites in Kailua and Kāneohe.
E.3.7    INSTITUTIONAL USES:
   ·   Retain the open space character of existing institutional campuses.
   ·   Site and design campus facilities to respect the scenic context and
adjacent residential areas.
E.3.8    MILITARY USES:
   ·   Assume Marine Corps Base Hawai’i (MCB Hawaii) and Bellows Air Force
Station (AFS) will remain under military control.
   ·   Encourage the State to continue to pursue the release of unused military
lands for civilian uses, with special attention to securing permanent civilian
use of all Bellows shorefront areas and provision of greater civilian shoreline
access at MCB Hawaii.
E.4    CHAPTER 4: PUBLIC FACILITIES AND INFRASTRUCTURE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
This chapter presents policies and guidelines for the major concerns related to
public facilities and infrastructure in Koolau Poko. Policies related to each
facility type are summarized below:
E.4.1    TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS:
   ·   Reduce reliance on the private passenger vehicle by promoting
transportation system management and travel demand management measures for both
commuting and local trips.
   ·   Provide adequate and improved mobility between communities, shopping,
and recreation centers by enhancing all forms of travel including pedestrian,
bicycle, transit, and personal mobility vehicle.
   ·   Maintain adequate capacities for peak-period commuting to and from the
Primary Urban Center.
E.4.2    WATER SYSTEMS:
   ·   Integrate management of all potable and nonpotable water sources,
including groundwater, stream water, storm water, and effluent, following State
and City legislative mandates.
   ·   To protect watersheds, retain existing acreage that is designated
Preservation in that land use designation.
   ·   Design and locate new water supply facilities to be compatible with the
scenic environment.
   ·   Adopt and implement water conservation practices in the design of new
developments and the modification of existing uses, including landscaped areas
and as a major element in integrated water resource planning.
   ·   Encourage all new development to install and use dual water systems.
E.4.3    ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES:
   ·   Direct all wastewater produced within the Community Growth Boundary area
to sewer service systems to protect the environment.
   ·   Treat and recycle, where feasible, wastewater effluent as a water
conservation measure.
   ·   Delay further sewer connections in Kailua, Kāneohe and Kahaluu, except
for areas with existing cesspools or septic tanks that need to be sewered for
public health reasons, until flow equalization/wet weather surge protection has
been provided for the Kailua Regional WWTP, as described in the Kaneohe/Kailua
Wastewater Conveyance and Treatment Facilities Final Environmental Impact
Statement (May 2011).
   ·   Mitigate visual, noise, and odor impacts associated with wastewater
collection and treatment systems, especially when they are located adjacent to
residential designated areas.
E.4.4    ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS:
   ·   Design system elements and incrementally replace facilities such as sub-
stations, transmission lines and towers to avoid or mitigate any potential
adverse impacts on scenic and natural resource values and residential
neighborhoods, and to enhance system reliability.
   ·   Place new utility lines underground and develop a long-range program for
systematically relocating existing overhead lines underground.
   ·   Encourage co-location of antennas; towers should host the facilities of
more than one service provider to minimize their proliferation and reduce
visual impacts.
   ·   Mount antennas onto existing buildings or structures so that public
scenic views and open spaces will not be negatively affected. However, except
for the occupant’s personal use, antennas on single-family dwelling roofs in
residential districts are not appropriate.
   ·   Use stealth technology (i.e. towers disguised as trees) especially on
free-standing antennas towers in order to blend in with the surrounding
environment and minimize visual impacts
E.4.5    SOLID WASTE HANDLING AND DISPOSAL:
   ·   Continue efforts to establish more efficient waste diversion and
collection.
   ·   Promote waste reduction, re-use and recycling.
   ·   Analyze and approve siting and/or expansion of sanitary landfills based
on island-wide studies and siting evaluations.
E.4.6   DRAINAGE SYSTEMS:
   ·   Promote drainage system design that emphasizes control and minimization
of polluted run-off and the retention of stormwater on-site and in wetlands.
   ·   Develop a comprehensive study of local flooding and drainage problems,
including a phased plan for improvements.
   ·   Design and construct modifications needed for flood protection in a
manner that maintains habitat and aesthetic values, and avoids and/or mitigates
degradation of stream, coastline and nearshore water quality.
   ·   Integrate planned drainageway improvements into the regional open space
network by providing access for pedestrians and bicyclists where feasible.
   ·   View stormwater as a potential source of water for recharge of the
aquifer that should be retained for absorption rather than quickly moved to
coastal waters.
   ·   Select natural and man-made vegetated drainageways and retention basins
as the preferred solution to drainage problems wherever they can promote water
recharge, help control nonpoint source pollution, and provide passive
recreation benefits.
   ·   Keep drainageways clear of debris to avoid flooding problems.
E.4.7   SCHOOL AND LIBRARY FACILITIES:
   ·   Approve new residential developments only after the State Department of
Education certifies that adequate school facilities will be available when the
development is completed.
   ·   Have developers pay their fair share of costs needed to ensure provision
of adequate school facilities.
   ·   Consider schools as community resources for learning about specialized
environmental, cultural and historic subjects related to Koolau Poko.
E.4.8   CIVIC AND PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES AND COMMUNITY RESILIENCE:
   ·   Provide adequate staffing and facilities to ensure effective and
efficient delivery of basic governmental services and protection of public
safety.
   ·   Locate civic facilities in or adjacent to the Regional Town Centers of
Kāneohe and Kailua.
   ·   Encourage the development of more emergency shelters.
   ·   Encourage disaster resilient communities
E.5   CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION
This chapter discusses the various measures that support implementation of this
Plan, including the regulatory mechanisms, physical improvements, and other
actions that are needed to realize the Plan’s vision. Section 5.8 presents an
Implementation Matrix to help organize and facilitate plan implementation. The
Implementation Matrix, which is based on the policies and guidelines presented
in Chapters 3 and 4, identifies the specific actions, corresponding plans and/
or codes, and public or both private entities responsible for implementation.
E.6   APPENDIX A
This appendix includes three maps used to graphically depict components of the
plan for the future of Koolau Poko. The maps include: Map A-1: Open Space; Map
A-2: Land Use; Map A-3: Public Facilities. These maps show the long-range
vision of the future of the plan area and the major land use, open space, and
public facilities policies that are articulated in the plan. In examining these
maps the reader should keep in mind that: 1) The maps are intended to
supplement the textual descriptions herein; and 2) The maps are intended to be
illustrative of the plan’s policy statements. The maps are intended to
complement the text. Both the text and the maps are to be considered in
interpreting this plan.
1.   KOOLAU POKO’S ROLE IN OAHU’S DEVELOPMENT PATTERN
The Koolau Poko region spans from Ka Lae O Ka ‘Ōio (Ka ‘ōio Point) in the north
to Makapuu Point in the south and is further defined by the peaks of the Koolau
Range and the shoreline. The Koolau Poko Sustainable Communities Plan Area
(SCPA) includes the rural communities of Waikāne, Waiāhole, Kahaluu, Heeia, and
Waimānalo. It also includes the more populated suburban communities of Kāneohe
and Kailua.
The region also includes Kāneohe Bay, a unique open space resource known for
its beauty, rich cultural heritage, and recreational value. It is the largest
sheltered body of water in the main Hawaiian Islands. This reef-embayment
dominates the majority of Koolau Poko’s northeastern coastal areas and is a
significant scenic and recreational feature along the coast. Kāneohe Bay and
its stream tributaries is an important ecosystem due to its combination of
multiple stream estuaries influenced by runoff from the watershed, the offshore
barrier reef and open ocean waters beyond. Beginning in the early 1900's,
stream waters entering Kāneohe Bay was diverted to Central Oahu and the ‘Ewa
Plains by the construction of the Waiāhole Ditch. The diversion negatively
affected diverted stream habitats and the nearshore estuarine waters and
associated fisheries of Kāneohe Bay. Challenges to the CWRM decision resulted
in the Supreme and Appellate courts increasing the flow to 14.43 mgd back to
windward streams including 2.43 mgd of unpermitted water which could be used
off-stream if the need arises.
The central portion of the bay accommodates many recreational activities due to
the ease of access from Heeia Kea Harbor, the only major public boat ramp and
harbor. The central barrier reef and sand flat is popular among locals and
visitors and is heavily used by many commercial and recreational boaters during
weekends and holidays. Two navigable channels cut across the northern and
southern ends of the barrier reef. The northeastern portion is the most rural
in both land and water. Activities in this portion of the bay are more reserved
and quieter. The south and southeastern portions of the bay are bordered by
urban uses and military uses of the Marine Corps. Several commercial fishponds
provide seafood products and a source for cultural education.
The General Plan of the City and County of Honolulu designates the central
portion of the SCPA, shown in Exhibit 1.1, as an urban fringe area to remain a
predominantly residential suburb with limited future population growth. The
northern and southern portions of Koolau Poko are designated rural areas to
remain in predominately agricultural and preservation land uses.
The present land use pattern in Koolau Poko began to take shape in the 1940's
during World War II. There was rapid growth in suburban development in the
following three decades, due largely to the opening of trans-Koolau highways
which made the region more accessible to Honolulu. In the 1960's, Kāneohe was
the proposed site of a deep-draft harbor and major new power generating plant,
which would have spurred an even faster pace of regional urban development. By
the mid-1970's, however, environmental concerns, focused especially on the
quality of Kāneohe Bay, led to the abandonment of these proposals and a shift
in public policy, as expressed in the 1977 General Plan, toward slower
population growth and urban development in the district. The 2010 resident
population in Koolau Poko was 115,164 persons, 2,835 persons fewer than the
2000 Census figure of 117,999 people. The region experienced an average annual
population decline of approximately 0.2 percent, in contrast to an estimated
island-wide annual population increase of 0.9 percent. Consequently, the
region’s share of Oahu’s total population has declined from about 13 percent to
about 12 percent. This declining trend is projected to continue through 2035.
The Koolau Poko Sustainable Communities Plan reaffirms the region’s role in
Oahu’s development pattern as intended by the General Plan by establishing the
following policies for future land use and development in Koolau Poko:
   ·   Limit the potential for new housing in the region so that significant
residential growth is directed instead to the Primary Urban Center and ‘Ewa
Development Plan Areas, as well as the Central Oahu Sustainable Communities
Plan Area, in accordance with the population distribution policy set forth in
the General Plan, which currently provides that Koolau Poko’s share of the 2025
distribution of Oahu’s resident population is to be about 11.6 percent.
   ·   Revitalize existing commercial centers and limit the expansion of
commercial centers and economic activity in the region to promote the
development and growth of employment in the Primary Urban Center, and the
designated secondary urban center at Kapolei.
   ·   Maintain the predominantly low-rise, low-density, single-family form of
residential development in the urban fringe and rural communities depicted on
Exhibit 1-1.
   ·   Maintain and promote small-scale agricultural uses in the mauka areas of
Waimānalo and from Kahaluu north to Kualoa.
   ·   Encourage continuation of small-scale agricultural uses in urban areas,
provided that there are standards for compatibility between adjacent uses.
   ·   Avoid urbanization of flood- and erosion-prone areas and seek to restore
the natural filtering, flood control, recreational, biological and aesthetic
values of streams, fishponds and wetlands.
   ·   Preserve scenic views and the scenic beauty of the ocean, bays and
beaches.
   ·   Preserve scenic views of ridges, upper-valley slopes, shoreline areas
from trans-Koolau and coastal highways; from coastal waters looking mauka; and
from popular hiking trails that extend toward the Koolau Mountain Range and
mauka from Kawainui Marsh.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8567.png]
   ·   Discourage the use of shore armoring structures.
   ·   Promote access to mountain and shoreline resources for recreational
purposes and traditional hunting, fishing, gathering, religious, and cultural
practices.
   ·   Promote restoration of fish population in near-shore waters.
2.   THE VISION FOR KOOLAU POKO’S FUTURE
This chapter expresses and describes the vision for Koolau Poko’s future and
the key elements of the vision.
The vision and plan for Koolau Poko focuses on the long-term protection of
community resources, residential character, and the adoption of public
improvement programs and development regulations that reflect a stable
population. The following vision statement describes the desired future
conditions in the year 2035 and beyond. This section is therefore written from
the perspective of the year 2035 looking back into the past.
Koolau Poko’s natural, cultural, historic, agricultural, and aquacultural/
fishpond resources are protected and enhanced.
Significant scenic views of ridges, upper valley slopes, shoreline areas from
major public parks highways, coastal waters and hiking trails are protected.
Access to shoreline areas and mountainous regions are improved and provided for
all to use and enjoy.
Cultural and historical resources are preserved through the protection of
visual landmarks and significant views, protected access rights relating to
traditional cultural practices, and the protection of significant historic,
cultural, and archaeological features.
Koolau Poko contains productive and potentially productive agricultural lands
that are preserved by adopted protective regulatory policies and implemented
incentives and programs that promote active agricultural use of these lands.
Consistent with the General Plan of the City and County of Honolulu, Koolau
Poko’s share of Oahu’s population declined from 12.1 percent in 2010, to 10.7
percent in 2035. The region’s population also declined over this period from
115,164 to about 112,000 persons.
Although Koolau Poko is nearly built-out, it is essential to continue to
improve and replace, as necessary, the district’s aging infrastructure systems
to maintain adequate capacity, improve operational performance or extend the
useful life of facilities. Infrastructure modifications are also made to
enhance the quality of the urban, rural, neighborhood, or natural environment.
There continues to be a modest increase in new dwellings and modifications to
the region’s existing housing stock because, while the number of residents is
declining, the number of persons per household has also continued to decline
over the past several decades. As in other parts of Oahu, the proportion of
elderly in the population is growing, which induces changes in housing and
service needs in various ways. These changes to infrastructure systems and
housing have been and will continue to be incremental.
2.1   KEY ELEMENTS OF THE VISION
The vision for Koolau Poko’s future is implemented through the following key
elements:
   ·   Adapt the concept of ahupuaa in land use and natural resource
management;
   ·   Preserve and promote open space and agricultural uses;
   ·   Preserve and enhance scenic, recreational and cultural features that
define Koolau Poko’s sense of place;
   ·   Emphasize alternatives to the private passenger vehicle as modes for
travel;
   ·   Protect and enhance residential character while adapting to changing
needs;
   ·   Define and enhance existing commercial and civic districts; and,
   ·   Maintain the Community Growth Boundary to protect agricultural, open
space, and natural resources.
Each of the above key elements is described in the following sections.
2.1.1   Adapt the Concept of Ahupuaa in Land Use and Natural Resource
Management
Prior to Western contact, Hawaiians managed the environment and organized their
society through a land division system known as ahupuaa. Ahupuaa boundaries are
similar to those of watersheds. Pukui and Elbert provide the following
definition of ahupuaa:
Land division usually extending from the uplands to the sea, so called because
the boundary was marked by a heap (ahu) of stones surmounted by an image of a
pig (puaa) 1 .
The ahupuaa has also been described as follows:
A principle very largely obtaining in these divisions of territory was that a
land should run from the sea to the mountains, thus affording to the chief and
his people a fishery residence at the warm seaside, together with the products
of the high lands, such as fuel, canoe timber, mountain birds, and the right of
way to the same, and all the varied products of the intermediate land as might
be suitable to the soil and climate of the different altitudes from sea soil to
mountainside or top. 2  
The ahupuaa system recognizes the interconnected relationship between land-
based and marine-based natural resources, focusing on streams as the connecting
element between ridge and reef, especially in an island environment. The
ahupuaa concept is still a useful concept for managing the natural environment
and fostering desirable community development, adapted to the context of
today’s community needs and technology. It also serves as a logical foundation
for sub-planning areas. Adapting and implementing the concept requires
significant cooperation and integration of efforts among the various units of
government whose jurisdictions encompass all or part of each ahupuaa.
In Koolau Poko, for example, natural wetlands and Hawaiian-built fishponds
preserve wildlife habitat, filter pollutants from stormwater runoff, and
provide flood protection. Over the years, the function of these wetlands and
fishponds had become impaired by accelerated siltation and polluted runoff from
urban development and agricultural activities. Some had vanished entirely due
to deliberate filling. The filling of wetlands and fishponds has been
restricted for decades, and regulatory and management practices have been
improved to promote more effective maintenance of these resources and deter
land-based activities which contribute to their degradation. Wetlands and
fishponds existing in 2010 have been successfully preserved and restored. In
addition, new wetlands to detain and retain stormwater have been created to
protect flood-prone areas, increase infiltration, and reduce polluted runoff
into streams, estuaries and nearshore waters.
As applied to Koolau Poko’s drainage system, the ahupuaa management concept
involves the retention of natural stream beds and, as feasible, partial or full
restoration of drainageways that have been altered by concrete-lined channels.
A streamside management zone or “buffer area” along natural streambeds defines
where uses or activities are controlled or modified to protect water quality
and aquatic resources. Revised or new public works standards have allowed the
dedication of passive stormwater drainage systems and minimal channel
modifications to provide flood protection for improved or developed properties.
Most of Koolau Poko’s native forests and other significant wildlife habitats
are located within the State Conservation District. Nevertheless, the State
Urban District and State Agricultural District contain many natural habitats,
such as stream segments and small wetlands. In the State Urban District, urban
development in areas susceptible to land movement, soil erosion, and sediment
loss has been avoided and performance standards have been applied for the
retention of sediment onsite during and after development activities. In the
State Agricultural District, best management practices in agricultural land use
and operations have been implemented.
The transition area between the Koolau Mountain Range and the urban and
agricultural uses in the valleys and on the coastal plain are preserved as a
permanent greenbelt to serve as a natural, recreational, and scenic resource
conservation area; to prevent inappropriate development or use which may cause
hazards or other undesirable environmental consequences downstream; and to
provide opportunities for environmental and cultural research and education.
2.1.2   Preserve and Promote Open Space and Agricultural Uses
The preservation, continuation, and potential expansion of agricultural land
use provides jobs and economic activity; promotes food security; offers the
choice of a rural lifestyle proximate to a major metropolitan area; and
maintains open space and a rural ambience in a section of the island that is
famed for its natural beauty. In Koolau Poko, agricultural use is sustained by
both commercially successful operations and subsistence or culturally-based
farming. There is a good understanding of the region’s strengths, future
opportunities and challenges for commercially viable agriculture. Land
development, public works, and environmental codes and standards have been
designed to prevent the gradual conversion of agricultural areas into large-lot
residential neighborhoods.
It is recognized that Koolau Poko has traditionally been one of Oahu’s
principal regions for wetland taro cultivation and aquaculture because of its
wet climate and abundant perennial streams. Restored fishponds and ancient
irrigation systems continue to be maintained to build upon the past and provide
modern day utility. Permanent instream flow standards have been established to
maintain sufficient quantity and quality of surface water to support fishpond
operations and taro cultivation. Educational tours of taro lo’i and fishponds
help support these traditional agricultural activities.
Research facilities such as the University of Hawaii’s Waimānalo Agricultural
Experiment Station, Windward Community College, and a fruit fly laboratory,
also in Waimānalo, provide technical advice to farmers in the region. State and
federal agricultural agencies also lend technical, financial, and marketing
support. The financial viability of commercial agricultural activity has been
strengthened by providing appropriately located centers for minor composting
and supplies, designated places for roadside vending and farmers’ markets, and
information and referral centers for potential customers and visitors.
Other appropriate accessory uses including recreational or educational
programs, or other uses consistent with the character of a rural, agricultural
area provide supplemental income necessary to sustain the primary agricultural
activity. There are direct connections between these activities and the
maintenance of agricultural uses on the same properties.
2.1.3   Preserve and Enhance Scenic, Recreational and Cultural Features That
Define Koolau Poko’s Sense of Place
Koolau Poko’s striking topographic features, outstanding beaches and bays, lush
valleys, perennial streams and other natural features and landmarks continue to
visually define the “windward” sense of place. Views of ridgelines or upper
slopes of coastal headlands and mountains from the vantage point of coastal
waters, major roads, parks and other public places, are kept free from land
disturbance or the encroachment of structures or other projects that would
affect the scenic viewplanes.
Historic site restoration and interpretive programs are integrated into the
development of parks, shoreline, and mountain access systems in order to
increase awareness of the role of the natural environment in Koolau Poko’s
cultural history, especially the importance of the ahupuaa in defining
activities and communities.
In addition, na wahi pana (the special and significant places) and na malae
(cultural complexes) of Koolau Poko are appropriately identified and
interpreted. Community-based organizations are encouraged to develop and
maintain programs that heighten appreciation for Koolau Poko’s na wahi pana as
na malae for Koolau Poko na ahupuaa.
Streams have been made more physically and visually accessible as routes for
pedestrians or bicyclists, especially in urbanized areas. Maintenance easements
or rights-of-way along several streams and drainage channels have become public
greenways where feasible.
Physical access to the shoreline has been increased and enhanced, especially
along Kāneohe Bay between MCB Hawaii and Heeia Fishpond; along Kailua Beach
between Kailua Road and Kawainui Channel; and to beaches within the Marine
Corps Base Hawaii - Kāneohe. To maintain lateral access along public beaches
the challenges of long-term and seasonal erosion of the shoreline are being
addressed. Accreted beaches remain as public land in perpetuity. Adaptation to
sea level rise is progressing.
Improved access to mountain areas has been achieved by developing the Koolau
Poko Trail Complex and the Waikāne Trail. Complementary to this is the public
acquisition and development of cultural and nature parks in Haikū Valley and
Waikāne Valley, where interpretive centers, vehicular parking and other
facilities are provided near the trailheads.
2.1.4   Emphasize Alternatives to the Private Passenger Vehicle as Modes for
Travel
Most of Koolau Poko’s urban growth occurred since the 1950's in the form of
suburban “bedroom” communities, so for many decades there had been heavy
reliance on automobile travel for commuting and other trips. Trans-Koolau
highways were built and expanded to accommodate this travel demand. The
completion of the H-3 Freeway in 1997 further provided service for commuter
traffic, although its main purpose is for military mobility. One highway
improvement project, however, exacted environmental costs that diminished the
quality of life in the region. The widening of Kahekili Highway resulted in
increased volumes of polluted runoff; heat island effects and aesthetic impacts
due to the loss of and absence of shade trees in the right-of-way; and visually
obtrusive acoustical barrier walls to mitigate the impacts of higher levels of
vehicular noise on adjacent residences.
Until the end of the previous century, transportation plans had called for
additional highway widenings and interchange construction to facilitate
vehicular traffic flow. The beginning of the present century marked a
significant shift in the transportation policy for Koolau Poko. First, State
highway officials acknowledged that the H-3 Freeway had absorbed a much higher
percentage of the peak period trans-Koolau commuter traffic than had been
anticipated, thereby substantially relieving the other two trans-Koolau routes
and the connections to them. Second, the congested Leeward corridor and
proposed new roadway network in the island’s more rapidly urbanizing regions
began to have much higher priority for the use of limited highway improvement
funds. Koolau Poko residents also found that unused road capacity resulted in
more pressure to further urbanize the region. Finally, emphasis on automobiles
as the principal means of transportation is inconsistent with other elements of
the vision expressed in this Sustainable Communities Plan. Transportation
system improvements in Koolau Poko have been directed instead towards
alternative travel modes, including public transit and pedestrian and bicycle
facilities.
2.1.5   Protect and Enhance Residential Character While Adapting to Changing
Needs
As described in Chapter 1, Koolau Poko’s modest increase in housing stock to
accommodate a decreasing household size has been satisfied by developing small-
scale “infill” sites or additions to existing dwellings. Paradoxically, while
the average household size had been declining over many decades, there had been
a concurrent trend toward multi-generational and “nontraditional” households
and larger dwelling sizes on single-family residential lots as aging housing
stock is replaced, expanded, or remodeled. Recognizing that this incremental
physical transformation can have adverse impacts on the character of mature
residential neighborhoods, zoning, and public works standards were amended,
resulting in appropriate building scale and quiet, attractive, and safe
streets.
New, expanded, or remodeled dwellings in recent decades have been proportionate
in size to their lot area and the district in which they are located. The
prevailing building-to-lot size ratio was lowered in both urban and rural
areas, but particularly in the latter. New single-family dwellings have pitched
roofs with relatively wide overhangs in response to the warm, rainy climate of
the region, as well as other design features that conserve natural resources
and are compatible with the natural environment.
Design standards for streets and front yards define neighborhood identity and
places for informal recreation and neighborly interaction. Landscaped front
yards and pedestrian entries are visible from the street to promote a sense of
neighborhood and a sense of security for residents and their homes.
Traffic calming measures have been installed along existing residential streets
with wide roadways serving as through-routes, in order to reduce traffic
speeds, which threaten pedestrian and bicycle safety and increase traffic
noise. Examples include the use of intersection narrowing, speed tables, and
similar measures to reduce traffic speed. Priority for such traffic calming has
been given to those residential streets of Kāneohe and Kailua where more
conventional traffic control measures, such as traffic signals and signage, had
either failed to achieve the desired results or had been resisted by residents
of the area or the responsible transportation agencies.
Some new housing has been developed as multi-family residential buildings to
provide for a choice in living environments, especially for the elderly
population and smaller households. Multi-family housing is located in the town
core areas of Kāneohe and Kailua or in other appropriately designated areas in
this Plan and designed to reflect the suburban residential character of the
surrounding neighborhood, with low building profiles, pitched roof forms, and
ample yard landscaping.
2.1.6   Define and Enhance Existing Commercial and Civic Districts
General Plan policy discourages major new employment growth in this region. Any
significant retail and office expansion in this region would be inconsistent
with the General Plan policy to direct job growth to the Primary Urban Center
and Secondary Urban Center. Furthermore, given Koolau Poko’s declining
population, there has been only modest growth in the demand for commercial land
uses to support the communities of this region. Nevertheless, the continued
viability of existing commercial districts and institutions is an important
part of the vision for Koolau Poko because they provide a significant number of
jobs for residents within the region and play an integral part in the region’s
social and cultural life.
The older commercial areas of Koolau Poko, which were developed primarily in
the 1950's through the early 1980's following the development of suburban
housing, were typically oriented to the automobile. On larger lots, commercial
developments tended to follow the shopping center model. On smaller lots
fronting arterial highways, such as Kamehameha Highway in Kāneohe, the
predominant development form was “strip commercial.” In either case, commercial
establishments were divorced from the sidewalk and the streets and highways
that front them are congested with traffic as cars enter and exit from parking
lots. There was no clear distinction between the central commercial districts
of Kāneohe and smaller, outlying community shopping centers. In Kailua, the
central business district had been fairly clearly defined. However, both
business districts had clusters of civic uses on their edges that establish
their identities as regional town cores. Also, there are pockets within both
districts - especially in Kailua - where the development pattern resembles a
traditional commercial street, with storefronts and entries facing the public
sidewalk.
Current land use policy and public infrastructure investments continue to
clearly define and enhance the roles and identities of the central business
districts of Kailua and Kāneohe as the region’s principal town centers. There
is more efficient utilization of land resulting from redevelopment and building
expansions, and more “walkable” districts. The town centers are confined to the
areas that had already been zoned for commercial, light industrial, and civic
uses and treated as mixed-use zones. Although the commercial mixed-use areas
allowed development of projects with both commercial and multi-family
residential uses, this did not result in significant residential population
increases beyond those set forth by the General Plan’s population policies; nor
did it significantly reduce areas available for commercial use.
Expansion of commercial or industrial zoning or new civic uses such as post
offices, libraries, and government offices has not occurred in outlying areas
of Kailua or Kāneohe, except for industrial park expansion within the Community
Growth Boundary at Kapaa. As civic buildings were added, expanded or remodeled,
they were sited and designed in a manner which encouraged pedestrian and
transit access and/or serves as hurricane resistant emergency shelters.
The pedestrian orientation of the town centers has been strengthened by
implementing a circulation plan that improves public sidewalks, links them with
through-block walkways and parking lots, and expands transit services and
amenities.
Outside of the Kailua and Kāneohe central business districts, the smaller
community-oriented shopping centers and environs of Temple Valley, Windward
City, Aikahi, and Enchanted Lake retain their suburban character and are
limited to their present land area and approximate floor area. Zoning for the
light industrial area near Windward City allows a mix of commercial and
industrial uses to reflect the actual pattern of development in that area and
establish a more desirable streetscape.
In the commercial districts of Waimānalo and Kahalu‘u, building scale and
design character are appropriate to a rural area. They have a “village center”
ambiance where uses and activities such as farmers’ markets and feed stores
have a visible presence. Also, provisions are made for roadside vending,
outside of the right-of-way, for the sale of agricultural products in a manner
that is consistent with traffic safety and rural ambience.
To stimulate and continue the revitalization of the town centers of Kailua and
Kāneohe, land use and zoning policies discourage the introduction of “big box”
retail stores or shopping centers consisting predominately of discount or
factory outlet stores within the region. This type of commercial development
often results in inappropriate building scale, localized traffic and parking
demand impacts, and the economic decline of existing businesses. Where “big
box” stores have been built, their impact has been mitigated by retrofitting
smaller retail stores and rental spaces along the street frontages of those
large buildings in order to create a more pedestrian-oriented environment along
the sidewalks.
Large-scale commercial development is directed to more favorable sites in
Leeward and Central Oahu, where there are large and readily-available parcels
better situated to capture patronage from the island’s major population growth
area. The H-3 Freeway also makes these “value retail” stores more accessible to
Koolau Poko’s residents.
Koolau Poko maintains six major institutional campuses, including two colleges,
two hospitals and two correctional facilities. No new institutional campuses
are envisioned for Koolau Poko, but minor expansion and redevelopment within
the existing grounds of the region’s major institutions are expected to
continue to occur.
2.1.7   Maintain the Community Growth Boundary to Protect Agricultural, Open
Space, and Natural Resources
The Community Growth Boundary was established to define and contain the
intended extent of urbanized or “built-up” areas within those districts
designated as “urban fringe” and “rural” by the General Plan. The purpose is to
accommodate modest increases in population, to provide adequate lands for
facilities or other groupings of built uses needed to support established
communities while protecting lands outside this boundary for agriculture and
other resource and open space values. Areas within this boundary
characteristically include extensive tracts of low-rise, low-density
residential, commercial, industrial, or mixed-use development clearly
distinguishable from undeveloped or more “natural” portions of the region’s
environment. While the Community Growth Boundary includes some lands designated
“park,” “agriculture,” “preservation,” or areas with development-related
hazards, such as steep slopes or unstable soils, these areas have not been
developed with uses unsuitable to their designations or in ways that may tend
to exacerbate those hazards.
The Community Growth Boundary confined new urban and suburban development to
“infill” sites within existing urbanized areas and prohibited continuous
sprawl. This more compact form of development helped achieve relatively lower
site development costs, more efficient utilization of existing urban
infrastructure systems, and reduced reliance on the automobile and made transit
ridership, walking, and bicycling more feasible and attractive modes of travel.
The Community Growth Boundary generally circumscribes the “urban fringe”
suburban communities of Kāneohe, Kailua, Olomana subdivision, Mokapu Peninsula,
Maunawili and ‘Āhuimanu within the State Urban District boundary, including the
following areas:
   ·   Residential, apartment, commercial, industrial and mixed-use districts;
   ·   Low-density built-up areas at Haikū Plantations, adjacent to Kailua High
School, and immediately adjoining the residential district;
   ·   Hawaiian Memorial Park and the Hawaii State Veterans Memorial Cemetery;
   ·   Public schools serving these communities;
   ·   The campuses of Windward Community College and the Hawaii State
Hospital;
   ·   Bayview Golf Course, Mid-Pacific Country Club, and the Klipper Golf
Course at MCB Hawaii;
   ·   Lands developed for the beneficiaries of the Department of Hawaiian Home
Lands;
   ·   Correctional and detention facilities makai of Kalanianaole Highway; and
   ·   The industrial area at Kapaa.
The following “urban fringe” areas are located outside of the Community Growth
Boundary:
   ·   Undeveloped parcels on the slopes of Kaiwa Ridge, Oneawa Hills and Puu o
‘Ehu;
   ·   Undeveloped lands within and directly adjacent to Kawainui Marsh, and
the wetlands of Heeia and Kaelepulu;
   ·   Most of Heeia Kea valley;
   ·   The slopes of Mount Olomana;
   ·   Areas within the State Conservation District;
   ·   Military lands, except those at MCB Hawaii developed with uses
associated with the residential, apartment, commercial, industrial, and mixed-
use districts; and
   ·   Portions of the slopes of Puu Maelieli and the valleys of ‘Āhuimanu,
Maunawili and Haikū where lots typically exceed one acre in size.
The “rural” areas within the Community Growth Boundary consist of smaller, more
dispersed, less intensively developed residential communities and towns than
those of Koolau Poko’s “urban fringe” areas; namely, the sections of Waimānalo,
Kahalu‘u, Wai’āhole and Waikāne in the State Urban District where there are
clusters of parcels that are less than two acres in size occupied by dwellings
or buildings used for community or commercial purposes other than agriculture.
Development character is generally low-density, low-rise, small scale, and
reflective of a “country” setting.
Included within the “rural” portion of the Community Growth Boundary are the
following areas:
   ·   Residential, apartment, commercial, industrial and mixed-use districts;
   ·   Areas developed for the beneficiaries of the Department of Hawaiian Home
Lands;
   ·   Public schools serving these communities;
   ·   The campus of the Hawaii Job Corps; and
   ·   Areas not designated as Agricultural Lands of Importance to the State of
Hawaii that are directly adjacent to or surrounded by residential or other
urban uses and are suitable for minor infill development for residential,
community or commercial purposes.
The Community Growth Boundary excludes much of the State Urban District land in
the vicinity of Kahalu’u where a predominately agricultural use pattern
currently prevails.
3.   LAND USE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
The vision for Koolau Poko, described in the preceding chapter, will be
implemented through the application of the following land use policies and
guidelines.
This chapter is organized under the following headings:
Sections
   3.1   Open Space Preservation
   3.2   Parks and Recreation
   3.3   Historic and Cultural Resources
   3.4   Agriculture
   3.5   Residential Use
   3.6   Commercial and Industrial Uses
   3.7   Institutional Uses
   3.8   Military Uses
3.1   OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION
Koolau Poko’s open space consists of lush forested valleys, sharply eroded
ridges which extend from the interior valley floors to the summit of the Koolau
Mountains, with agricultural fields and rural communities in the northern
portions of the region to urbanized communities of Kaneohe to Waimanalo toward
its southern portions. This sharply contrasts with the Mokapu Peninsula whose
dry climate and parched terrain is surrounded by the seashore, accompanying
white sand beaches and the Kāneohe Bay marine environments, all of which
contribute to the region’s unique and intrinsic beauty. This natural beauty
attracts residents and visitors to the area as well as the film industry.
Open space preservation is a key element of the vision for Koolau Poko’s
future. Long-term protection and preservation of scenic resources, agricultural
areas, natural areas, and recreational areas are important to maintaining the
character and attractiveness of Ko’olau Poko for both residents and visitors.
Open space also functions to provide access to shoreline and mountain areas,
define community boundaries, prevent urban sprawl, provide buffers between
agricultural uses and residential neighborhoods, create a system of linear
greenways along roadways and drainage channels, provide flood storage and
habitat where functionally necessary and feasible, and prevent development in
areas susceptible to landslides and similar hazards.
3.1.1   POLICIES
The following are policies for the preservation of open space and natural
resources:
   ·   Provide both active and passive open spaces. Active areas include
community-based parks, golf courses, cemeteries and intensive agricultural
uses. Passive areas include lands in the State Conservation District, drainage
and utility corridors, nature parks, preserves and wetlands, and agricultural
lands such as pastures, aquaculture ponds and fallow fields. Beach parks, which
may be either active or passive, depending on the extent to which the landscape
has been modified by grading and construction of facilities and the intensity
of public use, are also part of the open space system.
   ·   Improve the accessibility of recreational open space for public
recreational use, especially in shoreline and mountain areas (as required by
City ordinance and State law). Address the need for parking and emergency
vehicle access.
   ·   Protect endangered species and their habitats.
   ·   Enhance the visual and physical definition of urban areas, particularly
where topographic features are less pronounced, with contrasting forms of open
space and landscaping.
   ·   Promote the dual use of roadway and drainage corridors to create linear
open space that is also a more inviting environment for walking, jogging and
biking. Where physical modification of natural drainageways is necessary to
provide adequate flood protection, design and construct such modifications to
maintain habitat and aesthetic values, as well as to avoid degradation of the
stream, coastline and nearshore water quality.
   ·   Protect scenic beauty and scenic views and provide recreation.
   ·   Promote access to shoreline and mountain areas.
   ·   Define the boundaries of communities.
   ·   Prevent urban sprawl.
   ·   Provide buffers between agricultural uses and residential neighborhoods.
   ·   Create a system of linear greenways along roadways and drainage
channels.
   ·   Prevent development in areas susceptible to landslides and similar
hazards.
3.1.2   Guidelines
   ·   Require surveys to identify endangered species habitats and require
appropriate mitigation measures to address impacts due to new developments.
   ·   Allow outdoor lighting at the minimum level necessary for public safety,
security, and community aesthetics consistent with the goals of energy
conservation and environmental protection.
   ·   Adopt outdoor night lighting standards that encourage efforts to
minimize glare and stray light, and reinforce the difference between urban and
rural communities.
3.1.3   Elements of Open Space Resources
The following provides a brief description of the elements of open space
resources in Koolau Poko, followed by guidelines for each element, to carry out
the policies for the region’s open space resources.
3.1.3.1   Mountain Areas
Mountainous regions in Koolau Poko are in the State Conservation District and
thus the State Board of Land and Natural Resources (BLNR) oversees uses in
these areas. Limited public access to upper reaches of valleys and mountain
areas is presently available via the hiking trails described below.
Koolau Poko Trail Complex.  This is a proposed 15-mile system of interconnected
trails, most segments of which are already open, including the Likeke Trail,
Maunawili Trail, and Maunawili Falls Trail. This trail complex features
opportunities for hiking, hunting, nature study, bird watching and photography.
Horseback riding is possible in some sections, as is mountainbiking. Points of
interest along the route include Maunawili Falls, the Maunawili Ditch
irrigation flumes, and numerous archaeological sites, including kalo (taro) loi
and heiau. The area’s rich history adds to the interpretive potential of the
trails.
Waikāne Trail. This trail begins in Waikāne Valley and extends to the crest of
the Koolau Mountain Range, where it intersects with the Koolau Poko Trail
Complex. The trailhead is within the site of Waikāne Nature Preserve, which
presents an excellent opportunity for related interpretive and educational
programs and improved facilities for hikers.
Kaiwa Trail.  This trail, following the crest of Kaiwa Ridge from Lanikai to a
WWII bunker, is in a relatively urban setting. It is a good vantage point for
striking panoramic views of the adjacent Bellows Air Force Base and suburban
communities backdropped by natural features such as Kailua Bay, Waimanālo Bay,
the Koolau Mountain Range, and Mount Olomana. Currently, access is limited, but
parking and maintenance issues are being addressed to improve the situation.
The State’s Na Ala Hele Program manages and maintains public trails. Of the
trails mentioned above, only the Kaiwa Trail and portions of the Koolau Poko
Trail Complex are Na Ala Hele Program trails. Na Ala Hele trails that are part
of the Koolau Poko Trail Complex are the:
   ·   Maunawili-Waimanālo Access Road
   ·   Maunawili Trail
   ·   Maunawili Ditch Trail
Other trails may be privately owned and/or managed. Issues regarding ownership,
safety and liability must be further addressed before official access to trails
can be assured. Planning and development of public access to mountain areas
should incorporate provisions for adequate parking and means for minimizing and
addressing complaints from neighbors near trailheads.
Because the mountains and coastal headlands are prominently visible from long
distances and are a fundamental element of the regional identity, it is
important to preserve their visual integrity by avoiding encroachment of land
disturbances and structures on upper slopes and ridgelines.
Moreover, to protect important resource values in the State Conservation
District, steps need to be taken to control the number and range of feral
animals and other alien species and prevent overuse and misuse by humans in
selected areas, such as habitats of native and endangered species. Control of
feral animals in the mountain areas is also needed to prevent accelerated
vegetation loss and soil erosion.
Guidelines for Mountain Areas
   ·   Improve access to mountain areas and enhance the physical condition and
recreational and educational value of Koolau Poko’s hiking trails by fully
implementing the recommendations in the State of Hawaii’s Na Ala Hele Program
Plan 3 . Accompany access improvements with funding for management of
associated problems through increased trail maintenance, weed control and
eradication of non-native predators.
   ·   Create public access to the former U.S. Coast Guard Omega Station site,
including Haikū Stairs, and combine this parcel site with the adjoining City
and County of Honolulu parcel for the proposed Ha’ikū Valley Cultural and
Nature Preserve in order to:
      °   Provide recreational, cultural and educational benefits; and
      °   Help protect resources in the makai portion of the Heeia watershed,
including a high-quality perennial stream, a significant wetland habitat for
waterbirds, migratory waterfowl and shorebirds, and an ancient Hawaiian
fishpond.
   ·   Improve the sites that have been acquired for Waihee Valley Nature Park
and Waikāne Nature Preserve in a manner that preserves the area’s natural
scenic quality and provides educational and passive recreation opportunities.
   ·   Promote the preservation of remaining undeveloped lands at the foot of
the Koolau Mountain Range through protective regulatory measures, tax
incentives for the establishment of conservation easements and management
programs on private properties, and public acquisition of fee simple or partial
interest, where necessary to create the Koolau scenic resource area or
“greenbelt” from Waimanālo to Kualoa. (See Ko’olau Greenbelt under Section
3.1.3.3)
   ·   Locate structures at higher elevations of slopes only for purposes of
public safety when there is no feasible alternative, and when adequate
mitigation measures have been taken to reduce or avoid impact on the scenic and
natural environment.
   ·   Maintain, protect, and restore native forests in the State Conservation
District, especially by identifying and protecting endangered species habitats
and other sensitive ecological zones from threats such as fire, alien species,
feral animals, and human activity and disturbance.
   ·   Provide access to existing mountain trails through acquisition of
easements or rights-of-way, if necessary. Work with property owners to provide
access over their lands to mountain trails.
3.1.3.2   Shoreline Areas
Koolau Poko’s shoreline displays a variety of physical characteristics, from
the rocky headlands of Makapuu at the south end of the district, to wide sandy
beaches fronting Waimanālo and Kailua Bays, to mud flats and fishponds which
rim much of Kāneohe Bay. This signature region asset also possesses multiple
values which are important to residents of the district and the island at
large. It is valued for its natural and cultural resources, recreational
opportunities, scenic amenities, and economic aquaculture potentials.
Management of this shoreline, then, must carefully consider the relationship of
various activities and the integrity of assets they may affect. They include
active and passive recreation, lateral and mauka-makai public access, scenic
interludes and vistas, fishpond restoration and appropriately selected and
managed aquacultural activity. While all these opportunities merit enhancement,
this must be pursued while maintaining the integrity of the shoreline’s
natural, cultural, and scenic qualities, as well as considering impacts to
coastal processes. Individual beach management plans, such as the Kailua Beach
and Dune Management Plan, should be developed, and modification of shoreline
setbacks and impacts from sea level rise must be considered. Views from public
roads toward the shoreline should be maintained or enhanced. Where appropriate,
create new makai views. Notable segments of the shoreline are discussed below.
Kualoa Point to Molii Fishpond.  Kualoa Regional Park, a major recreational
asset with cultural significance and numerous pre-contact archaeological sites,
provides access to the shoreline, coastal waters and Mokolii Island
(“Chinaman’s Hat”). Severe, long-term erosion of the shoreline of the park has
damaged park landscaping and structures. Littoral drift has deposited sand from
this beach to the shoreline fronting Molii Fishpond.
Kāneohe Bay, from Molii Fishpond to Ke Alohi Point (Heeia State Park). The
narrow but stable beach is comprised of silty sand. There are relatively few
structures in the shoreline area. Physical and visual access to the shoreline
from Kamehameha Highway was improved significantly with the expansion and
clearing of Waiāhole Beach Park in the early 1990's. Intermittent views of the
shoreline are available along the stretch of Kamehameha Highway between Kahaluu
Fishpond and Heeia Landing. Heeia State Park, Laenani Beach Park and Kahalu‘u
Beach Park provide physical access to the shoreline and vantage points for
views of Kāneohe Bay. The expansion of Kahaluu Regional Park to include the
beach park area on the makai side of Kamehameha Highway is intended to provide
viewplane enhancement from the highway. Kapapa Island, the central barrier reef
and “sand bar” (Ahu o Laka) in this section of Kāneohe Bay is an attraction for
recreational and commercial boating. Heeia Kea Harbor provides public boating
launching ramps and mooring spaces. Other launching ramps are available for
small craft at Laenani Beach Park and Kahaluu Beach Park.
Kāneohe Bay, from Heeia Fishpond to Nuupia Pond.  Similar to the northern end
of Kāneohe Bay, most of the shoreline in this section is stable. Vertical
retaining walls have been constructed along many of the properties to support
docks or to prevent soil banks from slumping into the water, but there are no
chronic or significant patterns of erosion or accretion. Physical and visual
access to the shoreline is very limited due to residential and other private
urban or marina development along almost the entire length. Public access is
available at the small Kāneohe Beach Park, where parking and facilities are
very limited. There are five pedestrian rights-of-way to the shoreline at other
points, but none of these have off-street parking.
Mōkapu Peninsula. Sandy beach dunes facing the ocean are situated between large
remnants of volcanic craters. On one side of Nuupia Ponds, at the neck of the
peninsula, is a narrow, sandy beach facing Kailua Bay, and on the other side is
a siltier beach fronting Kāneohe Bay. Except at certain times for special
events, the general public is denied physical access to the peninsula, which is
under military jurisdiction.
Kailua Bay, from Kapoho Point to Alāla Point. Kailua Beach is wide and sandy,
but dynamic and subject to significant erosion and accretion cycles. It is
famed for its high quality as a recreation area. Kailua Bay is attractive for a
variety of ocean recreation activities, notably swimming, body surfing,
windsurfing, kayaking and canoe racing. Public access to the beach and coastal
waters is provided primarily at Kailua Beach Park, on either side of the
Kaelepulu Stream outlet, and at the smaller Kalama Beach Park. At both
locations, vehicular parking spaces are in great demand on weekends and
holidays. There are five public rights-of-way for pedestrians at dispersed
points along Kalāheo Avenue, the street that runs parallel to the beach, but no
off-street parking, public restrooms or showers are available at these
locations. Visual access to the shoreline from the adjacent street is available
only at Alāla Point and the Kaelepulu Stream crossing.
Kailua Bay, from Alāla Point to Wailea Point (Lanikai).  Severe erosion is
occurring at either end of Lanikai Beach, where adjacent residential property
owners have built seawalls and revetments along most of the shoreline. The
remaining sandy beach in the central portion is popular for recreation. Public
access for pedestrians is provided at eleven points along the parallel public
street, Mokulua Drive, but no off-street vehicular parking, public restrooms or
showers are available for beach-goers. Visual access to the shoreline from the
street is very limited.
Waimanālo Bay, from Wailea Point to Makapuu Point.  Wide sandy beaches front
almost the entire length of Waimanālo Bay. There is a narrower beach and
emerging reef rock in the vicinity of Pāhonu Pond in the mid-section of the Bay
shoreline. While Kalanianaole Highway is relatively distant from the shoreline
at the northern portion of the beach, physical access is readily available
during peak recreation periods at Bellows Air Force Station and Waimanālo Bay
State Recreation Area. In the beachfront residential area of Waimanālo, there
are three pedestrian rights-of-way to the shoreline along Laumilo Street.
Further south, at Waimanālo Beach Park and Kaiona Beach Park, the highway is
close enough to the shoreline to afford both visual and physical access. In the
southernmost stretch, along Kaupō Beach Park and Makapuu Beach Park, visual and
physical access to the shoreline is virtually unimpeded. From the highway,
dramatic vistas of coastal headlands and cliffs, ocean waters, and off-shore
islands can be seen.
Guidelines for Shoreline Areas
   ·   Maintain existing makai view channels along Kalanianaole Highway between
Makapuu Point and Waimanālo Beach Park; along Kawailoa Road and North Kalāheo
Avenue in Kailua; along Lilipuna Road in Kāneohe; and along Kamehameha Highway
north of Kāneohe. Avoid visual obstructions, such as walls and dense
landscaping.
    ·   Create and maintain new makai view channels along Kamehameha Highway
and Kahekili Highway north of Kāneohe by:
      °   Acquiring shoreline properties along the highway either in fee or by
obtaining easements and maintenance agreements with private landowners, giving
priority to locations where there are actual or potential vistas of perennial
streams, wetlands, fishponds and off-shore islands; and
      °   Selective clearing of dense vegetation and the removal of structures.
   ·   Maintain the untamed landscape quality of the Makapuu viewshed, with any
modification to this area being done for the purpose of health and safety and
in a manner that continues the landscape character of the scenic shoreline
corridor on the East Honolulu side of Makapuu Point.
   ·   Establish buffer zones for the protection of rare coastal resources and
recognition that such resources should be defined and identified.
   ·   Increase opportunities for physical access to the shoreline areas of
Kāneohe and Kailua by acquiring additional shorefront areas, with following
locations as priorities:
      °   The site of the Kāneohe Wastewater Pre-Treatment Facility, to be
named Waikalua Bayside Park, with possible expansion into Kokokahi YWCA
facility through either acquisition or joint use agreement;
      °   King Intermediate School and an area north of Heeia Kea Landing,
which may require some realignment of a portion of Kamehameha Highway to create
adequate land area makai of the roadway; and
      °   A site in either the Oneawa Beach area, near the surf spot known as
“Castles” or in the frontage along Kalaheo Avenue between Kailua Beach Park and
Kalama Beach Park.
   ·   Improve existing pedestrian rights-of-way to the shoreline by providing
on-street or off-street parking nearby; secured bicycle racks where the access
point adjoins an existing or planned bikeway, such as along Mokulua Drive in
Lanikai and Kāneohe Bay Drive in Kāneohe; and provisions for emergency vehicle
access and lateral access along the shoreline.
   ·   Prepare beach management plans to maintain lateral access along popular
beaches that are subject to long-term and seasonal erosion, particularly at
Lanikai and Kualoa, emphasizing non-structural approaches and prevention of
adverse effects on adjacent coral reef ecosystems such as greater shoreline
setbacks for new structures along these and other unstable shoreline areas. The
Kailua Beach and Dune Management Plan could serve as a prototype for beach
management plans at other locations. Effective beach management plans are very
location-specific and incorporate the consideration of long-term effects such
as climate change and sea level rise, as well as seasonal and long-term erosion
and accretion.
   ·   Locate and design exterior lighting to avoid disturbance to seabirds and
marine mammals, using DLNR guidelines.
   ·   Designate the Alāla Point to Wailea shoreline as an erosion-prone area
and prepare a beach management plan for this area, focusing beach restoration
activities on the Bellows Air Force Station beach and Kaupō beach.
   ·   Designate the shoreline along Kamehameha Highway adjacent to Kualoa
Ranch to Kualoa Point as an erosion-prone area and prepare a beach management
plan for this area.
   ·   Pursue measures to render all shoreline accretion as public (State)
property in perpetuity in order to preserve shorelines as a public resource.
   ·   Prohibit the use of shore armoring structures, considering alternative
measures such as beach replenishment.
   ·   Modify shoreline setbacks as needed to protect the natural shoreline,
lessen the impact to coastal processes, and address sea level rise.
   ·   Analyze the possible impact of sea level rise for new public and private
projects in shoreline areas and incorporate, where appropriate and feasible,
measures to reduce risks and increase resiliency to impacts of sea level rise.
3.1.3.3   Wetlands, Wildlife Preserves and Nature Parks
Koolau Poko is home to several wetlands listed as significant by the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service (USFWS) Oahu Team because of the occurrence and abundance
of native waterbirds, including the endangered Hawaiian Stilt (aeo), Hawaiian
Coot (‘alae keokeo), Hawaiian Duck (koloa maoli), Hawaiian Moorhen (alae ula),
and migratory waterfowl and shorebirds. Policies on the management of wetlands
have been prepared by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, in cooperation
with the State department of health 4 . Koolau Poko hosts a variety of venues
which serve as habitat for avian, terrestrial, aquatic, and marine wildlife. In
addition to onshore habitat, offshore islands which lie seaward of the planning
region also serve as habitat which may merit protection as such. Major onshore
wetlands, proposed nature parks/preserves and botanical gardens of Koolau Poko
(see Exhibit 3.1) are described below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8565.png]
   ·   Hoomaluhia Botanical Garden. This 211-acre park, maintained by the City,
was originally developed as a Federally-funded flood control project and
includes a large stormwater impoundment basin. It includes limited facilities
for camping, horse-back riding, hiking, camping and environmental education as
well as botanical gardens.
   ·   Kawainui Marsh. Since 2005, Kawainui-Hamakua Marsh Complex has been on
the Ramsar List of Wetlands of International Importance, serves multiple
purposes as a flood storage basin, wetland filter, wildlife habitat and
cultural and scenic resource pursuant to a master plan prepared in 1994 5 .
(Note that the 1994 plan was never officially adopted by the State DLNR.) The
master plan includes hiking trails through the marsh. Also proposed are an
environmental education center and a pedestrian path around the perimeter of
the marsh. A large restoration project by the Army Corps of Engineers and the
DLNR began in 2013. The project will restore nearly 40 acres and includes
habitat restoration for endangered native waterfowl. In 1979, the National
Registrar for Historic Places determined that the Marsh is eligible for listing
in the National Register of Historic Places.
The Kawainui-Hamakua Marsh Complex, endangered waterbird habitat, and
archaeological and cultural sites should be improved and protected by:
      ·   Improving water quality in contributing Kapaa and Maunawili streams;
      ·   Improving water quality in the marsh;
      ·   Establishing a comprehensive and coordinated land and water
management plan, including a long-term water monitoring and testing schedule;
      ·   Establishing a buffer zone surrounding existing waterbird habitats on
the marsh side of the Kapaa Quarry Road;
      ·   Removing invasive plant species to open up water flow;
      ·   Establishing long-term plans for removing and controlling invasive
plants in the ditches on both sides of Kapaa Quarry Road so that runoff from
industrial areas can be filtered as designed;
      ·   Implementing predator control measures;
      ·   Expanding Kapaa and Maunawili stream courses by removing vegetation
from their entrances into the marsh;
      ·   Developing criteria for monitoring discharge of sediments into the
marsh;
      ·   Investigating and recording the sacred nature and cultural
significance of the birds in the Kawainui area;
      ·   Conducting specific archaeological research studies of entire primary
and secondary areas of the marsh, which includes the slopes above the marsh;
and
      ·   Preserving and enhancing identified wildlife species, their habitats,
and related ecological systems.
   ·   Heeia Wetland.  Heeia Wetland was acquired by the State in 1991 and is
under the jurisdiction of the Hawaii Community Development Authority. In 2010,
a non-profit group, Kākoo ‘Ōiwi, acquired a long-term lease to the wetland.
Their goal is to implement the community-driven vision of restoring
agricultural productivity and environmental quality of the wetland. Wetland
kalo was traditionally grown at Heeia. The vision is to produce kalo once
again, to serve to educate, feed, and sustain the He’eia community.
   ·   Nuupia Pond.  This large waterbody at the neck of Mōkapu Peninsula is
within the Marine Corps Base Hawai’i and is under Federal protection and
management as a habitat for endangered species.
   ·   Waikalua Loko Fishpond.  This fishpond in Kāneohe is an active site for
resource management training and education that is managed by the Waikalua Loko
Fishpond Preservation Society.
   ·   Waihee Valley Nature Park.  This site covering nearly 150 acres was
acquired by the City and is designated as a Nature Park, but remains
undeveloped.
   ·   Haikū Valley Cultural and Nature Preserve.  The City proposed to acquire
the former Omega Station site from the State Department of Hawaiian Home Lands.
Combined with the adjoining City and County of Honolulu parcel, this could
create a large nature and cultural preserve. The site includes Haikū Stairs and
potential access to the Koolau Poko Trail Complex. In addition to its
recreational and education purposes, this park would help protect the Heeia
watershed, which includes a high-quality perennial stream, a significant
wetland habitat for native endangered Hawaiian waterbirds and migratory
waterfowl and shorebirds, and an ancient Hawaiian fishpond in relatively good
condition.
   ·   Waikāne Nature Preserve.  This is a site recently acquired by the City
that had formerly been proposed for the development of a 27-hole private golf
course. It is now designated for a nature preserve, but is currently
undeveloped. The preserve will provide access to the Waikāne Trail.
   ·   Koolau Greenbelt.  This describes the transition area between the Koolau
Mountain Range and the urban and agricultural uses in the valleys and on the
coastal plain. Much of this area is presently undeveloped or used for open
space purposes, including the nature parks/preserves described above or golf
courses described below. The purposes of designating the remainder of this area
as greenbelt are to preserve this natural, recreational and scenic resource;
maintain significant view corridors; to prevent inappropriate development or
use which may cause hazards or other undesirable environmental consequences
downstream; and to provide opportunities for environmental and cultural
research and education.
Guidelines for Wetlands, Wildlife Preserves, and Nature Parks
   ·   Prepare use and management plans for Heeia Marsh, Waihee Valley Nature
Park, Haikū Valley Cultural and Nature Preserve, and Waikāne Nature Preserve
and develop those sites pursuant to those plans.
   ·   Encourage owners of private wetlands, such as Waihee Marsh (also known
as “Haia Moa”), and other wildlife habitats, to prepare and abide by use and
management plans for those resources, and to investigate the various State and
Federal programs that provide incentives for landowners to manage their lands
for the benefit of wildlife.
   ·   Prepare and implement a plan to establish a Koolau Greenbelt.
   ·   Prohibit encroachment or intensification of residential or other urban
uses near wildlife sanctuaries and nature parks.
   ·   Prepare wildlife preserve management plans emphasizing conservation and
restoration of native plants, birds, fish and invertebrates.
   ·   Minimize the adverse effects of artificial lighting on wildlife and
human health by balancing the need of outdoor lighting for night utility,
security, and desire for reasonable architectural expression with the need to
conserve energy and protect the natural environment.
3.1.3.4   Natural Gulches, Streams and Drainageways
According to the Koolau Poko Watershed Management Plan, the Koolau Poko region
contains 20 watersheds (systems of natural gulches and streams) and 13
perennial streams. These stream channels are the primary means for carrying
water from the inland areas to the sea and are generally capable of handling
runoff from normal rainfall amounts. During periods of intense rainfall,
however, a number of these drainageways overflow and create flooding problems
(see discussion in Section 4.6, Drainage Systems).
Guidelines for Natural Gulches, Streams and Drainageways
   ·   Preserve the natural aesthetic and biological values of gulches, streams
and drainageways as part of the open space system by implementing the stream
classifications, design guidelines and actions contained in the Koolau Poko
Watershed Management Plan for the protection of natural stream beds and habitat
and the restoration of degraded streams.
   ·   Alter natural drainageways only when necessary to provide flood
protection for existing developed areas, and in a way that preserves aesthetic
and biological values, and avoids degradation of stream, coastline and
nearshore water quality. For example, impacts on biological conditions may be
mitigated, as appropriate, by using v-shaped bottom channels for periods of low
stream flow, rip-rap boulder lining of stream banks, streamside vegetation and
similar strategies to shade, cool and aerate the waters of the stream and
provide riparian and stream bottom habitat.
   ·   Incorporate erosion control measures and best management practices, as
cited in the Hawaii’s Coastal Nonpoint Pollution Control Program Management
Plan 6  to prevent pollution of wetlands, streams, estuaries and nearshore
waters.
Guidelines for Other Open Space Elements
Several types of land uses, other than those described above, contribute to
Koolau Poko’s open space system. In general, they are developed lands either
presently or potentially in active use rather than natural areas, but they are
relatively free of structures, compared to most urban uses. Below are the
descriptions of these land uses, their contribution to the open space system,
and guidelines for the use and development of these lands to maintain their
open space value.
Agriculture
While it is not its primary function, agriculture land use does contribute to
the open space system. It defines the landscape character of large sections of
Koolau Poko north of ‘Āhuimanu and in the mauka portions of Waimanālo. Smaller
enclaves of agricultural lands are found in Maunawili, Kailua and Kāneohe.
Guidelines for agricultural land use to help maintain these open space values
are listed below:
   ·   Design and locate buildings and other facilities that are accessory to
an agricultural operation in a way that minimizes visual impacts within the
view corridors identified in Appendix Map A-1.
   ·   Retain the open space character of pastures adjacent to Kawainui Marsh
and within the Hawaii Youth Correctional Facility to visually separate and
define the edges of the Maunawili, Olomana and Pohakūpū and Kukunono
residential neighborhoods.
Parks
Parks provide active and passive recreation space for residents in the form of
play courts and playfields, gyms and pools, gardens, water features, open
fields, trails, and other forms of active or passive recreational facilities.
In addition to meeting the recreation needs of the region, parks also serve as
open space elements, contain wildlife, and add aesthetic value to the region
and mental health value to its residents by providing visual relief from urban
land uses. Parks and recreation are discussed further in Section 3.2.
Golf Courses
Golf courses are important elements of the open space system because they
provide areas for active recreation and offer visual relief from adjacent urban
uses. Most are available for public play and are considered a part of the
region’s recreational resources.
Golf courses have a manicured appearance, so they are not necessarily
appropriate for areas where the retention of a natural, untamed landscape
character is desired. The Mid-Pacific Country Club, Bayview Golf Park, Kāneohe
Klipper Golf Course and Olomana Golf Links demonstrate how golf courses in
suburban settings can provide open space buffers between residential
neighborhoods, passive stormwater drainage management, and opportunities to
preserve significant views. The Pali, Luana Hills, and Koolau golf courses have
less value as contributors to the open space system because they are situated
within or near forests with a dense canopy of trees and have altered the
natural landscape character of those settings.
Golf courses also serve a practical purpose by reducing flooding and non-point
pollution by helping retain storm waters. However, they are highly land
intensive, typically occupying 150 to 200 acres, and thus plans for future golf
courses or redevelopment of existing golf courses must undergo careful
evaluation. Depending on the location, design, and pricing of greens fees or
memberships, or both, new course development could have significant
environmental, economic, and social impacts. Furthermore, Koolau Poko is mostly
built-out and land areas that could possibly accommodate a new golf course are
either in preservation or long-term agricultural use. Consequently, the
development of additional golf courses in the Koolau Poko region is not
desired.
Koolau Poko’s golf courses are listed in
Table 3.1 below:
Table 3.1: Golf Courses in Koolau Poko
Type/Name Location Public Play
Table 3.1: Golf Courses in Koolau Poko
Type/Name                   Location   Public Play
Municipal:                             
Pali Golf Course            Kāneohe   Yes
Daily Fee:                             
Bayview Golf Links          Kāneohe   Yes
Koolau Golf Links           Kāneohe   Yes
Olomana Golf Links          Waimanālo Yes
Semi-Private:                          
Royal Hawaiian Golf Club    Kailua     Yes
Private:                               
Mid-Pacific Country Club    Kailua     No; members only
Military:                              
Kāneohe Klipper Golf CourseMCB Hawaii No; military only
 
Policies relating to golf courses:
   ·   New golf courses are not recommended for Koolau Poko.
Guidelines relating to golf courses:
   ·   Maintain golf courses to provide view amenities for adjacent urban
areas, especially from well-used public rights-of-way, parks and vista points.
Where necessary, redesign golf course facilities or layouts to reduce the
visual prominence of large accessory buildings.
   ·   Design and maintain existing golf courses to avoid or minimize
environmental impacts, such as siltation, pesticide and fertilizer runoff,
destruction of coastal, riparian and wetland habitat, etc.
   ·   Optimize the function of golf courses as passive drainageways,
maximizing their potential to retain or detain stormwater runoff.
   ·   Provide safe access through golf courses, as necessary, for regional
continuity of pedestrian and bicycle systems.
   ·   When necessary for safety reasons, use landscape screening, setbacks and
modifications to the course layout rather than fencing or solid barriers.
   ·   Provide appropriate buffers between golf courses and surrounding
residential areas.
Cemeteries
Major cemeteries in Koolau Poko are Valley of the Temples Memorial Park in
‘Āhuimanu and the Hawaiian Memorial Park that adjoins the Hawaii State Veterans
Cemetery in Kāneohe. There are other, smaller cemeteries in the region, but
these three are by far the most significant in size and visibility.
Guidelines for cemeteries:
   ·   Maintain the open space character of the cemeteries through very low lot
coverage ratios.
   ·   Where located in the State Conservation District or in preservation area
designated by this Plan, above- grade structures shall be limited to maintain
the open space character of the cemetery.
   ·   Limit above-grade structures to grave markers of modest size; and
necessary administrative and maintenance support buildings that are minimally
visible from public rights-of-way, entries and vista points.
   ·   Where direct, indirect, or cumulative impacts of any proposed cemetery
expansion will affect rare, threatened, or endangered species; or where direct,
indirect, or cumulative impacts of any proposed cemetery expansion on sensitive
areas are identified in any environmental setting; measures to mitigate,
reduce, or rectify any adverse impacts shall be formulated.
   ·   Any proposed expansion by Hawaiian Memorial Park must include a 150-foot
buffer from residential homes, a 2,000-foot buffer from the Pohai Nani senior
living community, and a phased approach to sales and marketing to ensure that
the land adjacent to the residential homes on Lipalu Street is the last portion
of land used for cemetery interment, in order to minimize potential impacts to
neighboring residents.
   ·   Hawaiian Memorial Park shall record with the State of Hawaii Bureau of
Conveyances or the State of Hawaii Land Court, or both, as appropriate, a
conservation easement on the entirety of the 156-acre undeveloped portion of
its Pikoiloa Tract property (TMK No. 4-5-033: 001) that would limit any other
future development on the property, except for the 28.2-acre portion of the
property that encompasses the proposed Hawaiian Memorial Park expansion site,
and the 14.5-acre portion of the property that encompasses the proposed
Kawaewae Heiau cultural preserve.
3.1.4   Protection of Other Natural Resources
This section describes the policies and guidelines for protecting other natural
resources of the region.
3.1.4.1   Policies
   ·   Protect endangered species and their habitats.
   ·   Balance the need for public safety, the protection of property, and the
desire for architectural embellishments with the need to conserve energy and
the protection of wildlife and human health from adverse effects of outdoor
night lighting.
3.1.4.2   Guidelines
   ·   Require surveys to identify endangered species habitat, and require
appropriate mitigation and protection measures to address impacts due to
developments.
   ·   Minimize glare and obtrusive light by limiting outdoor lighting that is
misdirected, excessive, or unnecessary by fully shielding lighting (no light
above the horizontal plane) fixtures and using lower wattage.
   ·   Adopt outdoor night lighting standards that help reinforce the
difference between urban and rural communities.
3.1.5   Relationship to Map A-1, Open Space
The following components of the regional open space system are shown on the
Open Space map in Appendix A:
   ·   Mountains, Wildlife Preserves and Nature Parks.  These areas are
designated for preservation and are to remain outside of the Community Growth
Boundary. Small wetlands and agricultural lots consisting of less than 10 acres
may be included within the Community Growth Boundary, but the intent is to
preserve them in their present use, even if they are not specifically shown on
Map A-1, Open Space.
   ·   Shoreline Areas.  All public shoreline parks, whether managed by the
City or the State, are designated for preservation and shown on Map A-1, Open
Space. Smaller existing and proposed access points to the shoreline are
indicated by symbols on the map.
   ·   Agricultural Areas.  Map A-1, Open Space, shows all areas designated for
agriculture on the Map A-2, Land Use. Some of these lands are in the State
Urban District, but almost all are outside of the Community Growth Boundary.
   ·   Golf Courses and Cemeteries.  The golf courses and three largest
cemeteries in Koolau Poko are shown for their visual contributions to open
space by virtue of their size and landscape character.
   ·   Natural Gulches, Streams and Drainageways.  The riparian areas of
perennial streams that are significant for their natural resource quality or
that have potential for recreational accesses in urbanized areas are designated
as stream management corridors, which are discussed in Section 4.6.
3.2   PARKS AND RECREATION
The City and County of Honolulu Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR)
develops and maintains a system of island-wide parks and community-based parks
and related recreation facilities which it classifies in a hierarchical manner.
The largest and most specialized parks are classified as island-wide parks
since they serve the needs of all Oahu residents. This group includes regional
parks, beach/shoreline parks, beach/shoreline right-of-ways, nature parks/
reserves, botanical gardens, golf courses, and zoological parks. State parks
can also be considered part of the island-wide park system. DPR’s standard for
island-wide parks is 25 acres per 1,000 defacto population. The size of the
park and facilities to be provided are based on the character of the site,
intended use, and availability.
3.2.1   Island-wide Parks
Koolau Poko’s regional, beach and nature parks are listed in
Table 3.1. Compared to other regions of the island, Koolau Poko has a
disproportionate share of park acreage dedicated to natural and cultural
preserves, which is a reflection of the region’s physical assets and historical
use. For future additions to Koolau Poko’s island-wide park land inventory,
priority is given to the acquisition of shorefront properties primarily in
Kāneohe and secondarily in Kailua, as stated in Section 3.1.3.2 Shoreline
Areas.
Table 3.2: Island-Wide Parks in Koolau Poko
Park Type/Name Acreage Park Type/Name Acreage
Table 3.2: Island-Wide Parks in Koolau Poko
Park Type/Name                          Acreage Park Type/Name                   Acreage
Regional Parks                                 Nature Parks                      
   Kahaluu Regional Park 1           34.6       Waihee Valley Nature Park  149.6
   Kualoa Regional Park 1            153.4      HeeiaLea Valley Nature Park218.5
Subtotal                                188.0      Waikāne Nature Park 3     503.0
                                               Subtotal                         871.1
Beach/Shoreline Parks                           Botanical Gardens                 
   Bellows Field Beach Park (weekend 54.2       Hoomaluhia Botanical Garden370.8
use)
   He ‘eia State Park              18.5    Total Acreage                    1,735.0
   Kailua Beach Park                 35.2                                     
   Kaiona Beach Park                 4.3                                      
   Kalama Beach Park                 4.3                                      
   Kāneohe Beach Park               1.1                                      
   Kaupō Beach Park                 8.2                                      
   [Laenani Neighborhood Park]       [1.4]                                    
   Makapuu Beach Park2               46.9                                     
   Waiāhole Beach Park              20.0                                     
   Waimanālo Bay Beach Park         74.8                                     
   Waimanālo Beach Park             37.5                                     
Subtotal                                305.1                                     
1 Portions of these parks function as beach parks or nature parks.
2 Portions of this park are also considered as nature park.
3 Actual park development is pending the removal of hazards.
Acreage shown in brackets [ ] are counted as part of another park and therefore, not
included in the subtotals.
Source: City & County of Honolulu, Department of Parks and Recreation.
 
Policies
The following policies relate to island-wide parks and recreational resources
in Koolau Poko:
   ·   Increase the inventory of island-wide parks by giving priority to the
acquisition of shorefront properties primarily in Kāneohe and secondarily in
Kailua. (Note that expansion of the inventory of island-wide parks is of lower
priority than expansion of the inventory of community-based parks in Koolau
Poko as provided in Section 3.3.2.)
   ·   Maintain and enhance present island-wide parks by utilizing land area
not fully developed for recreation use. Island-wide parks are part of the
region’s abundance of natural and scenic resources and contribute to the
attractiveness of Koolau Poko to both residents and visitors.
   ·   Carefully site active playfields and supporting facilities intended for
intensive use, and use appropriate landscape screening to reduce the potential
impacts on surrounding areas.
   ·   Construct park facilities in a manner that avoids adverse impacts on
natural resources or processes in the coastal zone or any other environmentally
sensitive area. In the design of recreation areas, incorporate natural features
of the site and use landscape materials that are indigenous to the area in
order to retain a sense of place.
   ·   Integrate and link recreational attractions, which may be designed to
have distinct identities and entries, with surrounding areas through the use of
connecting roadways, bikeways, walkways, landscape features and/or
architectural design.
Guidelines
Passive or Nature Parks
   ·   Acquire and develop the proposed Haikū Valley Cultural and Nature
Preserve, including access to Ha’ikū Stairs.
   ·   Improve the Waikāne Nature Preserve and Waihe’e Valley Nature Park.
Active Recreation Areas
   ·   Acquire additional shorefront land for parks in Kāneohe and Kailua with
particular attention to increasing shoreline access in Kāneohe.
   ·   Locate bus stops and loading areas at principal entries and adjacent to
convenient pedestrian accesses to main activity areas within the park.
   ·   Provide amenities and service facilities to accommodate “tailgate”
picnics in parking areas for sporting events, including shading canopy trees
within the parking lot as well as nearby picnic tables and outdoor grills.
   ·   Locate areas designed for sporting events that attract high numbers of
people along major collector streets and separate them as much as possible from
residential areas and significant wildlife habitats.
   ·   Expand active recreational facilities by incorporating facilities such
as playfields and playcourts in regional and beach parks and in the former
sanitary landfill site at Kapaa.
3.2.2   Community-based Parks
Park areas that serve more localized populations are classified as community-
based parks. This group includes district, community, and neighborhood parks as
well as other, smaller park areas (see
Table 3.3).
 
Table 3.3: Types of Community-Based Parks
             Average Population
Park Type    Size    Service Size Typical Facilities
             (Acres)
District     20      25,000       Playfields, playcourts, passive areas,
                                  gym/recreation complex, swimming pool
Community    10      10,000       Playfields, playcourts, passive areas,
                                  recreation bldg
Neighborhood 6       5,000        Playfields, playcourts, passive areas,
                                  comfort station
Mini Park    Varies  High Density Benches, picnic tables, children’s play
                     Area         area
 
DPR uses a standard of two acres per every 1,000 persons in evaluating service
needs, although this figure varies according to each community’s situation.
Koolau Poko contains a total of approximately 167 acres of community- based
parks (see
Table 3.4). Based on DPR’s standard and Koolau Poko’s 2010 population of
115,164, this represents a deficit of approximately 63 acres of community-based
parks. With an expected 2035 population of 115,000, there will still be a
deficit in acreage if there is no addition to the park land inventory. At
present, the only planned addition to the community-based park inventory in
Koolau Poko is a one-acre expansion of the Kāneohe Civic Center Neighborhood
Park.
Acquisition of new park land is dependent currently on the Park Dedication
Ordinance which imposes a recreation requirement on new housing. This method
cannot be used to make up the existing deficit in community-based park lands in
Koolau Poko because the amount of new park improvement is generally intended to
only serve new development.
Table 3.4: Community-Based Public Parks in Koolau Poko
Park Type/Name Acreage Park Type/Name Acreage
Table 3.4: Community-Based Public Parks in Koolau Poko
Park Type/Name                    Acreage Park Type/Name                      Acreage
District Parks                           Neighborhood Parks, continued        
   Kāneohe District Park      31.4       Kaluapuhi Neighborhood Park   5.8
   Kailua District Park        18.7       Kāneohe Civic Center Park    4.2
   Waimanālo District Park    25.3       Kapunahala Neighborhood Park  3.9
Subtotal                          75.4       Keaalau Neighborhood Park     3.7
Community Parks                              Puohala Neighborhood Park     3.9
   ‘Āhuimanu Community Park 4.0        Kalāheo Neighborhood Park    1.4
   Kahaluu Community Park      5.6        Kawainui Neighborhood Park    4.8
   Kāneohe Community & Senior 2.0        Keolu Hills Neighborhood Park 6.3
Center
   Kāneohe Community Park     5.5        Maunawili Neighborhood Park   4.2
   ‘Aikahi Community Park    4.0        Maunawili Valley Neighborhood 8.1
                                          Park
   Enchanted Lake Community Par5.8     Subtotal                            59.7
   Waimanālo Beach Park - port10.0*   Mini Parks
Subtotal                          26.9       Kaelepulu Mini Park           1.6
Neighborhood Parks                           Pōhākupu Mini Park          3.5
   Bayview Neighborhood Park   8.0     Subtotal                            5.1
   Laenani Neighborhood Park   1.4      
   Heeia Neighborhood Park     4.0     Total Acreage                       167.1
*Acreage for this park is counted as part of the Waimanālo District Park and is not
included in the Community Parks total acreage.
Source: City & County of Honolulu, Department of Parks and Recreation.
 
The ratio of population to land area is not the only factor to consider when
evaluating community-based public park needs. Some of the demand for public
park space is off-set by private parks that are owned and maintained by
community associations in Kailua, ‘Āhuimanu, Kāneohe and Lanikai for the use of
their residents and guests. For military personnel and their dependents, the
Marine Corps Base Hawaii, Kāneohe also provides a golf course and several
parks.
It may be possible to increase the availability of public recreation facilities
without acquiring additional land to develop for that purpose. For example, the
current deficit of community-based public park land could be reduced if
portions of the regional parks and beach parks were developed with more active
playing fields, courts and playgrounds, as has been done at Waimanālo Beach
Park. The campuses of some of Koolau Poko’s public schools, including Windward
Community College, have athletic facilities that could be opened for general
community use, possibly under a joint use agreement between the State and the
City. Similar joint use agreements also could be explored with nonprofit
organizations such as the YMCA/YWCA or with Hawaii Pacific University.
The development of landscaped bikeways and walkways along streams and drainage
channels is another way to both increase recreation opportunities and provide
safer and more enjoyable access to existing parks, particularly in the
urbanized areas of Kāneohe and Kailua. “Pocket” parks could be developed along
the route on adjacent small parcels either presently owned by the City or State
or acquired by the City for this purpose.
Possible additional sites for active recreational facilities would be the mauka
portions of Kahaluu Regional Park and Bellows Field Beach Park, if and when
that site is released by the military for permanent civil recreation use. Also,
the former sanitary landfill site at Kapaa has been landscaped for eventual
park use, and some active recreation facilities could be developed there. A
portion of the former landfill area at the edge of Kawainui Marsh is already in
use as a model airplane park. While all possible methods should be pursued as
ways to reduce the deficit of community-based parks, emphasis realistically has
to be placed on future acquisition in areas where the current deficit is most
significant. Additions to the community-based park system are appropriately
determined more by community facility design considerations than by their
relationship to the regional open space network.
Policies
The following policies relate to community-based parks:
   ·   Increase the inventory of community-based parks to provide sports and
recreation facilities for Koolau Poko residents in appropriate locations in
Kailua, Kāneohe, Kahaluu, and Waimanālo with land acquisition to reduce the
existing deficit of such parks in these areas.
   ·   Increase recreation facilities in existing parks and increase access to
public school facilities in areas where there is limited opportunity to expand
park space.
   ·   Require new residential development to provide land for open space and
recreation purposes in lieu of payment of a fee for park dedication purposes,
if the project is of sufficient size to set aside usable land to meet
neighborhood recreational needs.
   ·   Pursue the development of greenways along the following streams and
drainage channels: Kāneohe Stream, from Kāneohe Bay to Kamehameha Highway;
Keaahala Stream, from Kāneohe Bay to Kahekili Highway; Kawainui Stream, from
Kailua Bay to Kawainui Marsh; Kawa Stream, from Mokulele Drive to Kāneohe Bay
Drive; and Kaelepulu Stream, from Kailua Bay to Kaelepulu Pond.
Guidelines
   ·   Design and site structural improvements and landscaping in community-
based parks in such a way as to enhance the aesthetic value of these open space
elements.
   ·   Mitigate visual impacts of large recreation buildings or structures,
lighting, parking lots, perimeter fencing along major collector streets and
other utilitarian elements through building design, plantings or other
appropriate visual screens adjacent to residential areas and major roadways.
   ·   Encourage multi-use and/or modest expansion of existing facilities over
the construction of new structures to minimize impacts on open space.
   ·   Prepare a functional plan for the acquisition of new community-based
parks in Kailua, Kāneohe, Kahaluu, and Waimanālo.
   ·   Have master plans for development of new parks or redevelopment of
existing parks provide for facilities and accessible pathways from surrounding
streets to facilitate pedestrian and bicycle access to parks.
   ·   The DPR should explore ways, through cooperative agreements and mutual
indemnifications with the UH, DOE, and non-profit organizations, to design and
operate facilities to achieve efficiencies and reduce duplication in the
development and use of athletic, recreation, meeting, and parking facilities.
3.3   HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
Koolau Poko’s landscape includes many vestiges of its cultural past, including
ancient fishponds fronting Kāneohe Bay, terraces for the cultivation of taro,
several heiau and other sacred sites, and various remains of pre-historic
habitation. On a smaller scale, there are also historic structures and places
representing Koolau Poko’s more recent past.
Due to the relatively recent urban development of the region, the most
significant remnants of Koolau Poko’s past are archaeological sites. In 1930,
an archaeological survey of Oahu documented numerous sites in the area 7 .
Erosion or other land altering activities such as agricultural use and urban
development had destroyed many of these sites, even at that time.
Table 3.5 lists some of the significant archaeological sites in Koolau Poko
including ancient fishponds and known remaining sacred sites such as heiau and
fishing shrines many of which are listed on the Hawaii or National Registers of
Historic Places. The approximate location of these sites and other significant
cultural features is shown in Exhibit 3.2. This representative list is not
intended to document all significant archaeological sites in Koolau Poko.
Table 3.5: Significant Archaeological Sites in Koolau Poko
Feature Reference
Table 3.5: Significant Archaeological Sites in Koolau Poko
Feature                                Reference
Molii Fishpond                         McAllister, SHPD
Kualoa Ahupuaa Historical District     SHPD
Puakea Heiau, Hakipuu                  McAllister
Kukuianiani Heiau, Waikāne            McAllister
Waikāne Taro Flats                    SHPD
Heeia Fishpond, Heeia                  McAllister, SHPD
Leleahina Heiau, Heeia                 McAllister, SHPD
‘Āhuimanu Taro Loi, Kahaluu         SHPD
Kahaluu Fishpond, Kahaluu              SHPD
Kahaluu Taro Loi                       SHPD
Pohaku Ka Luahine                      SHPD
Luluku Archaeological District         SHPD
Kapapa Island Complex                  SHPD
Kawainui Marsh                         SHPD
Kawainui Marsh, Archaeological site #7 SHPD
Kawaewae Heiau, Kāneohe               McAllister, SHPD
Kanohuluiwi Pond, Kāneohe             SHPD
Mōkapu (Nuupia) Fishponds             SHPD
Mōkapu Burial Area                    SHPD
Pahukini Heiau, Kailua                 McAllister, SHPD
Pohakunui Heiau, Kailua                SHPD
Ulupō Heiau                           McAllister, SHPD
Maunawili Archaeological District      SHPD
Koa (Manana Island)                    SHPD
Manikolu Shelter, Waimanālo           SHPD
Kukuipilau Heiau, Waimanālo           SHPD
Bellows Field Archaeological Area      SHPD
Pāhonu Pond/Heiau, Waimanālo         McAllister, SHPD
Waimanālo Taro Terraces, Waimanālo   SHPD
 
Koolau Poko has many other structural landmarks that are identified with the
history of the region. The following, some of which are listed on the National
or Hawaii Registers of Historic Places, are among the more significant sites:
   ·   Makapuu Lighthouse
   ·   Waikāne Store
   ·   Lanikai Entry Marker
   ·   Haikū Plantation Gardens, Kāneohe
   ·   Hygienic Store, Kahaluu
   ·   Waiāhole Poi Factory
   ·   Kāneohe State Hospital
   ·   Hawaii Youth Correction Facility - Kawailoa, Kailua
   ·   Byodo-in Temple, Valley of the Temples, ‘Āhuimanu
   ·   Boettcher Estate, Kalama Beach Park, Kailua
   ·   Kāneohe Ranch offices, Maunawili
   ·   Waimanālo Ditch System
The cultural richness of Koolau Poko is significant. In addition to the
previously listed sites, other sites highly valued by Koolau Poko residents
include: Holomakani Heiau (Kailua), Na Pohaku o Wahine (Kailua), Kawainui Marsh
Archaeological District (Kailua), Waikalua Loko Fishpond (Kāneohe), Ahu o Laka
Island, Nuupia Ponds (at entrance to Marine Corps Base Hawaii).
There are also many private residences, at various locations, which are more
than 50 years old that have sufficient architectural distinction and integrity
to make them eligible for listing on either the National or State Registers.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8563.png]
3.3.1   Policies
   ·   Emphasize physical references to Koolau Poko’s history and cultural
roots.
   ·   Protect existing visual landmarks and support the creation of new,
culturally appropriate landmarks.
   ·   Preserve significant historic features from earlier periods.
   ·   Retain significant vistas associated with archaeological features.
   ·   Implement in situ preservation and appropriate protection measures for
sites that have high preservation value because of their good condition or
unique features.
   ·   Determine the appropriate treatment for a historic site by the
particular qualities of the site and its relationship to its physical
surroundings. Carefully plan and design adjacent uses to avoid conflicts or
abrupt contrasts that detract from or destroy the physical integrity and
historic or cultural value of the site since the context of a historic site is
usually a significant part of its value.
   ·   Establish the degree of public access and interpretation that would best
promote the preservation of the historic, cultural and educational value of the
site, recognizing that economic use is sometimes the only feasible way to
preserve a site. Public access to a historic site can take many forms, from
direct physical contact and use to limited visual contact. In some cases,
however, it may be highly advisable to restrict access to protect the physical
integrity or cultural value of the site.
3.3.2   Guidelines
Native Hawaiian cultural and archaeological sites:
   ·   Require preservation in situ only for those features that the State
Historic Preservation Officer has recommended such treatment.
   ·   Determine the appropriate preservation methods on a site-by-site basis
in consultation with the State Historic Preservation Officer.
   ·   Determine appropriate delineation of site boundaries and setback
restrictions for adjacent uses based on whether a site is listed and/or
eligible for listing on the State and/or National Register of Historic Places
and on a site-by-site basis in consultation with the State Historic
Preservation Office.
   ·   Include sight lines that are significant to the original purpose and
value of the site in criteria for adjacent use restrictions.
   ·   Determine the appropriateness of public access on a site-by-site basis
in consultation with the State Historic Preservation Officer and the owner of
the land on which the site is located.
Historic sites and landmarks the following guidelines apply:
   ·   Promote the identification, survey and listing of sites that are
eligible for the Hawai’i or National Registers of Historic Places.
   ·   Preserve the architectural character, landscape setting and visual
context of historic and cultural landmarks through appropriate zoning standards
and development controls, as necessary, and public outreach programs such as
design guidelines for the maintenance, renovation or expansion of older
dwellings.
   ·   Provide incentives for the preservation and maintenance of historic
sites and buildings, and allow for adaptive re-use of historic buildings
through a permit review process.
3.4   AGRICULTURAL USE
The system for rating the relative productivity of agricultural lands, known as
Agricultural Lands of Importance to the State of Hawaii (or ALISH), classified
approximately 2,300 acres of agricultural lands in the “Prime” category, and
200 acres in the “Unique” category when the system was developed. These are the
two highest ratings in this classification system. “Other” agricultural lands
in this rating system are those whose limiting characteristics require certain
investments – such as added fertilizer or other soil amendments, drainage
improvements, erosion control practices and flood control – to increase their
productivity. The location of these lands and classifications relative to the
State Agricultural District boundary is shown in Exhibit 3.5.
According to the City and County of Honolulu Department of Planning and
Permitting’s Geographic Information System data, there are 6,179 acres of land
in Koolau Poko that are within the State Land Use Agricultural District and are
designated as ALISH 8 . These lands are considered good farm land. Not all may
be in production, but those that are consist primarily of small farms.
The largest concentration of high-quality agricultural land in Koolau Poko is
in Waimanālo, which is also within reasonable reach of the Honolulu market and
overseas shipping terminals. Other areas are in the valleys between Āhuimanu
and Hakipuu at the northern end of Kāneohe Bay, Maunawili Valley, and the
valleys near the mauka section of Likelike Highway.
Koolau Poko’s wet climate favors it as a region for certain products such as
bananas, papayas and tropical flowers. In some areas, reliable and inexpensive
sources of irrigation water have been developed to supplement rainfall and
adjust for periods of relative drought. The State of Hawaii provides irrigation
water at reasonable rates to farmers in Waimānalo and in its Waiāhole Valley
agricultural park. The State Commission on Water Resources Management’s 1997
decision to release a greater amount of flow from Waiāhole Ditch back to
Windward streams made more water available for the expansion of taro and other
crop production in the northern valleys of the region.
The pattern of small farms, typically with a dwelling on the same lot, presents
a paradox. Many people are attracted to the lifestyle of the small farms in the
region, pursuing agriculture for subsistence or supplemental income. This
arrangement enhances the economic feasibility of an agricultural operation by
(1) minimizing land costs; (2) enhancing security for agricultural products and
equipment; (3) allowing more efficient access for daily maintenance; and (4)
avoiding the cost of a separate home site for the farmer. On the other hand,
the pattern of development has attracted those who are seeking a large
residential lot with a “country” ambience at a reasonable price. Increasingly,
older farmers seek more dwellings on their properties to pass their legacies on
to their children and grandchildren or to finance their retirement. Growing use
of small farm lots for this purpose may lead to a gradual transformation of
agricultural areas to large-lot residential neighborhoods, induced by real
estate development pressures.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8561.png]
Development pressure is exacerbated as conflicts arise between agricultural use
and nearby residences, such as increased complaints from neighbors about dust,
noise, overspray, odors, and other normal effects of farming. In turn, this can
lead to operational changes that may be required by the enforcement of public
health regulations and that adversely affect the feasibility of agriculture.
One way to avoid this conflict is to require the more-recently established use
to maintain adequate separation between agricultural and residential uses.
Land use policy can support agricultural activities in other ways, as well. For
example, zoning and development codes can restrict non-agricultural uses to
those that are intended to meet the needs of the rural community or that are
related to agricultural operations in the area. It can also propose the
development of facilities and programs that support agricultural activities and
the marketing of products.
3.4.1   Policies
The following policies apply to lands designated for agricultural use:
   ·   Encourage agricultural use of small lots.
   ·   Adopt development and public works standards that are appropriate and
cost-effective for rural, agricultural areas.
   ·   Provide support infrastructure, services, and facilities to foster and
sustain agricultural operations.
   ·   Implement tax policies and easements that promote active, long-term
agricultural uses.
   ·   Encourage organic and sustainable agriculture.
   ·   Encourage self-contained land-based aquaculture in appropriate
locations.
   ·   Prevent the conversion of agricultural lots to residential or other non-
agricultural uses.
   ·   Modify standards for public infrastructure in rural and agricultural
areas in accord with the character and needs of such areas.
   ·   Develop and apply use standards to provide for all agricultural
activities and uses customarily associated with agricultural areas, including
ranching and plant nurseries (crop production with on-site retail or wholesale
sales).
   ·   In agricultural districts, craft nuisance regulations in zoning and
environmental codes to give preference to agriculture use over residential use.
   ·   Limit non-agricultural uses to those that provide support services for
agricultural operations or operations related to public renewable energy
sourcing, provided it does not remove high quality agricultural land.
   ·   Provide tax incentives, technical, and financial assistance, and public
land or facilities that support agricultural operations and/or the marketing of
products.
   ·   Promote land trusts, conservation easements, agricultural dedications,
and other mechanisms as incentives to preserve agricultural land use.
   ·   Promote and provide opportunities for small family farms.
3.4.2   Guidelines
   ·   Limit the floor area of dwellings and prevent inappropriate urban uses,
such as meeting facilities and conditional uses that have no direct
relationship to agricultural or local community needs. Permit a dwelling only
if it is accessory to a verifiable agricultural use on the same lot.
   ·   Require new residential development to maintain an adequate buffer when
adjacent to agricultural lands, giving consideration to topographic barriers,
prevailing winds, and the noise and air-borne emissions associated with the
type of agricultural operation.
   ·   Adopt standards for roadway and other infrastructure design that are
appropriate and intended for continued agricultural use rather than residential
use.
   ·   Require the acknowledgement of agricultural standards in the subdivision
process and in all deeds to lots.
   ·   Focus performance standards for agricultural zoning districts on
preventing degradation of the natural environment, maintaining the viability of
agricultural uses, and protecting the health and safety of agricultural workers
rather than on disturbance to residential uses.
   ·   Encourage development proposals of more than two lots to apply for
cluster housing which provides a larger, contiguous area reserved for
agriculture use.
   ·   Structure property tax assessments and rates to encourage long-term
leases for agricultural operations. Also, adopt lower development fees and
standards for agricultural subdivisions that do not involve the construction of
dwellings.
   ·   Adopt zoning standards that promote the use of natural energy sources to
support agricultural uses.
   ·   Permit revenue-producing activities on lots where a commercial
agricultural operation is being conducted, as ancillary uses. Allow these
activities only if they do not interfere with surrounding agricultural uses.
Examples of compatible activities include camping, picnicking, horseback
riding, training and instruction, rodeos, polo matches, and tours of botanical
gardens, fishponds, and kalo loi. Private parties promoting agricultural
production or agriculture-related educational activities may be compatible,
depending on the intensity of use and the location and size of the property.
Recreational activities involving motorized vehicles and thrill craft are
generally not considered compatible.
3.5   RESIDENTIAL USE
The Community Growth Boundary is established to preserve open space and
agricultural areas and contain the spread of development. Therefore, housing
capacity in Koolau Poko will be increased only by:
   ·   “Infill” development of remaining vacant lands in areas that are already
urbanized;
   ·   Subdivision of larger residential lots into smaller parcels at various
locations throughout the region;
   ·   Expansions of existing homes to accommodate larger households;
   ·   Residential development on Marine Corps Base Hawaii and lands under the
jurisdiction of the Department of Hawaiian Homelands or the Office of Hawaiian
Affairs;
   ·   Additional housing units on existing residential lots through such
programs as ‘ohana dwellings/accessory dwelling units; and
   ·   Housing above storefronts in town centers.
While the development of vacant parcels is readily identified and their effects
are more immediately apparent, the physical changes wrought by incremental
intensification of residential use in existing built-up neighborhoods through
subdivisions and home expansions will be slower and more subtle. Effective
residential lot design standards which limit building height, coverage, paving,
and the removal of landscaping may be implemented to avoid the long-term
cumulative impact of this gradual transformation, which could adversely affect
the character of existing neighborhoods.
Although recognized as a region with a slow growth policy, Koolau Poko
continues to have a high demand for housing.
Land use planning at the local level has a limited ability to shape market
forces or to influence the rate and amount of property taxes, but it can
restrict transient occupancy of housing. Currently, except for nonconforming
uses, vacation rentals within areas outside resort designations are not
allowed. The current General Plan does not support vacation rentals in
residential areas. The military can be encouraged to take a more active role in
providing housing on-base for their personnel and dependents in order to
increase the availability of housing for the local resident population.
Another concern of some Koolau Poko residents is the amount of large tour buses
visiting the neighborhoods and the increase in vehicular and foot traffic.
Residents are concerned about the potential hazards of large tour buses
traveling on streets that have no sidewalks which could pose a danger to
pedestrians and bicyclists. In general, the community would like to limit tour
bus stops, loading, and unloading by prohibiting any new off-street parking or
loading areas for large (15 passengers or more) private vehicles unless used
for school or public transportation vehicles. To address the potential impacts
and hazards that tour buses may have, a study could be undertaken to evaluate
the impact of large vehicles on residential streets and implement its
recommendations where warranted.
As noted in Section 2.1.7, Koolau Poko has two types of residential communities
that are located within the Community Growth Boundary: one more suburban in
character and the other more rural. The suburban communities are those
identified in the General Plan as “urban fringe” areas, corresponding to the
suburban communities of Kāneohe, Kailua, Mokapu Peninsula, Maunawili and
‘Āhuimanu within the State Urban District boundary. The “rural” areas within
the Community Growth Boundary consist of smaller, more dispersed, less
intensively developed residential communities and towns than those of Koolau
Poko’s “urban fringe” areas; namely, the sections of Waimānalo, Kahaluu,
Waiāhole and Waikāne in the State Urban District where there are clusters of
parcels that are less than two acres in size occupied by dwellings or buildings
used for community or commercial purposes other than agriculture.
While these two types of residential communities have some common features,
they are distinguishable by their built form, particularly with respect to
density of development. Accordingly, Section 3.5.2 contains two sets of
guidelines for residential development: one for rural communities and the other
for suburban communities.
3.5.1   Policies
   ·   Protect the character of existing residential areas and enhance
desirable residential amenities.
   ·   In accordance with the General Plan, increase housing capacity and
address the trend toward decreasing household size through the development of
new homes on lots presently designated for low-density residential use, and the
expansion of existing homes in existing residential neighborhoods.
   ·   Respond to the special needs of an aging population by providing future
housing development for the elderly in a variety of living accommodations that
are affordable to low- and moderate-income, gap group, and other elderly
households; such as multi-generation households, group homes, assisted living
units, and continuing care retirement communities.
   ·   Provide greater emphasis on safe, accessible, convenient, and
comfortable pedestrian routes, bus stops, and bike routes in residential areas,
even if this requires somewhat slower travel speeds or less direct routes.
   ·   Allow community facilities such as schools, churches, and meeting halls,
as well as home-based occupations, with appropriate limitations on scale,
siting and intensity of activity to respect adjacent residential uses and the
prevailing character of the surrounding neighborhood.
   ·   Encourage bus, pedestrian, and bicycle travel, particularly to reach
neighborhood destinations such as schools, parks, and convenience stores,
recognizing the need for accessible design and safe travel conditions for
elderly and/or disabled people. Implement passive and active automobile traffic
calming measures on residential neighborhood streets and plant street trees to
provide shading for sidewalks and bus stops. Provide sufficient area within the
public right-of-way to accommodate bus stop shelters.
   ·   Encourage energy efficient features, such as the use of solar panels for
heating water or electricity, and passive solar design, such as the use of
window recesses and overhangs and orientation of openings to allow natural
cross-ventilation. Also, incorporate resource conservation measures, such as
water flow constrictors and facilities for the sorting of waste materials for
recycling, in the design of new development and expansions of existing
dwellings. Minimize the visual impacts of such measures.
   ·   Avoid safety and health problems inherent in the development of land
with steep slopes and/or potentially unstable soil conditions. Reevaluate and
revise development standards governing such conditions to reflect the most
current civil, soils, structural engineering and geological findings related to
this subject as well as the analysis of historical experience on Oahu.
Development within the 100 year floodplain needs to conform with regulations
and guidelines of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   ·   Regulate nuisance in zoning and environmental codes such that
residential uses are given preference over non-residential uses within
residential zoning districts.
   ·   Evaluate the impact of large vehicles on residential streets and
implement its recommendations, where warranted.
3.5.2   Guidelines
This Plan recognizes two categories of residential development: Rural
Communities and Suburban Communities.
3.5.2.1   Rural Communities
   ·   Adopt development standards and design guidelines for residential-
designated areas within the Community Growth Boundary in order to:
      °   Minimize impervious surfaces;
      °   Require greater building setbacks than in suburban residential zoning
districts;
      °   Generally limit building heights to two stories;
      °   Allow relatively narrow roadway widths;
      °   Allow alternative sidewalk designs, as compared to suburban
communities, providing they comply with public safety and ADA standards;
      °   Allow the use of detention basins and grassed swales for stormwater
drainage instead of concrete curbs and gutters;
      °   Encourage the retention of a neighborhood’s character by avoiding a
concentration of group living facilities and group homes;
      °   Promote passive solar design, such as the use of sloped roof forms
with wide overhangs, and residential-scaled energy conservation and natural
energy harnessing devices;
      °   Promote water conservation measures, such as flow constrictors,
xeriscaping, and use of nonpotable water sources for irrigation; and
      °   Achieve an overall residential density of no greater than four
principal dwelling units per acre.
3.5.2.2   Suburban Communities
   ·   Adopt development standards and design guidelines for lots designated
for residential use within the Community Growth Boundary in order to:
      °   Retain the physical character and definition of neighborhoods and
minimize long-term adverse impacts of expansions of existing homes and new
infill development on surrounding neighborhoods;
      °   Enhance the identities of neighborhoods through the use of
landscaping, natural features, and building form and siting;
      °   Encourage appropriate scale and privacy with respect to surrounding
residential properties when infill development such as new homes or expansion
of existing homes occurs;
      °   Provide a range of housing at varying densities, depending on the
characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood and the physical features of
the site, but not to exceed six dwelling units per acre;
      °   Limit building height to two stories;
      °   Reduce the visual dominance of vehicular parking on residential lots
and discourage the paving of yards;
      °   Discourage the use of solid barrier walls that obscure views of the
front yard and dwelling entrances from the street;
      °   Prohibit development on slopes of 20 percent or greater that have
soil characteristics indicating potential instability for building purposes;
      °   Avoid the geographic clustering or concentration of group living
facilities and group homes that are licensed by the State and/or allowed by
federal laws;
      °   Promote passive solar design, such as the use of sloped roof forms
with wide overhangs, and residential-scaled energy conservation and natural
energy harnessing devices; and
      °   Promote water conservation measures, such as flow constrictors,
xeriscaping, and use of nonpotable water sources for irrigation.
   ·   Implement traffic safety measures for streets in residential
neighborhoods, including:
      °   Install traffic calming modifications at selected street locations
where speeding is a chronic problem;
      °   Install additional lighting or more visually prominent crosswalks at
selected intersections where pedestrian safety is a concern;
      °   Post signs or install striping for designated bike routes and bike
lanes; and
      °   Make sidewalk or pathway improvements and undertake operational
measures that are identified as part of a Safe Routes to Schools or Complete
Streets program, or other pedestrian safety initiatives.
   ·   Adopt zoning maps that recognize existing residential apartment
developments, but allow new apartment development only under the following
circumstances:
      °   The site is at least one acre in size and is located in close
proximity to a Regional Town Center;
      °   The building height does not exceed three stories; and
      °   The density does not exceed 30 units per acre.
3.5.2.3   Special Needs Housing
Special Needs Housing is typically comprised of facilities designed for certain
segments of the population with special living requirements. Categories of
special needs groups include low- and moderate-income sectors, elderly,
disabled people, and people with health problems or needs for other forms of
special care. Often such housing, including group living facilities and group
homes, includes special features, such as congregate dining and social rooms;
laundry, housekeeping and personal assistance services; shuttle bus services
for project residents; and skilled nursing beds or physical therapy clinics.
Special needs housing are ideally located in close proximity to transit
services and commercial centers since those with special needs are less likely
or able to drive. Although special needs housing can occur at a variety of
scales appropriate to the region’s neighborhoods, it is intended that multi-
family housing will be the primary form used to achieve economies of scale in
the development of special needs housing. Thus, it is anticipated that special
needs housing will be accommodated primarily within the low-density apartment
areas and the commercial-residential mixed use areas in the Regional Town
Centers.
3.5.3   Relation to Map A-2, Land Use
Residential areas are shown conceptually on the Land Use Map in Appendix A as
follows:
Rural Communities.  This land use designation corresponds to smaller, more
dispersed, less intensively developed residential communities and towns within
the Community Growth Boundary.
Suburban Communities.  This land use designation corresponds to areas
identified in the General Plan as “urban fringe” areas. These residential
communities consist of lots typically sized one acre or less.
Special Needs Housing.  This land use is not specifically designated on the
Land Use Map, but it is allowed in residential and mixed use areas subject to
project-by-project review for compatibility with surrounding uses.
Nonresidential uses that are not specifically designated on the Land Use Map
but are allowed in all residential areas include: elementary schools, parks,
churches, community centers, day-care centers, and other public facility and
utility uses serving the area. It should be noted that some of these uses do
require project review and/or public hearings and issuance of permits before
they can be developed in residential and rural areas.
3.6   COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES
Much of the commercial development in Koolau Poko is in the form of shopping
centers. Some are located within the central business districts of Kāneohe and
Kailua, while others are located in outlying areas, usually surrounded by
suburban residential neighborhoods and smaller commercial properties. Listed in
Table 3.6 are the shopping centers that contained over 50,000 square feet of
gross leasable area in 2010.
The main commercial district in Kailua is currently undergoing redevelopment.
The former Don Quijote was replaced by a new 130,000 square foot Target
Corporation store and other new stores, such as the 33,500 square foot Whole
Foods Market, have joined the Kailua Town Center. Redevelopment of the
commercial district includes the addition of other businesses, but Target in
particular, has drawn opposition from many Kailua residents. The main concerns
were the “big box” scale and impact on the community.
A “big box” retail establishment is generally a single freestanding store
belonging to a chain of stores and measuring 50,000 square feet or more. Big
box stores are typically situated on the property to be car-oriented and not
pedestrian friendly and big box stores draw customers from an area much larger
than the community in which it is located. The amount of floor area, the
traffic it generates, the flow of traffic around the community, and the effects
on smaller businesses were the main concerns of the recent redevelopment. In
general, the community would like to discourage additional big box retail
stores or factory outlet stores in the town centers unless they retain a more
pedestrian-oriented environment along the sidewalks and not larger than 90,000
square feet of floor area.
Table 3.6: Major Shopping Centers in Koolau Poko
Shopping Center Site Area (Acres) Gross Leasable Area  Location Characteristics
                                  (Sq. Ft.)
Table 3.6: Major Shopping Centers in Koolau Poko
                  Gross
Shopping  Site    Leasable
Center    Area    Area     Location Characteristics
          (Acres) (Sq.
                  Ft.)
‘Aikahi 7.9     103,000  Outskirts of Kailua at major collector road intersection; Pali Palms Center
Park                       across street
Enchanted 5.5     75,000   Within Enchanted Lake community in the outskirts of Kailua; other small
Lake                       commercial properties located adjacent and across street
Kailua    2.3     84,222   Within Kailua central business district
Kāneohe  3.3     54,000   Within Kāneohe central business district
Kāneohe  10.0    106,000  Edge of Kāneohe central business district; across Kamehameha Highway from
Bay                        Windward Mall
Temple    12.3    100,866  Within Āhuimanu community; surrounded by townhouse and low density apartment
Valley                     development
Windward  15.4    231,782  Within Kāneohe at major highway intersection; small commercial and industrial
City                       properties nearby
Windward  32.0    530,000  Edge of Kāneohe central business district; across from Kāneohe Bay Shopping
Mall                       Center
Windward
Town &    5.6     87,639   Within Kailua central business district
Country
Source: International Council of Shopping Centers, 1992 Directory; interviews with property managers.
“Major” is defined as those with over 50,000 sq. ft. of gross leasable floor area.
 
The majority of office space in Koolau Poko is located in Kāneohe, with an
inventory of approximately 212,000 square feet. Given current high vacancy
rates, there is little demand for expansion of office space in the region. The
existing supply is anticipated to be sufficient to meet near-term increases in
demand should economic conditions change.
 
Table 3.7: Office Space in Koolau Poko
Office Building            Net Rentable Area (Sq. Ft.)
Castle Professional Center 62,820
Enchanted Lake Plaza       19,385
Kailua Commercial Center   26,469
Pali Palms Plaza           58,604
Windward Business Center   58,253
 
Most of Koolau Poko’s industrial land is within the Kapaa light industrial
subdivision. The designated industrial land and building inventory is expected
to be capable of meeting future demand, especially in light of the declining
island-wide demand for industrial space and no windward airport or harbor to
generate or sustain high demand in the area. Industrial activities and future
opportunities are likely to be limited to small service and repair operations,
storage facilities, and other service business uses that are oriented to the
needs of the region’s suburban and rural communities. Such uses, which are
commercial in character, are permitted in the Kāneohe and Kailua Regional Town
Centers. The anticipated demand for industrial space in this region will be
more light industrial uses and can be accommodated within the existing
industrial or mixed use zones of the town centers of Kailua and Kāneohe and in
the vicinity of the Kapaa quarry. However, a light industrial site in Waimānalo
should be considered to address parking and maintenance needs of large trucks
and industrial vehicles.
3.6.1   Policies
For purposes of this Plan, the various types of commercial and industrial uses
are defined and designated in five categories: Rural Commercial Center,
Suburban Commercial Center, Community Commercial Center, Regional Town Center,
and Light and Extractive Industry. The policies pertaining to each of these
categories are as follows:
3.6.1.1   Rural Commercial Center
The Rural Commercial Center is a small cluster of commercial and service uses
which serve primarily the surrounding rural community. Due to their highway
exposure, many businesses also attract visitors and residents from outside the
immediate community. The Rural Commercial Center typically consists of small
business establishments located on small land parcels rather than in shopping
centers. At present, commercial uses within the rural communities are somewhat
dispersed along highway frontages.
Policies pertaining to Rural Commercial Centers are as follows:
   ·   Promote a more concentrated, but small-scale center for commercial
activities and services for rural communities and agricultural enterprises in
Kahaluu and Waimanālo.
   ·   Maintain consistency in architecture and scale between the building mass
of a commercial center and its rural setting. Ensure that the architectural
character of commercial centers respects the surrounding context, particularly
when located adjacent to a residential area or significant natural or historic
feature. Commercial centers lend themselves to the application of urban design
features that provide distinctiveness to each center and strengthen the
characteristics of the communities they serve.
3.6.1.2   Suburban Commercial Center
The Suburban Commercial Center typically encompasses an area of about five to
ten acres or less, with an aggregate floor area of up to 100,000 square feet.
It may consist of a shopping center on a single lot, a concentration of
commercial establishments on smaller lots, or a combination of the two. It is
located within or adjacent to a residential neighborhood and contains services
and shops catering to common household needs. Some examples of such businesses
are grocery stores, pharmacies, copy centers, dentists, and banks.
Policies pertaining to Suburban Commercial Centers are as follows:
   ·   Designate commercial properties within the Community Growth Boundary
that are not defined as Community Commercial Centers or Regional Town Centers
as Suburban Commercial Centers.
   ·   Maintain the present scale and purpose of the Suburban Commercial
Centers, but allow minor expansions of floor area on lots that are presently
zoned for commercial use.
   ·   Emphasize retail stores, personal services and public facilities
designed to serve the needs of the surrounding community, i.e., typically
residents within a one- to two-mile radius.
   ·   Incorporate site design and facilities to promote pedestrian and bicycle
access.
   ·   Maintain compatibility in architectural design and scale between the
building mass of a commercial center and its urban and natural setting,
particularly when located adjacent to a residential area or significant natural
or historic feature.
3.6.1.3   Community Commercial Center
The typical Community Commercial Center is situated along an arterial road or
at the juncture of major roads. The nucleus is a retail shopping center that
occupies between 10 to 30 acres and contains up to 250,000 square feet of floor
area, but with the addition of adjacent, smaller sites the entire Community
Commercial Center may encompass up to 50 acres. In addition to the uses found
in Suburban Commercial Centers, Community Commercial Centers may include
offices, service industrial establishments, entertainment and social centers.
Windward City Shopping Center and adjacent commercial uses fall into this
category.
Policies pertaining to Community Commercial Centers are as follows:
   ·   Retain the present purpose and approximate size of Community Commercial
Centers.
   ·   Allow modest additions of floor area and parking through redesign of
site.
   ·   Prohibit expansion of commercial zoning to additional lots in the
vicinity of these centers, except for those near Windward City that are
presently zoned heavy industrial, but are predominantly in commercial-type
uses.
   ·   Incorporate site design and facilities to promote pedestrian and bicycle
access.
   ·   Maintain compatibility in architecture and scale of commercial centers
and their urban and natural settings, particularly when located adjacent to a
residential area or significant natural or historic feature.
3.6.1.4   Regional Town Center
The commercial core areas of Kāneohe (defined by the Kāneohe Town Plan as the
Windward Mall area in general) and Kailua are defined as “Regional Town
Centers”. They offer a wider range of shopping and services than the other
commercial centers in the region, including light industrial uses. Their roles
will be intensified and enhanced by directing new commercial development to
these centers, increasing the mix of uses and types of services and activities
in the centers and providing more convenient public transportation access and
pedestrian amenities within and leading to the centers.
Regional Town Center policies are as follows:
   ·   Designate the centers of Kāneohe and Kailua as the focal points for
regional shopping and services. This may include small to medium-sized office
buildings and “service-industrial” establishments.
   ·   Allow low-density apartment and special needs housing uses in the
commercial district to stimulate business activity and create a livelier
environment, but not to the extent that it is inconsistent with General Plan
population policies, nor to the extent that a net loss of commercial floor area
is realized in the affected Regional Town Center.
   ·   In the centers of Kāneohe and Kailua, integrate the pedestrian
circulation system with linkages through blocks to public sidewalks and transit
stops. Encourage the design of storefronts and entries to business
establishments to support this pedestrian orientation.
   ·   Encourage shared use of parking to reduce the dominance of parking lots.
Implement a parking improvement district in Kāneohe and expand the parking
improvement district in Kailua.
   ·   Scale and site buildings to be consistent with the surrounding context.
Provide appropriate setback and height transitions.
   ·   Incorporate site design and facilities to promote pedestrian, bicycle,
and transit access.
   ·   Promote efficiencies and other improvements in traffic and parking
conditions by redesigning or re-siting parking lots, driveways (particularly in
the Kailua Regional Town Center) and walkways and providing shuttle bus
services within the Kailua and Kāneohe communities and their respective
Regional Town Centers.
   ·   Maintain consistency in architecture and scale between the building mass
of a commercial center and its urban and natural setting, particularly when
located adjacent to a residential area or significant natural or historic
feature. The Regional Town Centers may reflect a more urban architectural
character, with emphasis on pedestrian-scaled design and features.
   ·   Encourage environmental compatibility via use of energy efficient
features, such as solar panels for heating water or electricity, and passive
solar design, such as the use of arcades, window recesses and awnings and
orientation of openings to allow natural cross-ventilation. Also, incorporate
resource conservation measures, such as water flow constrictors and facilities
for the sorting of waste materials for recycling, in the design of new
development.
3.6.1.5   Light Industrial and Extractive Industries
This description pertains to light industrial uses and resource extractive
activities, such as sand and rock quarrying. Koolau Poko has two quarry sites,
one in Waimanālo and the other at Kapaa. The former quarry at Kapaa was the
site of the City’s largest sanitary landfill for many years until its closure
in 1997. A portion of the existing Kapaa quarry is bounded by light industrial
uses. This Plan anticipates the continuation of existing quarries.
Policies pertaining to light industrial and extractive industries are as
follows:
   ·   Promote a re-use plan for the Kapaa quarry sites that emphasizes the
restoration of natural conditions rather than urban uses. Use fill material
that is engineered and generally consists of natural materials or non-toxic
construction debris. Limit the quantity of fill material to the amount
necessary to simulate the original topographic conditions of the site. Provide
a suitable depth of topsoil to establish plant material similar to that in the
surrounding area.
   ·   Promote a re-use plan for the Kapaa quarry that includes an expansion of
light industrial use, if sufficient demand can be demonstrated.
   ·   Promote a re-use plan for the quarry site in Waimanālo that supports the
development of Hawaiian Home Lands residential lots and a neighborhood mini-
park.
3.6.2   Guidelines
Guidelines for commercial and light industrial uses are as follows:
3.6.2.1   Rural Commercial Centers
Architectural Character and Building Mass
      °   Encourage the rustic appearance in building forms, with pitched roof
forms or “false-front” parapets characteristic of rural towns in Hawaii.
      °   Promote Individual business establishments that are relatively small
and focused on provision of goods and services primarily to the surrounding
rural community or agricultural activities.
      °   Site buildings close to the roadway in the manner of a traditional
rural village.
      °   Keep meeting facilities, other than schools or service facilities,
relatively small in area and focused on accommodating the needs of the
surrounding rural community or agricultural activities.
      °   In Kahaluu, improve the commercial center in the vicinity of the
Kamehameha Highway-Kahekili Highway intersection in accordance with the design
recommendations of the Kahaluu Community Master Plan (2007).
Visual Screening, Lighting and Signage
      °   Encourage informal landscaping, subdued road signage and lighting,
and parking lots that are visually subordinate to the buildings and
landscaping.
      °   In Kahaluu, implement the landscape, fencing, and signage
improvements in public rights-of-way and in lands recommended in the Kahaluu
Community Master Plan (2007).
Vehicular Access
      °   In Kahaluu, implement the traffic calming and transportation
measures, i.e., roadway treatments, bus stop relocation, bikeway, that are
recommended in the Kahaluu Community Master Plan (2007).
Outlying Commercial Uses
      °   Outside of the Rural Commercial Centers, allow structures occupied by
existing commercial, light industrial or community facility uses to be rebuilt
or remodeled within their present floor area, provided they meet the design
guidelines for Rural Commercial Centers.
      °   Further explore and define the needs for a community baseyard and
vocational training center in Waimanālo, as part of the implementation of the
Waimanālo Business Plan.
3.6.2.2   Suburban and Community Commercial Centers
Architectural Character and Building Mass
      °   Retain the residential character; height, size, and massing of
buildings to be compatible with adjacent residential areas.
      °   Limit the total floor area of Suburban Community Centers to a maximum
of 100,000 square feet, and limit the aggregate floor area of all properties
within Community Commercial Centers to 350,000 square feet.
      °   Encourage gable and hip-form roofs, using breaks in the roof line to
reduce the apparent scale of large roof plates.
      °   Express residential character by using exterior materials and colors
that are contextual with the neighborhood character.
Vehicular Access
      °   Provide access to the parking and loading areas from a collector
street, when available.
      °   Encourage use of shared driveways to access parking areas between
buildings.
      °   Permit access to a local residential street only if it is for
emergency or secondary access and would not encourage through traffic along the
local street.
Pedestrian and Bicycle Facilities
      °   Provide pedestrian access from the public sidewalk or other off-site
pedestrian pathway to the entrance of establishments in the commercial center
that does not require crossing a traffic lane or parking lot aisle or driveway.
      °   Provide a direct pedestrian connection from the interior walkways in
the commercial center to a bus stop, if a bus stop is nearby.
      °   Provide bicycle racks for security. Locate bicycle racks to be
visible and readily accessible from the street entry.
Visual Screening, Lighting, and Signage
      °   Visually screen parking and service areas from streets and
residential areas.
      °   Include a landscaped screen of trees and hedges along the street
frontages and property lines.
      °   Use only fully-shielded lighting which does not exceed the minimum
standards necessary to meet safety and security requirements in parking lots.
      °   Ensure compatibility between the type, size, design, placement, and
color of signage and the context of adjacent facilities and uses.
3.6.2.3   Regional Town Centers (Kailua and Kāneohe)
Mix of Uses
      °   Locate public uses serving a regional purpose -- such as Satellite
City Halls, regional libraries, police substations, post offices, and civic
centers - within or adjacent to Regional Town Centers and not in outlying
areas. Public facilities that have smaller service areas or that are an
integral part of a regional network, such as elementary schools, fire stations,
pump stations, and utility substations, may be located in outlying areas.
      °   Locate service industrial uses within enclosed buildings.
      °   Locate, design, and operate uses that generate undue noise levels in
a way that will keep noise to an acceptable level in adjacent areas.
Architectural Character and Building Massing
      °   Allow variation in architectural character, depending on the context
and theme for the particular center. For portions of commercial center
buildings that are adjacent to, or readily visible from, residential areas,
encourage architectural character that reflects and are compatible with the
residential character; or screen from view from such areas by landscaping.
      °   Avoid blank facades on portions of buildings visible from public
areas by using texture, articulation, color, and fenestration to create visual
interest.
      °   Limit building heights to 40 feet, as is currently established, with
height setback transitions from street frontages, the shoreline, and adjacent
residential areas.
      °   Limit the total floor area belonging to a single business to 90,000
square feet.
      °   Locate street facades of buildings at or near the street property
line and incorporate display windows. Orient the primary entries to commercial
establishments toward the sidewalk.
      °   Locate parking for individual commercial structures behind or to the
side of the building. Secondary entries to business establishments may be
provided from parking areas.
      °   Encourage the development of cooperative parking agreements among
neighboring businesses and landowners.
Pedestrian, Bicycle, and Transit Facilities
      °   Provide street frontage improvements for bus stops, including bus
shelters and dedicated loading lanes, along all abutting streets that have bus
routes.
      °   Provide a pedestrian pathway from the bus stop to an entrance to the
main building of the commercial center. Clearly indicate the pathway with
special paving or markings and provide weather protection, where feasible, if
the commercial center building is not directly connected to the bus shelter.
      °   Design and place bicycle parking in secure places that are visible
from the main street or parking entry to the commercial center.
Visual Screening, Lighting and Signage
      °   Buffer noise and other adverse impacts related to parking, loading
and service areas from adjacent residential areas with proper siting and by
landscaped berms or solid walls fronted by landscaping.
      °   Plant a landscape screen, consisting of trees and hedges, along
streets fronting parking lots or garages.
      °   Visually screen storage areas for vehicles, equipment, and supplies
from the street and adjacent lots by privacy walls and buildings, fronted by
landscaping to soften the appearance of large solid walls.
      °   Signage may be directly illuminated, but discourage the use of direct
illumination of building features. Use only fully-shielded lighting to avoid
direct visibility from residential areas.
3.6.2.4   Light and Extractive Industry
Visual Screening, Lighting and Signage
      °   Buffer noise and other adverse impacts from quarrying operations from
adjacent urban uses, wildlife preserves, and public roads by a combination of
landscaped berms and setbacks.
      °   For light industrial uses, buffer noise and other adverse impacts
from parking, loading and service areas from adjacent urban uses, wildlife
preserves, and public roads by a combination of solid walls or berms and
landscaped setbacks.
      °   Plant a landscape screen, consisting of trees and hedges, along roads
fronting parking lots or garages.
      °   Visually screen storage areas for vehicles, equipment, and supplies
from adjacent roads, wildlife preserves, and urban uses by privacy walls and by
building orientation. Soften the appearance of screening walls by landscaping
in front.
      °   Use fully-shielded lighting that balances the needs for public
safety, security, energy conservation, and wildlife protection.
Drainage and Waste Material
      °   Manage stormwater runoff through application of Best Management
Practices (BMPs) or containment or filtering onsite. To minimize the creation
of impervious surfaces, alternatives to hardscape are encouraged. Avoid
discharge into adjacent wildlife preserves, water resources, sanitary sewage
systems, or other urban use areas.
      °   Prevent leachates from underground storage tanks or fill material
from migrating offsite, applying particularly stringent measures to sites near
wildlife preserves. Where practicable, institute leachate management systems
from existing and closed quarries and landfills.
      °   Prevent litter and other waste material from encroaching into
adjacent sites through the use of proper operational means, as well as
landscaping.
3.6.3   Relation to Map A-2, Land Use
Commercial and industrial areas are conceptually shown on Map A-2, Land Use, as
follows:
Rural Commercial Centers.  The Rural Commercial Centers of the rural
communities of Waimanālo and Kahaluu are illustrated on the Land Use Map and
designated “RC.”
Suburban Commercial Centers and Community Commercial Centers.  The locations of
Community Commercial Centers and Suburban Commercial Centers with an aggregate
floor area of more than 50,000 square feet are shown on the Land Use Map and
designated with “CC” and “SC”, respectively.
Regional Town Centers.  The components of the Regional Town Centers of Kailua
and Kāneohe are designated with “TC,” representing the general location, size
and shape of the respective land areas.
Light and Extractive Industry.  Industrial areas are indicated on the Land Use
Map.
3.7   INSTITUTIONAL USES
Koolau Poko is home to several public and private institutional campuses. Its
secondary school campuses are listed and discussed in Section 4.7.
Table 3.8 lists other significant institutions.
Table 3.8: Institutional Campuses in Koolau Poko
Institution Location Characteristic
Table 3.8: Institutional Campuses in Koolau Poko
Institution    Location Characteristic
Hawaii Pacific In State Conservation District surrounded by open space
University
Windward
Community      Situated between Kāneohe State Hospital and Kāneohe District Park
College
Oceanic        Mauka of Kalanianaole Highway near Makapu’u
Institute
Hawaii Jobs    Mauka of Kalanianaole Highway in Waimanalo
Corp
Castle
Memorial       At edge of Kawainui Marsh and the entry to Kailua
Hospital
Kāneohe State Mauka of Windward Community College and Kāneohe District Park to the
Hospital       Conservation District
Hawaii Youth
Correctional   Makai of Kalanianaole Highway at edge of Kailua
Facility -
Koolau
Hawaii Youth
Correctional   Mauka of Kalanianaole Highway at edge of Kailua
Facility -
Kawailoa
 
3.7.1   Policies
The following policies are applicable to institutional campuses:
   ·   New Campuses.  The decrease in population forecast for 2035 for Koolau
Poko does not warrant major new schools, hospitals, or similar institutions to
serve these communities. No new institutional campuses are proposed in this
Plan, although they may be appropriate if they respond to or advance the vision
for the region.
   ·   Existing Campuses.  Existing institutions may expand facilities and
programs within the campuses they presently occupy; however, because the major
institutions are located adjacent to significant scenic resources, ensure that
the campuses retain an open space character. Design and site buildings and
facilities on the campus to respect the scenic context. Ensure that the
architectural character of institutional buildings and structures respect the
surrounding urban and natural features, particularly when located adjacent to a
residential area or significant natural or historic feature.
   ·   Environmental Compatibility.  Encourage energy efficient features, such
as the use of solar panels for heating water, and passive solar design, such as
the use of window recesses and overhangs and orientation of openings to allow
natural cross-ventilation. Also, incorporate resource conservation measures,
such as water flow constrictors and facilities for the sorting of waste
materials for recycling, in the design of new development.
3.7.2   Guidelines
Architectural Character and Building Massing
      °   Reflect in the site plan a campus-like environment with a relatively
low building coverage ratio and low profile, emphasize open space and
landscaping.
      °   Vary the architectural character, depending on theme and purpose of
the use. Design portions of buildings that are adjacent to or readily visible
from residential areas to reflect that residential character or be screened
from view from such areas by landscaping.
      °   Limit building heights to two to three stories or 40 feet, including
the roof form. Provide height setback transitions from street frontages, the
shoreline, and adjacent residential areas.
Pedestrian, Bicycle, and Transit Facilities
      °   Provide street frontage improvements for bus stops, including a bus
shelter and a dedicated loading lane, along all abutting streets that have bus
routes.
      °   Provide a pedestrian pathway from the bus stop to an entrance to the
main building of the institution. Clearly indicate the pathway with special
paving or markings.
      °   Design and place bicycle parking in secure places that are visible
from the main street or parking entry to the institution.
Visual Screening, Lighting and Signage
      °   Buffer the noise and other adverse impacts from parking, loading, and
service areas from adjacent residential areas by a combination of walls or
berms and landscaped setbacks.
      °   Plant a landscape screen, consisting of trees and hedges, along
streets fronting parking lots or garages. Plant shade trees throughout parking
lots.
      °   Visually screen storage areas for vehicles, equipment, and supplies
from the street and adjacent lots by privacy walls and buildings, fronted by
landscaping used to soften the appearance of large solid walls.
      °   Signage is non-illuminated or indirectly illuminated. Outdoor
lighting is fully-shielded to avoid light trespass over residential areas.
3.7.3   Relation to Map A-3, Public Facilities
The general locations of existing larger institutions, such as intermediate and
high schools, colleges, hospitals and correctional facilities, are indicated on
the Public Facilities Map, A-3. Elementary schools, churches, child care
centers, fire stations, and other public facility and utility uses serving the
area are not specifically designated on the Public Facilities Map, A-3, but are
allowed in all residential and commercial areas, subject to appropriate zoning
controls to assure compatibility with surrounding uses.
3.8   MILITARY USES
Koolau Poko contains the following military installations: Marine Corps Base
Hawaii in Kāneohe (MCB Hawaii) on Mōkapu Peninsula; Marine Corps Training Area
Bellows (MCTAB); and, the Bellows Air Force Station in Waimanālo. In 1994, all
of the Marine Corps landholdings and installations were consolidated under a
single command at MCB Hawaii. This was in part a result of the decision to
close the Barbers Point Naval Air Station (BPNAS) in ‘Ewa, whose functions were
to be absorbed by MCB Hawaii. On January 5, 2000, the Marine Corps acquired
1,049 acres from the Air Force to form MCTAB. The U.S. Air Force retained
approximately 274 acres for its existing recreation and training area under
Detachment 2, 18th Force Support Squadron.
For safety and security reasons, public access to the MCB Hawaii is restricted.
At present, the beach area of MCTAB serves as a site for military exercises and
training and a portion of the land near the shoreline is used as a recreation
facility for military personnel. Native Hawaiians have lobbied for the return
of MCTAB to the State of Hawaii for the use of the Department of Hawaiian Home
Lands. However, there has been increasing use of Bellows by the Hawaii Air and
Army National Guards in the last decade. This increase in use has also
increased noise impacts to surrounding homes. In addition, noise generated by
aircraft operating at MCB Hawaii directly impact the residents of Kaneohe, due
to the flight patterns used and the particular geographic features of the
region. The high volume noise generated from large aircraft at the airport
facilities has adversely impacted the quality of life of residents in the
surrounding community.
Noise impacts from military installations are not regulated by the Federal
Aviation Administration or the Hawaii Department of Health. Community concerns
regarding noise impacts are normally directed to the originating installation.
Military installations consider themselves a member of the community and
routinely work directly with local comprehensive planning efforts. The military
takes a pro-active approach to understanding encroachment and community
concerns, while at the same time articulating its military mission and
operational requirements for installations, ranges, and training areas. The
dialogue supports good communication and partnering. Securing the nation
depends on realistic training for its military units. The use of actual weapon
systems and detonation of live ordnance, night training, and low-level flight
are just a sample of the requirements for representation of real life
conditions and effective training. Recognizing that the sounds of military
operations can affect people’s lives, the military services (Army, Navy,
Marines, and Air Force) continues to work with civilian partners and to listen
to residents’ concerns regarding the sounds associated with military training
that may be disruptive to their community.
National defense objectives and budget priorities that are difficult to foresee
determine the level of military presence. Nevertheless, more recent events
indicate the likelihood of a long-term commitment to military presence and
training in Koolau Poko. This Plan therefore assumes that MCB Hawaii and MCTAB
will remain under military control. However, portions of MCTAB may continue to
be available for civilian use through agreements with the City.
3.8.1   Policies
   ·   The State of Hawai’i should continue to pursue the release of surplus
federal lands, including those at Bellows, for civilian use. When such is
released, reserve beachfront area for recreational use in perpetuity. Mauka
areas could also be used for recreational purposes or for other purposes.
Discourage any residential or commercial uses unless they constitute a minor
portion of the total site area and are located outside of flood hazard areas
and adjacent to existing similar uses.
   ·   Encourage energy efficient features, such as the use of solar panels for
heating water and electricity, and passive solar design such as the use of
window recesses and overhangs and orientation of openings to allow natural
cross-ventilation. Also, incorporate resource conservation measures, such as
water flow constrictors and facilities for the sorting of waste materials for
recycling, in the design of new development.
   ·   Encourage pro-active and periodic communication between the military and
neighboring community organizations, including affected residences of military
activities, to disclose and address adverse impacts attributed to military
operations. Share in advance with the community and affected residences,
schedules for training exercises anticipated to have a significant noise impact
and provide contact information for its Public Affairs Office or the Community
Plans and Liaison Officer.
3.8.2   Guidelines
Architectural Character and Building Massing
      °   When buildings and structures are visible from an adjacent non-
military use, reflect the scale and design character of the adjacent non-
military use or screen from view from such areas by landscaping.
      °   Limit building heights to two to three stories or 40 feet, including
the roof form, except to meet specific mission-critical design requirements.
Height setback transitions are provided from streets, the shoreline, and
adjacent residential areas.
Pedestrian, Bicycle, and Transit Facilities
      °   Provide street frontage improvements for bus stops, including a bus
shelter and a dedicated loading lane along all abutting streets that have bus
routes.
      °   Provide a clearly indicated pedestrian pathway, such as special
paving or marking, from the bus stop to the base’s main entrance.
      °   Design and place bicycle parking in secure places that are visible
from the main street or parking entry.
Visual Screening, Lighting and Signage
      °   Buffer the noise and other adverse impacts from parking, loading, and
service areas from adjacent residential areas by a combination of solid walls
or berms and landscaped setbacks.
      °   For parking lot lighting, use fully-shielded fixtures and low
intensity lamps.
      °   Plant a landscape screen, consisting of trees and hedges, along
streets fronting parking lots or garages. Plant shade trees throughout parking
lots.
      °   Visually screen storage areas for vehicles, equipment, and supplies
from the street and adjacent lots by privacy walls and buildings, fronted by
landscaping used to soften the appearance of large solid walls.
      °   Use non-illuminated or indirectly illuminated signage. Fully shield
lighting to avoid light trespass into residential and public areas.
3.8.3   Relation to Map A-2, Land Use
Portions of military lands that are occupied by identifiable urban uses, such
as housing, commercial establishments and military buildings of an industrial
character, are reflected on the map in the same way that comparable civilian
uses are. Military lands used for training exercises, munitions storage or
similar uses that have an open space character are represented in the Land Use
Map, A-2. Other lands under military control that have no specified use or that
are designated as protected habitats are represented in the same way as
Preservation areas under civilian control.
When lands are released from military jurisdiction, the use depicted on the
Land Use Map, A-2, shall be the basis for determining the appropriate civilian
use. Where major deviations from these designated uses are proposed, an
amendment of the Plan and its Land Use Map may be required if large tracts of
land are involved.
4.   PUBLIC FACILITIES AND INFRASTRUCTURE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
The vision for Koolau Poko will be implemented in part through application of
the policies and guidelines for public facilities and infrastructure, which are
presented in the following sections.
This chapter is organized under the following headings:
4.1   TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
This section describes the existing road, transit, bikeway and pedestrian
network in Koolau Poko as well as plans for future improvements. These elements
are shown in Map A-3, Public Facilities, in Appendix A. The section concludes
with policies and guidelines to direct future transportation system development
in Koolau Poko with the understanding it will be part of an island-wide multi-
modal transportation system.
Act 54 (Session Laws Hawaii, 2009) requires State and County transportation
departments to adopt and implement a complete streets policy and establishes a
task force to determine necessary standards and guidelines. The intent of a
complete streets policy is to create and configure a connected street system
that provides for all users, including but not limited to, pedestrians,
bicyclists, and transit passengers of all ages and abilities.
4.1.1   Roadway Network
The Koolau Poko Sustainable Communities Plan Area is served by several highways
that provide access across the Koolau Mountain Range and other parts of the
island:
   ·   Likelike Highway, Pali Highway, and the H-3 Freeway traverse the Koolau
Mountain Range and provide direct access between the windward and leeward sides
of the island. The latter, a U.S. Interstate opened in 1997, begins at the MCB
Hawai’i in Kāneohe and connects to H-1 and the Moanalua Freeway at Halawa.
   ·   Kamehameha and Kahekili Highways connect to trans-Koolau highways and
link Koolau Poko to other windward Oahu locations. In the mid-1990's, Kahekili
Highway was widened to six lanes from Likelike Highway to Kahuhipa Street, and
to five lanes from Kahuhipa Street to Haiku Road.
   ·   Kalanianaole Highway links Koolau Poko to communities in East Honolulu
and serves as a scenic, secondary route for travel between Kailua/Waimānalo and
Honolulu.
The 2035 Oahu Regional Transportation Plan (ORTP) serves as a guide for the
development of recommended major surface transportation facilities and
programs. It identifies short- and long-term plans for major highway projects,
transit improvements and transportation demand management (TDM) measures (e.g.
park-and-ride lots and rideshare programs). The plan lists projects by the time
period in which they are expected to be completed. Some projects identified are
conceptual or generic in nature and serve as “placeholders” in order to qualify
for federal funding rather than as indicators of specific projects or
solutions. The following projects are identified in the current ORTP. These are
in addition to islandwide projects. The ORTP is currently being updated to year
2040.
2011 - 2020 Time Period
   ·   Construct safety improvements to Kamehameha Highway from Hale’iwa to
Kahaluu.
   ·   Construct safety and operational improvements along Kamehameha Highway
between Kaalaea Stream and Hygienic Store.
   ·   Construct operational and safety improvements to Kalanianaole Highway
between Olomana Golf Course and Waimānalo Beach Park.
   ·   Protect shoreline along Kamehameha Highway and other locations.
2021 - 2035 Time Period
   ·   Widen Kahekili Highway from 2 to 4 lanes from Kamehameha Highway to
Haikū Road, to include:
      °   Enabling contraflow in the existing right-of-way between Hui Iwa
Street and Haiku Road, and
      °   Making intersection improvements at Hui Iwa Street and Kamehameha
Highway
The above listed projects were based on a preliminary anticipated growth in
population and economic activity in 2006 and may not be necessarily needed or
desirable in light of revised projections.
In addition to the projects listed under the ORTP, appropriate measures to
reduce risks and increase resiliency should be implemented, where feasible, to
respond to the impacts of sea level rise due to climate change. Improvement
and/or relocation of roadways and associated infrastructure should be
considered for new public and private projects in shoreline and storm surge
impact areas.
4.1.2   Transit System
The Bus system in Koolau Poko is organized in three service categories:
   ·   Suburban trunk service, which provides direct, multi-stop connections
between suburban neighborhoods and activity centers within Koolau Poko;
   ·   Suburban feeder service, which provides suburban neighborhoods that are
not directly served by trunk routes access to the transit system -- namely to
express and trunk service routes; and
   ·   Express service, which provides direct non-stop connections between
Koolau Poko and the major activity centers in the urban core of Honolulu.
To support the express bus service for commuters, a transit center is proposed
within the Regional Town Center of Kāneohe to function as a collection and
distribution hub. The transit center proposal considers parking facilities to
provide more convenient access for bicyclists, pedestrians and riders of the
“circulator” buses or vans. This, in turn, will stimulate economic and
community activity in the Regional Town Center, as envisioned in Chapter 2 of
this Plan.
4.1.3   Bikeway System
Bike Plan Hawaii (2003), a State master plan for bikeways, defines the various
types of bikeways:
   ·   Signed Shared Roadway.  Any street or highway specifically designated by
signs for the shared use of bicycles and motor vehicles and/or pedestrians.
Such facilities are of two types: a widened curb lane in an urban-type area or
a paved right shoulder in a rural-type area. The Signed Shared Roadway is,
according to Bike Plan Hawaii, “…the preferred route for bicycle use,” when
mainly due to land width or other mitigating factors.
   ·   Bicycle Lane.  A portion of a roadway designated by striping, signing,
and/or pavement markings for the preferential or exclusive use of bicycles. The
right-of-ways assigned to bicyclists and motorists are delineated to provide
for more predictable movements of each. Only crossflows by motor vehicles or
pedestrians to gain access to driveways or parking facilities or bus stops are
allowed.
   ·   Shared Use Path. A bikeway that is physically separated from motorized
vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier, and is either within the highway
right-of-way or has an independent right-of-way. Often shared with pedestrians,
skaters, joggers and other non-motorized users.
In Koolau Poko, the existing bikeway system consists of discontinuous segments
of bike lanes, bike routes, and bike paths in Kāneohe, Kailua, Lanikai, and
Waimānalo. Significant community interest has been communicated regarding
connection of segments and expansion of the bikeway system in general. The
State’s bikeway master plan proposes substantial additions to Koolau Poko’s
bikeway system to create an interconnected grid through the more populated
areas and links to East Honolulu via Kalaniana’ole Highway and to Koolau Loa
via Kamehameha Highway. The creation of the grid will enhance the potential for
bike travel for short commuting and incidental trips. Also, the grid can be
expanded by marking bicycle lanes where the existing right-of-way width permits
on local streets in residential neighborhoods as part of a “traffic calming”
program.
In 2012, the City Council adopted the Oahu Bike Plan, which builds upon the
1999 Honolulu Bicycle Master Plan.
4.1.4   Pedestrian Circulation
For the past several decades commercial developments and residential
subdivisions have been required to install sidewalks along street frontages,
but there are many areas throughout Koolau Poko where there are inadequate
surfaces or clearances for walking within the road rights-of-way.
High costs and adverse environmental effects make it impractical and
undesirable to install formal sidewalks along all roadways in rural and older,
low-density suburban areas. In most sections, the volume or speed of vehicular
traffic is low enough to allow pedestrians to share the road surface or move
over to the road shoulder while a vehicle passes. In areas where there are
conflicts between vehicular and pedestrian travel, safety should be improved by
making relatively modest changes to the right-of-way to slow vehicular speed,
enhance sight distances, and separate vehicular, and pedestrian traffic.
Most street frontages in higher density residential areas and commercial
districts have public sidewalks, but many are too narrow or too cluttered with
utility and street light poles, signposts, traffic control boxes and other
fixtures to accommodate comfortable and safe pedestrian movement. Even street
trees may become obstacles rather than amenities for pedestrians when the
sidewalk is too narrow or the trees are inappropriately placed.
An integrated approach to planning for pedestrians is needed in the areas where
activity is more intensive. The Regional Town Centers of Kailua and Kāneohe -
especially the latter -- should be improved significantly by designing and
implementing a pedestrian circulation plan to provide a safe, convenient and
attractive network of public walkways consisting of sidewalks, streamside paths
and passageways through or along parking lots and buildings. The circulation
plan should not only designate routes, but also provide detailed design
guidelines for pavement width and material, rehabilitation of footpaths in
older residential neighborhoods (including asphalt footpaths), street
crosswalks, landscaping, signage, street fixtures, transit stops, and other
elements of the pedestrian environment. The recently passed “Complete Streets”
ordinance, which addresses these issues and promotes an integrated planning and
design approach City-wide, should be implemented.
4.1.5   Policies
   ·   Reduce reliance on the private passenger vehicle by promoting
transportation system management and travel demand management measures for both
commuting and local trips.
   ·   Encourage the provision of infrastructure to support alternative fuel
vehicles.
   ·   Improve adequate and improved mobility between communities, shopping,
and recreation centers; especially by enhancing transit, pedestrian, bicycle,
and other forms of personal mobility vehicle modes of travel.
   ·   Reduce conflicts between pedestrian travel and vehicular travel and
improve pedestrian safety.
   ·   Promote connectivity in the design of new or enhancement of existing
roadway networks.
   ·   Maintain adequate person-carrying capacity for peak-period commuting to
and from work in the Primary Urban Center.
4.1.6   Guidelines
Commuter Travel
   ·   Encourage the Department of Transportation’s Highways Division to
construct new bridges that do not flood at Waiāhole and Waikāne stream
crossings at Kamehameha Highway.
   ·   Provide improved services and facilities for express buses, such as more
frequent, larger-capacity and more comfortable vehicles.
   ·   Provide park-and-ride and bus transfer facilities as a joint or modified
use of an existing parking area or adjacent to uses that are related to
commuter trips, such as child-care centers and convenience stores.
   ·   Establish transit centers to function as collector or distribution hubs
which provide an interface between “circulator” shuttle and trunk bus routes.
   ·   Promote ridesharing, vanpooling, and bicycle-sharing.
   ·   Increase person-carrying capacity on trans-Koolau highways and
Kalanianaole Highway for commuter travel without expanding rights-of-way or
exacerbating delays in access to the highway from collector streets during peak
periods.
Local Trips
   ·   Identify and take measures to reserve the option for potential future
right-of-ways acquisitions at locations where minor connections between
existing local street would improve mobility and reduce congestion on collector
streets;
   ·   Implement roadway modifications recommended in the Kahaluu Community
Master Plan (2007) and the Kāneohe Town Plan (2009);
   ·   Modify rights-of-way by changes to travelway widths, curb radii,
pavement width, pavement texture, installation of appropriate signage, and more
generous landscape planting in selected areas; especially along designated bike
lanes and routes, principal pedestrian routes, and street crossings, and near
bus stops.
   ·   Expand the bikeway network by implementing the proposals in the State of
Hawaii Bike Plan Hawaii Master Plan (2003) and the City and County of Honolulu
Oahu Bike Master Plan (2012). Safety is an important concern.
   ·   Design streets to accommodate personal mobility vehicles for travel
within and between town cores and residential areas.
4.2   WATER SYSTEMS
In 1987, the State enacted the Water Code (HRS Chapter 174C) in order to
protect, control, and regulate the use of the State’s water resources. This
Code is implemented through the Hawaii Water Plan which addresses water
conservation and supply issues on a statewide level by incorporating county
water plans and water-related project plans.
The Oahu Water Management Plan (OWMP) is being updated using the watershed
approach to water resource management for each of the eight Development Plan
and Sustainable Communities Plan areas. The Koolau Poko Watershed Management
Plan (KPWMP) was adopted in 2012. The goal of the KPWMP is to formulate an
environmentally holistic, community-based, and economically viable plan that
balances: (1) the preservation and management of Koolau Poko’s watersheds, and
(2) sustainable ground and surface water use and development to serve present
users and future generations. The KPWMP can be accessed at:
http://www.boardofwatersupply.com/water-resources/watershed-management-plan/
koolau-poko-plan. The KPWMP provides existing and future water demand
projections to 2035.
4.2.1   Potable Water
The Board of Water Supply (BWS) is the principal purveyor of potable water in
Koolau Poko. The BWS Six-Year Capital Improvement Program for fiscal years
2015-2020, completed in February, 2015, sets forth BWS’s planned infrastructure
improvements for the City and County of Honolulu, including the Koolau Poko
municipal water system. In 2015, the region consumed 13.4 million gallons per
day (mgd) of potable water, approximately 4.0 mgd of which was imported from
sources within the Koolau Loa region. The BWS projects future water demand
based on population growth rather than number of dwellings. Therefore, while
additional housing is expected to be built in Koolau Poko, notably by the
Department of Hawaiian Home Lands (DHHL) in Waimānalo and Waiāhole, with the
slight decline in projected population over the next couple of decades (as
noted in Chapters 1 and 2) potable water demand in the region is expected to
remain stable, especially when water conservation measures are implemented. No
new source, storage, or transmission mains are planned in the region, but
existing source, storage, and water mains must be repaired and replaced as
needed.
4.2.2   Irrigation Water
Waiāhole and Waikāne
The State of Hawaii developed a 1 mgd water system to supply the residents and
farmers in the Waiāhole Valley Agricultural Park. Farmers use only about 0.1
mgd from this source since the valley is not fully planted, and they can draw
free water from the McCandless pipeline, which can deliver 0.5 mgd. Irrigation
water for taro and other crops is also drawn from Waiāhole Stream, whose flow
has become more abundant since the CWRM’s decision on the Waiāhole Ditch
matter.
Waimānalo
In Waimānalo, the State provides water to farmers from the Maunawili Ditch,
which was built by Waimānalo Sugar Company. Its source is high-level water
tunnels, springs, and streams in Maunawili and Waimānalo Valley. The system
delivers an average of about 0.75 mgd of water.
Other Water Systems
In many areas, farmers rely on relatively expensive water from the Board of
Water Supply. However, some farmers rely on local springs, streams, groundwater
wells, and rainfall. A few taro growers take advantage of ancient irrigation
systems built by early Hawaiians.
4.2.3   Policies
   ·   Integrate management of all potable and non-potable water sources,
including groundwater, stream water, stormwater, and water recycling, following
State and City legislative mandates.
   ·   To protect watersheds, retain existing acreage that is designated as
Preservation Area.
   ·   Adopt and implement water conservation practices in the design of new
developments and the modification of existing uses, including landscaped areas.
   ·   Encourage all new development to install and use dual water systems.
4.2.4   Guidelines
   ·   Where new reservoirs and other above-ground infrastructure is necessary,
avoid impacts to significant scenic resources; where such impacts are
unavoidable, implement appropriate mitigation measures. Design and locate new
water supply facilities to be compatible with the scenic environment.
   ·   Require installation of low-flush toilets, flow constrictors, and other
water conserving devices in commercial and residential developments.
   ·   Investigate the feasibility of bulk-heading Waiāhole Ditch to restore
water in the natural dikes.
   ·   Utilize climate-appropriate, indigenous plant material and drip
irrigation systems in newly installed, smaller-scale landscaped areas.
   ·   Use recycled (R-1 or R-2) water for the irrigation of golf courses, as
well as for landscaping, and agricultural areas where this would not adversely
affect potable groundwater supply or other aspects relating to public health.
   ·   Investigate the feasibility of small-scale rain catchment systems in
agricultural areas to use for irrigation, groundwater recharge, and filtering
of stormwater runoff sediments. (See related discussion in Section 4.6.2.)
   ·   Confirm that adequate potable and non-potable water is available prior
to approval of new residential and commercial development.
4.3   WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT
Koolau Poko’s wastewater systems are organized into three service areas. The
boundaries of the municipal Kailua- Kāneohe-Kahaluu Service Area extend from
Kaōio Point and Waikāne Valley to the north, to Wailea Point and Lanikai/Keolu
Hills to the south, and inland along the ridgeline of the Koolau Mountain
Range. The municipal Waimānalo Service Area is bounded by Keolu Hills to the
northwest, Waimānalo Bay to the northeast, Makapuu Point to the east, and the
Koolau Mountain Range ridgeline to the south. The Marine Corps Base Hawaii on
the Mōkapu Peninsula has an independent sewage collection, treatment and
disposal system under the control of the military.
4.3.1   Kailua-Kāneohe-Kahaluu Wastewater Service Area
The Kailua-Kāneohe-Kahaluu area is served by the Kailua Regional Wastewater
Treatment Plant (WWTP). As part of a regional plan, the Kailua WWTP receives
wastewater flows from the Kāneohe and ‘Āhuimanu areas. The Kailua WWTP serves
as a secondary treatment facility and has an average design capacity of 18.0
mgd and a 1995 average flow of approximately 12.3 mgd. The former treatment
plants at Kāneohe and ‘Āhuimanu were converted to preliminary treatment
facilities (screening and grit removal only) in late 1994. Wastewater flows
from the entire region are now conveyed to the Kailua WWTP for treatment and
are then discharged through the Mōkapu Outfall. The system has experienced
major problems which resulted in overloads and spills. To remedy the situation,
a new gravity sewer tunnel is currently being constructed to replace the
existing force main that connects the Kāneohe WWPTF with the Kailua Regional
WWTP. Other improvements at the Kāneohe WWPTF are also under construction.
Unsewered areas in the service area are primarily in the Kahaluu area. For much
of these areas, Sewer Improvement Districts have been identified and are being
implemented, but no plans are in place for areas north of Waihee Road. There
are also some small pockets of unsewered areas in Kāneohe and Kailua.
Population projections for the Kailua-Kāneohe-Kahaluu area indicate a declining
population between 2010 and 2035. However, in order to address the problems
mentioned above and to accommodate projected five-year peak storm flows,
substantial expansions and modifications of the Kailua WWTP, the Kāneohe and
‘Āhuimanu Wastewater Preliminary Treatment Facilities (WWPTF), and the
collection system were and are continuing to be made.
Major proposed improvements include:
Kailua Regional WWTP
Expansion of plant capacity to handle secondary treatment of up to 68 mgd.
Major improvements include a new influent pumping station, additional primary
and secondary clarifiers, additional biotower and biotower pumping station, and
upgrade of the effluent pumping station. An ultraviolet disinfection facility
is also incorporated in the planned improvements.
   Kāneohe WWPTF
Preliminary treatment capacity upgrade to 46 mgd, to include a new screening
and grit removal facility, new influent pumping station, additional odor
control, additional storage and flow equalization capacity, and equalization
tanks.
   ‘Āhuimanu WWPTF
New screening and grit removal facility, and new odor control and flow
equalization tank improvements.
   Collection System
Improvements to the collection system included the provision of relief lines
throughout the Kailua and Kāneohe basins, increased pump station capacities,
and addition of equalization basins adjacent to the Kailua Road, Kailua
Heights, and Enchanted Lakes Wastewater Pumping Stations.
4.3.2   Waimānalo Wastewater Service Area
Approximately 65 percent of residences in the Waimānalo Wastewater Service Area
is served by a centralized wastewater collection, treatment, and disposal
system.
Wastewater is collected by a network of gravity sewers, and is then treated at
the Waimānalo Wastewater Treatment Plant, which has a design capacity of 0.6
million gallons per day (mgd) and average flow of approximately 0.585 mgd.
Wastewater from a residential area located within the western portion of the
service area is pumped by the Kahawai Stream Wastewater Pump Station (WWPS).
Homes in Waimānalo that are not connected to the public sewers are served by
individual wastewater systems, which are generally either cesspools or septic
tanks with leaching fields. The unsewered areas include certain portions of the
low lying coastal areas and all of the inland agricultural lots. In addition,
nearly 15 percent of the homes in sewered areas are not connected to the sewer
system and continue to use individual wastewater systems.
There are water quality and public health concerns associated with the
continued use of individual treatment systems (primarily cesspools) in the low-
lying coastal areas. Algal blooms have occurred periodically in the past in the
nearshore waters of Waimānalo. It is uncertain whether nutrients from
individual wastewater treatment systems, stormwater runoff, and/or treatment
plant effluent promoted such algal blooms.
Between 2000 and 2035, residential population serviced by the Waimānalo WWTP is
projected to increase from approximately 10,087 to 10,745 residents, or by
about 6.5 percent. The service area population is projected to grow primarily
due to new housing development proposed by the Department of Hawaiian Home
Lands (DHHL), and expansion of the wastewater collection system to service
existing unsewered dwellings.
To address these concerns, the average design capacity of the Waimānalo WWTP
will be increased from 0.7 mgd to 1.1 mgd 9 . The expansion will include a new
secondary biological treatment process, an effluent filtration system,
additional injection wells, new sludge thickening facilities, an upgraded
electrical system, and added personnel and maintenance facilities. There will
also be an ultraviolet disinfection system and effluent pumping facilities to
allow the use of recycled water for irrigating selected agricultural lots and
the Olomana Golf Links.
4.3.3   Policies
   ·   Direct all wastewater produced within the Community Growth Boundary to
municipal or military sewer service systems.
   ·   Treat and recycle, where feasible, wastewater effluent as a water
conservation measure.
   ·   Mitigate visual, noise, and odor impacts associated with wastewater
collection and treatment systems, especially when they are located adjacent to
residential designated areas.
   ·   Use reclaimed water for irrigation and other uses, where feasible, in
accordance with the Guidelines for the Treatment and Use of Recycled Water (May
15, 2002) by the State Department of Health and the No Pass Line established by
the Board of Water Supply.
4.3.4   Guidelines
   ·   Complete planned improvements to the Kailua Regional WWTP service area
facilities.
   ·   Complete planned improvements to the Waimānalo WWTP service area
facilities.
   ·   Replace outdated individual cesspools with septic tanks and individual
wastewater systems in areas outside of planned municipal wastewater service
areas, employing public programs or policies to support private conversion
efforts.
   ·   Provide adequate horizontal separations and landscape elements (e.g.
berms and windrows) between wastewater facilities and adjacent residential
designated areas.
4.4   ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS
The demand for electrical power in Koolau Poko is expected to be generally
proportionate to the modest level of projected population decline. Hawaiian
Electric Company is not planning to construct new trans-Koolau transmission
lines, substations or power generating facilities in the Koolau Poko region.
However, replacement or repair of components of the transmission and
distributions system should be anticipated over the next couple of decades.
Underground placement of overhead lines should be accomplished, especially
where they are exposed to high winds or other conditions that cause power
outages or where they detract from a high quality view of natural features,
such as identified in Appendix Map A-1, Open space.
The growth in telecommunications systems is more likely to outpace population
growth. The 1990's decade saw substantial development of the telecommunications
infrastructure throughout the island, including Koolau Poko. Many new antennae
and relay devices were installed throughout the region, usually at higher
elevations to provide adequate line-of-sight or coverage. Competition between
communications companies contributed to the proliferation of facilities, and
often made cooperation in the collocation of communications devices a
challenge.
Technological advances in fiber optics and insulation will probably make it
more feasible to bury power and communications cables in the future, creating
an opportunity to develop more reliable and less visually intrusive
transmission and distribution systems.
Antennas have been around as long as we have had radio and television services.
Antennas associated with communication purposes have grown tremendously
especially since the U.S. introduction of mobile communication devices in the
early 1980's. While the telecommunication industry has provided more convenient
communication capabilities for individuals, it has also increased the public
agencies’ abilities to provide faster and more efficient responses to those in
need, particularly on an emergency basis.
While the benefits of telecommunications industry cannot be disputed,
communities have opposed the antennas due to aesthetic impacts, particularly on
public views and on the neighborhood character. Their visibility has increased,
especially where antennas are mounted on free-standing towers.
The public has also raised concerns about the environmental effects of
electromagnetic field exposure associated with radio transmissions, as
evidenced by the presence of antennas. However, the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) is responsible for evaluating the human environmental effects
of radio frequency (RF) emissions from FCC-regulated transmitters. The federal
guidelines specifically preclude local decisions affecting environmental
effects of radio frequency emissions, assuming that the provider is in
compliance with the Commission’s RF rules.
4.4.1   Policies
   ·   Design system elements and incrementally replace facilities such as sub-
stations, transmission lines and towers to avoid or mitigate any potential
adverse impacts on scenic and natural resource values and to enhance system
reliability.
   ·   Place new utility distribution lines underground and implement a long-
range program for systematically relocating existing overhead lines
underground.
   ·   Encourage co-location of antennas; towers should host the facilities of
more than one service provider to minimize their proliferation and reduce
visual impacts.
   ·   Mount antennas onto existing buildings or structures so that public
scenic views and open spaces will not be negatively affected. However, except
for the occupant’s personal use, antennas on single-family dwelling roofs in
residential districts are not appropriate.
   ·   Use stealth technology (i.e. towers disguised as trees) especially on
free-standing antennas towers in order to blend in with the surrounding
environment and minimize visual impacts.
4.4.2   Guidelines
   ·   Initiate a region-wide program to place utility lines underground and
relocate and/or streamline existing overhead utility and communications lines,
focusing on the following priority areas:
      °   Streets within Regional Town Centers, especially where overhead
utility lines conflict with existing or planned street tree canopies;
      °   Locations where overhead utility lines are prominently visible within
a scenic viewshed identified in Appendix Map A-1.
      °   Locations where major construction projects within rights-of-way
present the opportunity to coordinate the undergrounding of facilities through
shared trenching and to minimize construction- related disruptions.
   ·   Where full undergrounding of utility lines is cost-prohibitive or
impractical due to disruption of existing uses and utility connections, utility
poles may be visually streamlined by undergrounding lower-hanging
communications lines and related equipment, if this would result in substantial
visual improvement at a much lower cost.
   ·   Promote the use of renewable energy sources and energy conservation
measures through both regulatory and tax incentive measures.
   ·   Co-locate communications and power equipment and devices with similar
facilities in order to minimize the number of supporting structures and
dispersal sites.
4.5   SOLID WASTE HANDLING AND DISPOSAL
Solid waste collection, transport, and disposal operations on the island are
provided by the City Department of Environmental Services, Refuse Division.
Municipal refuse collection trucks provide curbside pickup for most single-
family residences. Refuse collection for commercial and multi-family apartment
uses is provided by private haulers. Individuals may deliver recyclable items
to collection containers that are located throughout the region. They may also
dispose of trash and large items that cannot be picked-up by the municipal
refuse truck at one of Koolau Poko’s two refuse convenience centers, in Kapaa
and Waimānalo.
Collected refuse is taken from the Kapaa Transfer Station to a recycling
center, incinerator or a sanitary landfill. Incineration, handling the majority
of the island’s waste disposal, is done at the H-POWER plant, located in the
‘Ewa region. The City’s sanitary landfill is at Waimānalo Gulch, also in the
‘Ewa region.
Potential new landfill sites on Oahu are extremely limited because of stringent
federal and state environmental requirements. Koolau Poko has not had a
sanitary landfill since the closure of the Kapaa site in 1997.
A reduction of the amount of refuse going to landfills would lessen
transportation costs and the need for landfill space. This can be possibly
achieved by full participation in the waste sorting and collection program by
individual households, commercial buildings, government offices, parks
maintenance, etc. By sorting out green waste which can be recycled into usable
mulch, and materials such as cardboard, paper, and beverage bottles and cans
which can be recycled into usable material, the amount of refuse headed to
landfills and overall waste may be significantly reduced.
4.5.1   Policies
   ·   Continue efforts to establish more efficient waste diversion and
collection systems.
   ·   Promote waste reduction, re-use and recycling.
4.5.2   Guidelines
   ·   Promote the recycling of waste materials by providing expanded
collection facilities and services, and public outreach and education programs.
   ·   Expand the use of automated refuse collection in residential areas.
   ·   Develop programs for reducing the production of solid waste.
   ·   Provide a convenience refuse transfer station, including a green-waste
drop-off site, to serve Kahaluu at a location close to the Kamehameha Highway
in the area between ‘Āhuimanu and Waikāne.
   ·   Analyze and approve siting and/or expansion of sanitary landfills based
on island-wide studies and siting evaluations.
4.6   DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
The mauka reaches of Koolau Poko are among the wettest areas of the island and
the source of numerous perennial streams, which are listed in
Table 4.1.
The water quality and riparian habitat of many of these streams has been
adversely impacted by diversions, channel alterations and polluted stormwater
runoff. These problems are generally more severe along stream segments that
traverse highly urbanized areas, but irrigation systems, water well development
and land use conditions in agricultural and conservation areas have also
created impacts. Still, Koolau Poko contains significant stream segments of
high resource value, and the quality of many other segments could be improved
by restoring natural habitat and adopting stream corridor management practices.
All of Koolau Poko’s major watersheds have urban and agricultural areas in
regulatory flood zones (see Exhibit 4.1). In the 1960's and 1970's, several
large flood control projects were undertaken to remove or reduce the most
frequent and severe threats of flooding. The most visible results of those
flood projects are the Kawainui Marsh and flood berm, the Kahaluu lagoon, and
the Hoomaluhia dam and stormwater detention basin. Following a major flood
event in 1987, improvements were made to the design and maintenance of the
Kawainui flood control project.
Table 4.1: Environmental Quality and Flood Zones of Perennial Streams in
Koolau Poko
Stream Environmental Quality
       Aquatic Riparian Areas in Flood Zone
Table 4.1: Environmental Quality and Flood Zones of Perennial Streams in Koolau
Poko
Stream    Environmental Quality
          Aquatic  Riparian    Areas in Flood Zone
Hakipuu   Moderate –         Agricultural lots
Waikāne  Moderate –         Agricultural lots
Waiāhole Moderate Substantial Agricultural lots
Waihee    –      –         Agricultural lots
Kaalaea   Moderate –         Agricultural lots
Kahaluu   Moderate –         Agricultural lots
Heeia     Moderate Outstanding Wetlands
Keaahala  Moderate –         –
Kamooalii –      –         Hoomaluhia Park
Kāneohe  Moderate Substantial –
Kawa      –      –         Golf Course
Kawainui  Low      Outstanding –
Maunawili –      Outstanding Portions of Maunawili and Coconut Grove
                               residential areas
Kapaa     –      –         Portions of Coconut Grove residential area
Kaelepulu Low      Substantial Wetlands; portion of Enchanted Lakes residential
                               area
Waimānalo–      Substantial Agricultural lots; Saddle City residential area;
                               Bellows AFS
Source: State of Hawaii Commission on Water Resource Management and The
National Park Service, Hawaii Stream Assessment: A Preliminary Appraisal of
Hawaii’s Stream Resources, December 1990; State of Hawaii Department of Land
and Natural Resources, General Flood Control Plan for Hawaii, September 1983.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8559.png]
Some of Koolau Poko’s agricultural irrigation systems have become de facto
drainage systems. The Waiāhole, Kailua and Maunawili Ditches divert some
stormwater from downstream areas. Problems occur when abandoned irrigation
structure, such as the reservoir for the former Waimānalo Plantation, fall into
disrepair and the responsibility for their maintenance is unclear.
Due to the high cost and adverse environmental effects of formal flood control
structures, flood protection measures have turned to non-structural approaches.
In 1980, the City adopted development standards based on the Federal Flood
Insurance Program to prevent encroachments into floodways and reduce the risk
of property damage. In 2000, the City adopted storm drainage standards to
address both the quantity and quality of storm runoff for flood control and
environmental quality purposes 10 . Periodic maintenance of stormwater basins,
including wetlands, and stream channels and outlets is another element of the
flood protection strategy. Soil conservation measures, especially in
agricultural areas, are also important to reduce sediment and maintain the
downstream capacity of the stream channel.
4.6.1   Policies
   ·   Promote drainage system design that emphasizes control and minimization
of non-point source pollution and the retention of stormwater on-site and in
wetlands.
   ·   Develop a comprehensive study of local flooding and drainage problems,
including a phased plan for improvements.
   ·   Design and construct modifications needed for flood protection in a
manner that maintains habitat and aesthetic values, and avoids and/or mitigates
degradation of stream, coastline and nearshore water quality.
   ·   Include where practical, the integration of pedestrian and bicycle
connections for the regional open space network as part of drainageway
improvement planning.
   ·   View stormwater as a potential irregular source of water that should be
retained for recharge of the aquifer rather than quickly moved to coastal
waters.
   ·   Select natural and man-made vegetated drainageways and retention basins
as the preferred solution to drainage problems wherever they can promote water
recharge, help control non-source pollutants, and provide passive recreation
benefits.
   ·   Keep drainageways clear of debris to avoid the flooding problems that
have occurred in the past.
   ·   Low Impact Development strategies are recommended.
4.6.2   Guidelines
   ·   Emphasize retaining or detaining stormwater for gradual release into the
ground as the preferred strategy for management of stormwater.
   ·   Prevent the blocking of downstream channels during major storm events by
properly maintaining large- capacity boulder and debris basins in upper valleys
above urbanized areas.
   ·   Integrate planned improvements to the drainage system into the regional
open space network by emphasizing the use of retention basins, creation of
passive recreational areas, and recreational access for pedestrians and
bicycles without jeopardizing public safety.
   ·   In places where the hardening of stream channels is unavoidable or
highly desirable to prevent significant loss of property or threat to public
health and safety, design improvements in a manner which protects natural
resource and aesthetic values of the stream, consistent with the guidelines
expressed in Section 3.1.3.4.
   ·   Require periodic maintenance of stream channels and stormwater detention
basins, including natural wetlands, to improve and retain their capacity for
flood conditions while taking care to maintain their biological and aesthetic
values.
   ·   Designate a public agency to assume jurisdiction over abandoned
irrigation ditches and reservoirs for the purpose of maintaining them as
important elements of the flood control system.
4.7   SCHOOL AND LIBRARY FACILITIES
Public schools in the Koolau Poko Sustainable Communities Plan area, listed in
Table 4.2 , are part of the Department of Education’s (DOE) Windward District.
Most recent enrollment figures show that the majority of schools in Koolau Poko
are operating under capacity. Consequently, DOE does not plan to increase
classroom capacity through new construction or expansion of existing
facilities. During this time period, however, other improvements are planned
for a number of schools in the region. These include renovation of cafeterias
and libraries, and construction of new administration buildings. Additional
demand for classroom space generated by future residential developments can be
absorbed by the existing facilities. If necessary, school boundaries could be
adjusted to allocate additional demand to schools that have the most available
capacity. Also, future residential developments may be subject to a school
impact fee. This fee will help pay for improvements in order to accommodate the
additional students who will live in the future residential developments.
Table 4.2: Public School Enrollment and Capacity
School 2009-2010 Enrollment 2008-2009 Capacity Under/(Over) Capacity
Elementary
Table 4.2: Public School Enrollment and Capacity
School         2009-2010 Enrollment 2008-2009 Capacity Under/(Over) Capacity
Elementary
‘Āhuimanu   415                  491                76
Aikahi         495                  620                125
Ben Parker     283                  507                224
Enchanted Lake 420                  606                186
Heeia          484                  736                252
Kaelepulu      193                  228                35
Kahaluu        233                  357                124
Kailua         356                  530                174
Kainalu        509                  700                191
Kāneohe       618                  672                54
Kapunahala     568                  600                32
Keolu          175                  245                70
Lanikai        303                  330                27
Maunawili      404                  487                83
Mōkapu        794                  720                (74)
 
Table 4.2: Public School Enrollment and Capacity
School 2009-2010 Enrollment 2008-2009 Capacity Under/(Over) Capacity
Table 4.2: Public School Enrollment and Capacity
School              2009-2010 Enrollment 2008-2009 Capacity Under/(Over)
                                                            Capacity
Pope                230                  390                160
Puohala             232                  612                380
Waiāhole           63                   159                96
Waimānalo (Elem. & 501                  600                99
Inter.)
Intermediate
Kailua              680                  1,113              433
King                663                  1,043              380
High School
Castle              1,421                1,738              317
Kailua              902                  1,159              257
Kalāheo            859                  1,051              192
Olomana (Inter. &   136                  189                53
High)
Source: State of Hawaii, Department of Education, Facilities and Support
Services Branch, November 2009
 
Private schools have a relatively small presence in Koolau Poko. As of 2009,
Koolau Poko’s 11 private schools had a combined enrollment of 2,921 (see
Table 4.3). If enrollment increases in these private schools, it is likely that
enrollment will decline in area public schools because most students are
expected to be drawn from within the region rather than outside.
Table 4.3: Private Schools in Koolau Poko - 2008-2009
School PS/K-8 9-12 TOTAL
Table 4.3: Private Schools in Koolau Poko - 2008-2009
School                        PS/K-8 9-12 TOTAL
Kailua Christian Academy      20     29   49
Koolau Baptist Church Academy 156    50   206
Le Jardin Academy             632    190  822
Redemption Academy            34     26   60
Saint Ann School              388    0    388
Saint Anthony                 355    0    355
Saint John Vianney            274    0    274
Saint Mark Lutheran           181    0    181
Trinity Christian             283    0    283
 
Table 4.3: Private Schools in Koolau Poko - 2008-2009
School             PS/K-8 9-12 TOTAL
Windward Adventist 61     0    61
Windward Nazarene  242    0    242
Source: Hawaii Association of Independent Schools Enrollment Report 2008-
2009.
 
Colleges, universities, and research institutions in Koolau Poko include the
University of Hawaii’s (UH) Windward Community College, UH’s Hawaii Institute
of Marine Biology, UH’s College of Tropical Agriculture and Human Resources
Waimanalo Research Station, and Hawaii Pacific University. These institutions
utilize the outdoors as open classrooms, taking advantage of Koolau Poko’s
natural environment and biota. They also add to Koolau Poko’s diversity and
quality of life.
Koolau Poko contains three public libraries administered by the DOE. The
regional library is located in Kāne’ohe. The other two libraries are in Kailua
and Waimānalo, the latter of which is incorporated in the Waimānalo Elementary
and Intermediate School. No additional libraries are planned.
4.7.1   Policies
   ·   Approve new residential developments only after the State Department of
Education confirms that adequate school facilities, either at existing schools
or at new school sites, will be available at the time new residential units are
occupied.
   ·   Have developers pay their fair share of costs to ensure provision of
adequate school facilities.
   ·   Consider schools as community resources for learning about specialized
environmental, cultural and historic subjects related to Koolau Poko and each
of its communities.
4.7.2   Guidelines
   ·   Encourage coordination between the department of parks and recreation
and the DOE regarding the development and use of athletic facilities such as
playgrounds, play fields and courts, swimming pools, and gymnasiums where the
joint use of such facilities would maximize use and reduce duplication of
function without compromising the schools’ athletic programs.
   ·   Support the DOE’s requests for fair share contributions from developers
to ensure that adequate school facilities are in place.
   ·   Apply the guidelines for institutions in Section 3.7.2 when a new public
or private school campus or a significant increase in enrollment capacity at
one of the existing campuses is proposed.
4.8   CIVIC AND PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES AND COMMUNITY RESILIENCE
Civic centers in Koolau Poko include several State of Hawai’i facilities. The
City’s Satellite City Hall for the region is located in the Windward City
Shopping Center. Satellite City Halls offer many basic services for residents,
including bus pass sales and bicycle registration. The State of Hawaii operates
regional or area service centers for unemployment insurance in the Regional
Town Centers of Kailua and Kāneohe and a food stamp office near Windward City
Shopping Center. The State’s Windward Health Center and the District Court for
Koolau Poko- Koolau Loa are located adjacent to the Kāneohe State Hospital,
Windward Community College and Kāneohe District Park, forming a secondary civic
center for Kāneohe.
Koolau Poko public safety facilities consist of police, fire and ambulance
stations, and emergency shelters. Police sub-stations are located in Kāneohe
and Kailua, both of which are located within their respective Regional Town
Centers. The Honolulu fire department (HFD) operates fire stations in Kailua,
Kāneohe, Waimānalo and Kahaluu. The military maintains a fire station on the
Marine Corps Base Hawaii. To provide adequate response time throughout the
region, a future fire station is planned at Kualoa. Ambulance service, staffed
by the City’s Emergency Medical Services Division, is provided from each of the
HFD fire stations except Kahaluu, whose service area is covered from the
Kāneohe station. An ambulance unit is planned in Kaaawa where an ambulance bay
has been completed at the new Kaaawa fire station.
Emergency shelters in the event of a potential disaster will be opened
selectively depending on the severity of the situation as determined by the
Department of Emergency Management. Shelter locations for the Koolau Poko and
Koolau Loa regions are listed on
Table 4.4. Kailua has been designated as a disaster-ready community. Other
communities should be encouraged to become disaster-ready communities as well.
Emergency planning should be updated according to the most recent Federal
Emergency Management Agency and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
flood inundation maps.
Table 4.4: Emergency Shelters for Koolau Poko
Kaneohe/Kahaluu Kailua/Mākapu/Waimānalo
Table 4.4: Emergency Shelters for Koolau Poko
Kaneohe/Kahaluu                   Kailua/Mākapu/Waimānalo
‘Āhuimanu Elementary School    ‘Aikahi Elementary School
Kapunahala Elementary School      Enchanted Lake Elementary School
Benjamin Parker Elementary School Keolu Elementary School
Castle High School                Kailua Middle School
Kāneohe Elementary School        Lanikai Elementary School
He’eia Elementary School        Maunawili Elementary School
Kahaluu Elementary School         Mōkapu Elementary School
Waiāhole Elementary School       Kalaheo High School
King Middle School                Pope Elementary School
Puohala Elementary                Kailua Elementary School
                                 Kainalu Elementary School
                                 Kaliua High School
                                 Waimānalo Elementary and Middle School
 
Community resilience is the ability of a community to prepare for anticipated
hazards, adapt to changing conditions, and withstand and recover rapidly from
disruptions. In order to protect lives, livelihoods, and quality of life,
communities should plan for damages and disruptions to buildings and
infrastructure systems from natural, technological, and human-caused hazards.
Planning for a more resilient community involves a comprehensive, risk-based
approach that is tailored to their community’s needs for maintaining vital
services. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the National Institute
of Standards and Technology, U.S. Department of Commerce, provides policy,
support information and guidelines for community resilience planning and
implementation strategies that will better prepare communities for future
hazard events. The City and County of Honolulu, department of emergency
management, prepared various plans and operations guides to prepare, prevent,
protect, respond, and recover from hazards.
4.8.1   Policies
   ·   Provide adequate staffing and facilities to ensure effective and
efficient delivery of basic governmental service and protection of public
safety.
   ·   Locate regional civic facilities in the Regional Town Centers of Kāneohe
and/or Kailua.
   ·   Encourage the development of more emergency shelters.
   ·   Encourage disaster resilient communities.
4.8.2   Guidelines
   ·   Locate permanent Satellite City Halls in the Regional Town Centers of
Kāneohe and Kailua to reinforce these areas as a regional focal point or
gathering spot for activities and services.
   ·   Design new public buildings such as schools and recreation centers to
serve a secondary function as an emergency shelter.
   ·   Design new City buildings which are used for public assembly and able to
serve as emergency shelters such that they can withstand a Category 3
hurricane.
   ·   Survey and retrofit, as appropriate, existing public buildings to serve
a secondary function as hurricane- resistant emergency shelters.
   ·   Provide incentives for private organizations to create hurricane-
resistant shelter areas in their facilities and for homes to include hurricane-
resistant safe rooms.
5.   IMPLEMENTATION
Many counties, cities, and other local jurisdictions on the U.S. mainland have
instituted comprehensive planning programs that emphasize proactive, community-
based planning, and implementation processes. These local governments have
sought to establish a strong link between planning policies and guidelines, and
specific organization, funding and actions needed to implement a variety of
public and private projects and programs. The following sections are intended
to strengthen the linkage to implementation to realize the vision for the
future and the policies and guidelines articulated in this Plan. Implementation
will vary depending upon the priorities and resources of each department.
This chapter is organized under the following headings:
Section
   5.1   Overview and Planning Implementation Tools
   5.2   Public Facilities Investment Priorities
   5.3   Development Priorities
   5.4   Special Area Plans
   5.5   Functional Planning
   5.6   Review of Zoning and Other Development Applications
   5.7   Five-Year Sustainable Communities Plan Review
   5.8   Implementation Matrix
5.1   OVERVIEW AND PLANNING IMPLEMENTATION TOOLS
Implementation of the Koolau Poko Sustainable Communities Plan will be
accomplished by:
   ·   Initiating zoning map and development code amendments to achieve
consistency with the vision, policies, and guidelines of the Sustainable
Communities Plan;
   ·   Guiding public investment in infrastructure through Functional Plans and
Special Area Plans in support of the vision, policies, and guidelines of the
Sustainable Communities Plan;
   ·   Reviewing zoning and other development applications based on how well
they support, conform to, and carry out the purposes of the Sustainable
Communities Plan;
   ·   Incorporating Sustainable Communities Plan priorities through the Public
Infrastructure Map and the City’s annual budget process;
   ·   Advising the State government on the content of the Sustainable
Communities Plan and seeking to conform State actions including those of DHHL
to the vision, policies, and guidelines of this Plan; and
   ·   Conducting a review of the vision, policies, guidelines, and CIP
priority investments of the Ko’olau Poko Sustainable Communities Plan every
five years and recommending revisions as necessary.
5.2   PUBLIC FACILITY INVESTMENT PRIORITIES
The vision for Koolau Poko requires the cooperation of both public and private
agencies in planning, financing, and improving infrastructure. The City must
take an active role in planning infrastructure improvements, such as land
acquisition and site improvements for proposed parks, provision of adequate
public access to the shoreline and mountain areas, provision of pedestrian,
bicycle, and other transportation options, and improvements to wastewater and
stormwater management systems and other proposals of this Plan.
5.3   DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES
Projects to receive priority in the approval process are those which:
   ·   Land acquisition and improvements for public projects that are
consistent with the Sustainable Communities Plan’s vision, policies, and
guidelines;
   ·   Action on applications for land use and other regulatory approvals that
are consistent with the Sustainable Communities Plan’s vision, policies, and
guidelines; and
   ·   Use of vacant usable parcels or sites ready for redevelopment and
conform to the Sustainable Communities Plan Map A-2, Land Use.
5.4   SPECIAL AREA PLANS
For areas requiring particular attention, Special Area Plans provide more
detailed policies and guidelines than are provided by the Sustainable
Communities Plan. The form and content of Special Area Plans depend on what
characteristics and issues need to be addressed in greater detail in planning
and guiding development or use of the Special Area.
Special Area Plans can be used to guide land use development and infrastructure
investment in Special Districts, Redevelopment Districts, or Resource Areas.
Plans for Special Districts provide guidance for development and infrastructure
investment in areas with distinct historic or design character or significant
public views. Plans for Redevelopment Districts provide strategies for the
revitalization or redevelopment of an area. Plans for Resource Areas provide
resource management strategies for areas with particular natural or cultural
resource values.
In Koolau Poko, Special Area Plans are proposed for the following locations and
purposes:
   ·   Kailua Regional Town Center.  A plan to improve pedestrian circulation,
public transit service, landscaping and public open spaces, street fixtures and
signage, and building appearance in the central commercial district and civic
center.
   ·   Koolau Greenbelt.  A plan to restore, protect, and maintain the area at
the base of the Koolau Mountain Range through a variety of mechanisms that may
include land trusts and tax incentives.
   ·   Haikū Valley, Waihee and Waikāne Nature Preserves, Kawainui Marsh, and
Nuupia Fishponds Plans for improved public access and preservation of these
resources should be prepared.
Other Special Area Plan opportunities may be identified as the Sustainable
Communities Plan is implemented.
5.5   FUNCTIONAL PLANNING
Functional planning is the process through which various City agencies
determine needs, assign priorities, phase projects, and propose project
financing to further implement the vision, policies, and guidelines articulated
in the Sustainable Communities Plan. This process may take a variety of forms,
depending upon the missions of the various agencies involved, as well as upon
requirements imposed from outside the City structure, such as federal
requirements for wastewater management planning. Typically, functional planning
occurs as a continuous or iterative activity within each agency.
Through the functional planning process, City agencies responsible for
developing and maintaining infrastructure and public facilities or for
provision of City services review existing functional planning documents and
programs. As a result of these reviews, the agencies then update, if required,
existing plans or prepare new long-range functional planning documents that
address facilities and service system needs. Updates of functional planning
documents are also conducted to assure that agency plans will serve to further
implement the Sustainable Communities Plan as well as to provide adequate
opportunity for coordination of plans and programs among the various agencies.
The number and types of functional planning documents will vary from agency to
agency, as will the emphases and contents of those documents. A typical agency
may develop a set of core documents such as:
   ·   A resource-constrained long-range capital improvement program. A
“resource-constrained” program is one that identifies the fiscal resources that
can be reasonably expected to be available to finance the improvements.
   ·   A long-range financing plan, with identification of necessary new
revenue measures or opportunities.
   ·   A development schedule with top priorities for areas designated for
earliest development.
   ·   Service and facility design standards, including level of service
guidelines for determining adequacy.
Other documents may also be developed as part of an agency’s functional
planning activities, such as master plans for provision of services to a
specific region of the island. In some cases, functional planning activities
will be undertaken in cooperation with agencies outside the City structure,
such as the transportation planning activities that are conducted in
association with the Oahu Metropolitan Planning Organization.
Functional planning is intended to be a proactive public involvement process
which provides public access to information about infrastructure and public
facility needs assessments, alternatives evaluations, and financing. Outreach
activities should involve Neighborhood Boards, community organizations,
landowners, and others who may be significantly affected by the public
facilities and infrastructure projects or programs to be developed to further
implement the policies of the Sustainable Communities Plan.
The functional planning process should be characterized by opportunities for
early and continuing involvement, timely public notice, public access to
information used in the evaluation of priorities, and the opportunity to
suggest alternatives and to express preferences. The functional planning
process provides the technical background for Capital Improvement Program and
public policy proposals that are subject to review and approval by the City
Council. Consequently, any functional planning proposal which is inconsistent
with, or varies from, the vision, policies, and guidelines of the Sustainable
Communities Plan shall only be approved as an amendment to the Plan.
5.6   REVIEW OF ZONING AND OTHER DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS
A primary way in which the vision of the Koolau Poko Sustainable Communities
Plan will guide land use will be through the review of applications for zone
changes and other development approvals. Approval for all development projects
will be based on the extent to which the project conforms to and carries out
the purposes of the policies, and guidelines of the Sustainable Communities
Plan.
Projects that do not involve significant zone changes will be reviewed by the
department of planning and permitting for conformance with the policies,
development priorities, and guidelines of the Koolau Poko Sustainable
Communities Plan and the population policies of the General Plan. For mixed-use
zoning allowing residential use, the applicant should prepare an analysis of
the projected population impacts of the change to verify that such impacts will
not be inconsistent with the population policies of the General Plan as they
apply to Koolau Poko. Those projects requiring an Environmental Assessment (EA)
or Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) shall follow the provisions of Hawaii
Revised Statutes, Chapter 343.
5.6.1   Adequate Facilities Requirement
All projects requesting zone changes shall be reviewed to determine if adequate
public facilities and infrastructure will be available to meet the needs
created as a result of the development. Level of Service Guidelines to define
adequate public facilities and infrastructure requirements will be established
during the Capital Improvement Program.
In order to guide development and growth in an orderly manner as required by
the City’s General Plan, zoning and other development approvals for new
developments should be approved only if the responsible City and State agencies
indicate that adequate public facilities and utilities will be available at the
time of occupancy or if conditions the functional agency indicates are
necessary to assure adequacy are otherwise sufficiently addressed.
The department of planning and permitting, as part of its report on the
consistency of the project with the Koolau Poko Sustainable Communities Plan
vision, policies, and guidelines, will review and summarize any individual
agency’s findings regarding public facilities and utilities adequacy that are
raised as part of the EA/EIS process. The department of planning and permitting
will address these findings and any additional agency comments submitted as
part of the agency review of the zone change application and recommend
conditions that will be included in the conditional zoning approval to insure
adequacy of facilities.
5.7   FIVE-YEAR SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN REVIEW
The Department of Planning and Permitting shall conduct a comprehensive review
of the Koolau Poko Sustainable Communities Plan and shall report its findings
and recommended revisions to the Planning Commission and the City Council five
years after adoption and every five years thereafter. It is intended the
Community Growth Boundary will remain fixed through the 2035 planning horizon.
In the Five-Year review, the Koolau Poko Sustainable Communities Plan will be
evaluated to see if the regional vision, policies, guidelines, and implementing
actions are still appropriate, with particular attention to the issue of
sustaining long-term agriculture.
5.7.1   Adoption of the Sustainable Communities Plan and Existing Land Use
Approvals
This Sustainable Communities Plan will go into effect upon its adoption by
ordinance. Land use approvals granted under existing zoning, Unilateral
Agreements, and approved Urban Design Plans will remain in force and guide
entitlement decisions until any zoning action to further implement the vision,
policies, and guidelines of the Koolau Poko Sustainable Communities Plan is
initiated. If an EA or EIS was accepted in the course of a Development Plan
land use approval for a project, it should be acceptable to meet the
requirement for an initial project EA/EIS when zone change applications are
submitted for subsequent phases of the project unless the project scope and
land uses are being significantly changed from that described in the initial
EA/EIS.
5.8   IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
This section provides a summary of the guidelines in Chapters 3 and 4 of this
Plan that identify specific physical improvements and actions in order to help
organize and facilitate plan implementation.
Table 5-1 lists each of the guidelines and identified related plans, regulatory
code or action, and the public or private entities responsible for implementing
the action. The table is organized by land use and infrastructure category,
with the categories listed according to the order of Chapters 3 and 4.
The table is not exclusive. Programs and initiatives that are consistent with
the Plan’s policies and guidelines may be added. In addition, new funding
sources or public-private partnerships may expand and/or alter policy
implementation.
   ·   The first column of the table - Policies/Guidelines - is comprised of
the guideline statements for each land use category. Policy statements are used
if the land use category does not include guidelines.
   ·   The second column - Program - relates each statement to a specific
regulatory code, functional plan or other action. The term “project review”
indicates the review of discretionary land use approvals, such as State land
use, zoning, and special management area use permits. In some instances, To Be
Determined (TBD) was used to indicate that the related code/plan/action was not
clear. TBD actions are intended to be identified and developed by the agencies
responsible for implementation.
   ·   The third column - Agency - identifies the public and/or private
entities responsible for implementing the policy or guideline. Although many of
the implementing actions fall under DPP’s jurisdiction, some actions are the
responsibility of other Federal, State or City departments or public agencies,
while a few have been assigned to private entities or individual landowners.
   ·   The last column - Role - describes the role of the named agency in
carrying out the code revision or action, either as primary implementer, or as
an advocate or partner of the primary implementer. For the implementation of
certain guidelines there is more than one primary implementer if more than one
code revision or action is necessary or multiple jurisdictions are involved.
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                               Program Agency Role
Sec 3.1.3.1 Open Space Preservation - Mountain Areas
   Improve access to mountain areas and enhance the physical condition and
recreational and educational value of hiking trails by fully implementing the     CIP,
recommendations in the State of Hawaii’s Na Ala Hele Program Plan, providing    OPS     DLNR   Implementer
adequate funding for the management of issues related to increased access, such
as trail maintenance, weed control, and eradication of non-native predators.
   Create public access to the former U.S. Coast Guard Omega Station site,
including Haikū Stairs, and combine this parcel with the adjoining City and      CIP     DPR    Implementer
County of Honolulu site for the proposed Haikū Valley Cultural and Nature                DLNR   Advocate
Preserve in order to:
   ·   Provide recreational, cultural and educational benefits; and                      
   ·   Help protect resources in the makai portion of the Heeia watershed,
including a high-quality perennial stream, a significant wetland habitat for                    
waterbirds, migratory waterfowl and shorebirds, and an ancient Hawaiian fishpond.
   Improve the sites that have been acquired for Waihee Valley Nature Park and         DPR    Implementer
Waikāne Nature Preserve in a manner that preserves the area’s natural scenic   CIP     CBO    Advocate
quality and provides educational and passive recreation opportunities.
   Promote the preservation of remaining undeveloped lands at the foot of the
Koolau Mountain Range through protective regulatory measures, tax incentives for                 Implementer
the establishment of conservation easements and management programs on private    TAX,    DLNR   Advocate &
properties, and public acquisition of fee simple or partial interest, where       CIP     CBO    Implementer
necessary to create the Koolau scenic resource area or “green belt” from
Waimānalo to Kualoa.
   Locate structures at higher elevations of slopes only for purposes of public
safety or compelling public interest, when there is no feasible alternative to    Project DLNR   Implementer
fulfill the public need, and when adequate mitigation measures have been taken to Review
reduce or avoid impact on the scenic and natural environment.
   Maintain, protect, and/or restore native forests in the State Conservation          DLNR   Implementer
District, especially by identifying and protecting endangered species habitats    OPS     FED    Implementer
and other sensitive ecological zones from threats such as fire, alien species,            CBO    Implementer
feral animals, and human activity and disturbance.
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                                Program Agency Role
   Provide access to existing mountain trails through residential areas, through
acquisition of easements or rights-of-way, if necessary, and work with the         OPS,    DLNR   Implementer
military and agricultural landowners to provide access through those lands to      CIP
mountain trails, as well, consistent with security needs.
Sec 3.1.3.2 Open Space Preservation - Shoreline Areas
   Maintain existing makai view channels along Kalanianaole Highway between     Project DPP    Implementer
Makapuu Point and Waimānalo Beach Park; along Kawailoa Road and North Kalāheo    Review, DOT    Implementer
Avenue in Kailua; along Lilipuna Road in Kāneohe; and along Kamehameha Highway    LUO     DFM    Implementer
north of Kāneohe. Avoid visual obstructions, such as walls and dense landscaping.
   Create and maintain new makai view channels along Kamehameha Highway and     CIP,    DOT    Implementer
Kahekili Highway north of Kāneohe by:                                             OPS     DFM    Implementer
                                                                                   OPS
   ·   Acquiring shoreline properties along the highway either in fee or by
obtaining easements and maintenance agreements with private landowners, giving
priority to locations where there are actual or potential vistas of perennial
streams, wetlands, fishponds and off-shore islands; and
   ·   Selective clearing of dense vegetation and the removal of structures.
   Maintain the untamed landscape quality of the Makapuu viewshed, with any     Project DLNR   Implementer
modification to this area being done for the purpose of health and safety and in a Review  DPP    Implementer
manner that continues the landscape character of the scenic shoreline corridor on         DOT    Implementer
the East Honolulu side of Makapuu Point.                                           OPS
   Establish buffer zones for the protection of rare coastal resources and      OPS     DLNR   Implementer
recognition that such resources should be defined and identified.                          CBO    Advocate
Increase opportunities for physical access to the shoreline areas of Kāneohe and  SAP     DDC/   Implementer
Kailua by acquiring additional shorefront areas, with following locations as       CIP     DPR    Implementer
priorities:                                                                                DLNR
   ·   The site of the Kāneohe Wastewater Pre-Treatment Facility, to be named
Waikalua Bayside Park, with possible expansion into Kokokahi YWCA facility through
either acquisition or joint use agreement;
   ·   King Intermediate School and an area north of Heeia Kea Landing, which may
require some realignment of a portion of Kamehameha Highway to create adequate
land area makai of the roadway; and
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                               Program Agency Role
   ·   A site in either the Oneawa Beach area, near the surf spot known as
“Castles” or in the frontage along Kalaheo Avenue between Kailua Beach Park and
Kalama Beach Park.
   Improve existing pedestrian rights-of-way to the shoreline by providing on-
street or off-street parking nearby; secured bicycle racks where the access point SAP     DDC/   Implementer
adjoins an existing or planned bikeway, such as along Mokulua Drive in Lanikai    CIP     DPR    Implementer
and Kāneohe Bay Drive in Kāneohe; and provisions for emergency vehicle access and       DLNR
lateral access along the shoreline.
   Prepare beach management plans to maintain lateral access along popular
beaches that are subject to long-term and seasonal erosion, particularly at
Lanikai and Kualoa, emphasizing non-structural approaches and prevention of
adverse effects on adjacent coral reef ecosystems such as greater shoreline       SAP     DLNR/  Implementer
setbacks for new structures along these and other unstable shoreline areas.               DPP
Effective beach management plans are very location specific and incorporate the
consideration of long-term effects such as climate change and sea level rise, as
well as seasonal and long-term erosion and accretion.
   Locate and design exterior lighting to avoid disturbance to seabirds and    LUO,    DPP    Implementer
marine mammals, using DLNR guidelines.                                            Project DLNR   Advocate
                                                                                  Review
   Designate the Alāla Point to Wailea shoreline as an erosion-prone area and
prepare a beach management plan for this area, focusing beach restoration         SAP     DLNR   Implementer
activities on the Bellows Air Force Station beach and Kaupō beach.
   Designate the shoreline along Kamehameha Highway adjacent to Kualoa Ranch to
Kualoa Point as an erosion-prone area and prepare a beach management plan for     SAP     DLNR   Implementer
this area.
   Pursue measures to render all shoreline accretion as public (State) propertyCIP     DLNR   Implementer
in perpetuity in order to preserve shorelines as a public resource.
   Prohibit the use of shore armoring structures, considering alternative      Project DPP/   Implementer
measures such as beach replenishment.                                             Review  DLNR   Implementer
                                                                                  CIP     DLNR
   Modify shoreline setbacks as needed to protect the natural shoreline, lessenLUO     DPP    Implementer
the impact to coastal processes, and address sea level rise.
   Analyze the possible impact of sea level rise for new public and private    Project DPP
projects in shoreline areas and incorporate, where appropriate and feasible,      Review  DOT    Implementer
measures to reduce risks and increase resiliency to impacts of sea level rise.    CIP     DTS
                                                                                          DDC
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                             Program Agency Role
Sec 3.1.3.3 Open Space Preservation - Wetlands, Wildlife Preserves and Nature Parks
   Prepare use and management plans for Heeia Marsh, Waihee Valley Nature Park,      DDC/
Haikū Valley Cultural and Nature Preserve, and Waikāne Nature Preserve and    SAP     DPR    Implementer
develop those sites pursuant to those plans.
   Encourage owners of private wetlands, such as Waihee Marsh (also known as
“Haia Moi”), and other wildlife habitats, to prepare and abide by use and   SAP     PRIV   Implementer
management plans for those resources and to investigate the various State and   TAX     DLNR   Advocate
Federal programs that provide incentives for landowners to manage their lands
for the benefit of wildlife.
Prepare and implement a plan to establish a Koolau Greenbelt.                   SAP     DLNR   Implementer
                                                                                OPS     CBO    Advocate
   Prohibit encroachment or intensification of residential or other urban useProject DPP    Implementer
near wildlife sanctuaries and nature parks.                                     Review
   Prepare wildlife preserve management plans emphasizing conservation and   SAP     DLNR   Implementer
restoration of native plants, birds, fish and invertebrates.                            USFWS  Implementer
   Minimize the adverse effects of artificial lighting on wildlife and human Project DPP
health by balancing the need of outdoor lighting for night utility, security,   Review  DTS/   Regulator
and desire for reasonable architectural expression with the need to conserve    OPS     DOT    Implementer
energy and protect the natural environment.
Sec 3.1.3.4 Open Space Preservation - Natural Gulches, Streams and Drainageways
   Preserve the natural aesthetic and biological values of gulches, streams aOPS
drainageways as part of the open space system by implementing the stream        SWM,    DFM    Implementer
classifications, design guidelines and actions contained in the Koolau Poko     Project DPP    Implementer
Watershed Management Plan for the protection of natural stream beds and habitat Review
and the restoration of degraded streams.
   Alter natural drainageways only when necessary to provide flood protection
for existing developed areas, and in a way that preserves aesthetic and
biological values, and avoids degradation of stream, coastline and nearshore    CIP     DDC    Implementer
water quality. For example, impacts on biological conditions may be mitigated,  OPS     DFM    Implementer
as appropriate, by using v-shaped bottom channels for periods of low stream     SWM     DPP    Regulator
flow, rip-rap boulder lining of stream banks, streamside vegetation and similar
strategies to shade, cool and aerate the waters of the stream and provide
riparian and stream bottom habitat.
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                                Program Agency Role
   Incorporate erosion control measures and best management practices, as cited SWM,
the Hawaii’s Coastal Nonpoint Pollution Control Program Management Plan to prevenProject DPP    Regulator
pollution of wetlands, streams, estuaries and nearshore waters.                    Review
Sec 3.1.3.4 Open Space Preservation - Other Open Space Elements
Agriculture
   ·   Design and locate buildings and other facilities that are accessory tProject
agricultural operation in a way that minimizes visual impacts within the view      Review  DPP    Regulator
corridors identified in Appendix Map A-1.
   ·   Retain the open space character of land adjacent to Kawainui Marsh and
within the Hawaii Youth Correctional Facility to visually separate and define the  Project DLNR   Implementer
edges of the Maunawili, Olomana and Pōhākapu and Kukunono residential            Review
neighborhoods.
Golf Courses
   ·   Maintain golf courses to provide view amenities for adjacent urban areas,
especially from well-used public rights-of-way, parks and vista points. Where      Project DPP    Implementer
necessary, redesign golf course facilities or layouts to reduce the visual         Review
prominence of protective screens or large accessory buildings.
   ·   Design and maintain golf courses to avoid or minimize environmental impacts
– such as siltation, pesticide and fertilizer runoff, destruction of coastal,    Project
riparian and wetland habitat - using as a guideline the Office of Planning         Review  DPP    Implementer
publication, Golf Course Development in Hawaii - Impacts and Policy
Recommendations.
   ·   Optimize the function of golf courses as passive drainageways, maximiProject DPP    Implementer
their potential to retain or detain stormwater runoff.                             Review
   ·   Provide safe access through golf courses, as necessary, for regional Project DPP    Implementer
continuity of pedestrian and bicycle systems.                                      Review
   ·   When necessary for safety reasons, use landscape screening, setbacks Project DPP    Implementer
modifications to the golf course layout rather than fencing or solid barriers.     Review
   ·   Provide appropriate buffers between golf courses and surrounding     Project DPP    Implementer
residential areas.                                                                 Review
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                                Program Agency Role
Cemeteries
   ·   Maintain the open space character of cemeteries through very low lot Project DPP    Regulator
coverage ratios.                                                                   Review
   ·   Where located in the State Conservation District or in the preservatiProject DPP,
area designated by this Plan, limit above-grade structures to maintain open space  Review  DLNR   Regulator
character.
   ·   Limit above-grade structures to ceremonial or religious buildings; grave
markers of modest size; and necessary administrative and maintenance support       Project DPP    Regulator
buildings that are minimally visible from public rights-of-way, entries and vista  Review
points.
3.1.4 Other Natural Resources
   Require surveys to identify endangered species habitat, and require appropriate      DLNR   Implementer
mitigation and protection measures to address impacts due to developments.         OPS     FED    Implementer
                                                                                           CBO    Implementer
   Minimize glare and obtrusive light by limiting outdoor lighting that is      Project DPP    Regulator
misdirected, excessive, or unnecessary by fully shielding lighting (no light above Review  DTS/   Implementer
the horizontal plane) fixtures and using lower wattage.                            OPS     DOT
   Adopt outdoor night lighting standards that help reinforce the difference    Project DPP    Implementer
between urban and rural communities.                                               Review
3.2.1 Island-Wide Parks
Passive or Nature Parks
   ·   Acquire and develop the proposed Ha’ikū Valley Cultural and NatureCIP     DDC/   Implementer
Preserve, including access to Haikū Stairs.                                               DPR
   ·   Improve the Waikāne Nature Preserve and Waihee Valley Nature Park.  CIP     DDC/   Implementer
                                                                                           DPR
Active Recreation Areas
   ·   Acquire additional shorefront land for parks in Kāneohe and Kailua wCIP     DDC/   Implementer
particular attention to increasing shoreline access in Kāneohe.                           DPR
   ·   Locate bus stops and loading areas at principal entries and adjacent CIP     DDC/   Implementer
convenient pedestrian accesses to main activity areas within the park.                     DPR
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                                  Program Agency Role
   ·   Provide amenities and service facilities to accommodate “tailgate” picnics DDC/
parking areas for sporting events, including shading canopy trees within the parking CIP     DPR    Implementer
lot as well as nearby picnic tables and outdoor grills.
   ·   Locate areas designed for sporting events that attract high numbers of people  DDC/
along major collector streets and separate them as much as possible from residential CIP     DPR    Implementer
areas and significant wildlife habitats.
   ·   Expand active recreational facilities by incorporating facilities such as      DDC/
playfields and playcourts in regional and beach parks and in the former sanitary     CIP     DPR    Implementer
landfill site at Kapaa.
Sec 3.2.2 Community-Based Parks
Community-Based Parks
   ·   Design and site structural improvements and landscaping in community-baCIP,    DDC/   Implementer
parks in such a way as to enhance the aesthetic value of these open space elements.  OPS     DPR
   ·   Mitigate visual impacts of large recreation buildings or structures,
lighting, parking lots, perimeter fencing along major collector streets and other    CIP,    DDC/   Implementer
utilitarian elements through building design, plantings or other appropriate visual  OPS     DPR
screens adjacent to residential areas and major roadways.
   ·   Encourage adaptive re-use and/or modest expansion of existing facilitieCIP,er  DDC/   Implementer
the construction of new structures to minimize impacts on open space.                OPS     DPR
   Prepare a functional plan for the acquisition of new community-based parks in  SAP     DDC/   Implementer
Kailua, Kāneohe, Kahaluu, and Waimānalo.                                                   DPR
   Have master plans for development of new parks or redevelopment of existing parSAP,    DDC/
provide for facilities and accessible pathways from surrounding streets to           CIP     DPR    Implementer
facilitate pedestrian and bicycle access to parks.
   Explore ways, through cooperative agreements and mutual indemnifications with the      DDC/
UH, DOE and non-profit organizations, to design and operate facilities to achieve    OPS     DPR,   Implementer
efficiencies and reduce duplication in the development and use of athletic,                  DOE,
recreation, meeting, and parking facilities.                                                 CBO
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                                Program Agency Role
   Pursue the development of greenways along the following streams and drainage CIP,
channels: Kāneohe Stream, from Kāneohe Bay to Kahekili Highway; Kawainui Stream, SAP,    DDC,   Implementer
from Kailua Bay to Kawainui Marsh; Kawa Stream, from Mokulele Drive to Kāneohe BayProject DPP
Drive; and Kaelepulu Stream, from Kailua Bay to Kaelepulu Pond                     Review
Sec 3.3.2 Historic and Cultural Resources
Cultural and Archaeological Sites
   ·   Require preservation in situ only for those features that the State  Project DLNR   Implementer
Historic Preservation Officer has recommended such treatment.                      Review
   ·   Determine the appropriate preservation methods on a site-by-site basiProject DLNR   Implementer
consultation with the State Historic Preservation Officer.                         Review
   ·   Determine appropriate delineation of site boundaries and setback and
restrictions for adjacent uses based on whether a site is listed and/or is         Project
eligible for listing on the State and/or National Register of Historic Places and  Review  DLNR   Implementer
on a site-by-site basis in consultation with the State Historic Preservation
Office.
   ·   Include sight lines that are significant to the original purpose and Project DLNR   Implementer
of the site in criteria for adjacent use restrictions.                             Review
   ·   Determine the appropriateness of public access on a site-by-site basiProject DLNR   Implementer
consultation with the State Historic Preservation Office and the owner of the land Review  PRIV,  Advocate
on which the site is located.                                                              CBO
Historic Sites
   ·   Promote the identification, survey and listing of sites that are eligOPSe    DLNR   Implementer
for the Hawaii or National Registers of Historic Places.
   ·   Preserve the architectural character, landscape setting and visual coLUO,
of historic and cultural landmarks through appropriate zoning standards and        Project DPP    Implementer
development controls, as necessary, and public outreach programs such as design    Review  DLNR   Implementer
guidelines for the maintenance, renovation or expansion of older dwellings.        OPS
   ·   Provide incentives for the preservation and maintenance of historic sTAX,    DLNR,  Implementer
and allow for adaptive reuse through a permit review process.                      LUO     BFS    Implementer
                                                                                           DPP
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                              Program Agency Role
Sec 3.4.2 Agricultural Use
   Limit the floor area of dwellings and prevent inappropriate urban uses, such
as meeting facilities and conditional uses that have no direct relationship to   LUO     DPP    Implementer
agricultural or local community needs. Permit a dwelling only if is accessory to
a verifiable agricultural use of the same lot.
   Require new residential development to maintain an adequate buffer when    LUO,
adjacent to agricultural lands, giving consideration to topographic barriers,    Project DPP    Implementer
prevailing winds, and the noise and air-borne emissions associated with the type Review
of agricultural operation.
   Adopt standards for roadway and other infrastructure design that are
appropriate and intended for continued agricultural use rather than residential  SR&R    DPP    Implementer
use.
   Require the acknowledgement of agricultural standards in the subdivision   SR&R    DPP    Implementer
process and in all deeds to lots.
   Focus performance standards for agricultural zoning districts on preventing
degradation of the natural environment, maintaining the viability of             LUO     DPP    Implementer
agricultural uses, and protecting the health and safety of agricultural workers  PHS     DOH    Implementer
rather than on disturbance to residential uses.
   2.   Encourage development proposals of more than two lots to apply for SR&R,
cluster housing which provides a larger, contiguous area reserved for            LUO     DPP    Implementer
agriculture use.
   Structure property tax assessments and rates to encourage long-term leases         BFS    Implementer
for agricultural operations. Also, adopt lower development fees and standards    TAX     DPP    Advocate
for agricultural subdivisions that do not involve the construction of dwellings.
   Adopt zoning standards that promote the use of natural energy sources to   LUO     DPP    Implementer
support agricultural uses.
   Permit revenue-producing activities on lots where a commercial agricultural
operation is being conducted, as ancillary uses. Allow these activities only if
they do not interfere with surrounding agricultural uses. Examples of compatible
activities include camping; picnicking, horseback riding, training and
instruction; rodeos; polo matches; and tours of botanical gardens, fishponds,    LUO     DPP    Implementer
and kalo loi. Private parties promoting agricultural production or agriculture-
related educational activities may be compatible, depending on the intensity of
use and the location and size of the property. Recreational activities involving
motorized vehicles and thrill craft are generally not be considered compatible.
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                                 Program Agency Role
Sec 3.5.2.1 Residential Use - Rural Communities
   Adopt development standards and design guidelines for residential-designated  LUO     DPP    Implementer
areas in rural areas which:
   ·   Minimize impervious surfaces
   ·   Require greater building setbacks than in suburban residential zoning
districts;
   ·   Generally limit building heights to two stories;
   ·   Allow relatively narrow roadway widths
   ·   Allow alternative sidewalk designs, as compared to suburban residential
neighborhoods, providing they comply with public safety and ADA standards;
   ·   Allow the use of detention basins and grassed swales for stormwater drainage
instead of concrete curbs and gutters;
   ·   Avoid the geographic clustering and concentration of group living facilities
and group homes;
   ·   Promote passive solar design, such as the use of sloped roof forms with wide
overhangs, and residential-scaled energy conservation and natural energy harnessing
devices;
   ·   Promote water conservation measures, such as flow constrictors, xeriscaping,
and use of non-potable water sources for irrigation; and
   ·   Achieve an overall residential density of no greater than four principal
dwelling units per acre.
Sec 3.5.2.2 Residential Use - Suburban Communities
Adopt development standards and design guidelines for lots designated for
residential use in urban fringe areas in order to:
   ·   Retain the physical character and definition of neighborhoods and miniLUO,    DPP    Implementer
long-term adverse impacts of expansions of existing homes and new infill            BLDG    DPP    Implementer
development on surrounding neighborhoods;
   ·   Enhance the identities of neighborhoods through the use of landscaping,       DPP    Implementer
natural features, and building form and siting;
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                                Program Agency Role
   ·   Encourage appropriate scale and privacy with respect to surrounding
residential properties when infill development such as new homes or expansion of           DPP    Implementer
existing homes occurs;
   ·   Provide a range of housing at varying densities, depending on the
characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood and the physical features of the           DPP    Implementer
site, but not to exceed six dwelling units per acre;
   ·   Limit building height to two stories;                                        DPP    Implementer
   ·   Reduce the visual dominance of vehicular parking on residential lots and     DPP    Implementer
discourage the paving of yards;
   ·   Discourage the use of solid barrier walls that obscure views of the front    DPP    Implementer
yard and dwelling entrances from the street;
   ·   Prohibit development on slopes of 40 percent or greater that have soil       DPP    Implementer
characteristics indicating potential instability for building purposes;
   ·   Avoid the geographic clustering or concentration of group living facilities  DPP    Implementer
and group homes that are licensed by the State;
   ·   Promote passive solar design, such as the use of sloped roof forms with
wide overhangs, and residential-scaled energy conservation and natural energy              DPP    Implementer
harnessing devices; and
   ·   Promote water conservation measures, such as flow constrictors,      BWS     BWS    Advocate
xeriscaping, and use of non-potable water sources for irrigation.
Implement traffic safety measures for streets in residential neighborhoods,        CIP OPS DTS    Implementer
including:                                                                                 DOT    Advocate
   ·   Install traffic calming modifications at selected street locations where
speeding is a chronic problem;
   ·   Install additional lighting or more visually prominent crosswalks at
selected intersections where pedestrian safety is a concern;
   ·   Post signs or install striping for designated bike routes and bike lanes;
and
   ·   Make sidewalk or pathway improvements and undertake operational measures
that are identified as part of a Safe Routes to Schools or Complete Streets
program, or other pedestrian safety initiatives.
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                                 Program Agency Role
                                                                                    Zoning
Adopt zoning maps that recognize existing residential apartment developments, but   Maps,   DPP    Implementer
allow new apartment development only under the following circumstances:             Project
                                                                                    Review
   ·   The site is at least one acre in size and is located in close proximity to a
Regional Town Center;
   ·   The building height does not exceed three stories; and
   ·   The density does not exceed 30 units per acre.
Sec 3.6.1.1 Commercial and Industrial Uses - Rural Commercial Centers
Architectural Character and Building Mass
   ·   Encourage the rustic appearance in building forms, with pitched roof fLUO,
or “false-front” parapets characteristic of rural towns in Hawai’i.           Project DPP    Implementer
                                                                                    Review
   ·   Promote individual business establishments that are relatively small and
focused on provision of goods and services primarily to the surrounding rural
community or agricultural activities.
   ·   Site buildings close to the roadway in the manner of a traditional rural
village.
   ·   Keep meeting facilities, other than public schools or service facilities,
relatively small in area and focused on accommodating the needs of the surrounding
rural community or agricultural activities.
   ·   In Kahaluu, improve the commercial center in the vicinity of the Kamehameha
Highway-Kahekili Highway intersection in accordance with the design recommendations CIP     DDC    Implementer
of the Kahaluu Community Master Plan.
Visual Screening, Lighting and Signage
   ·   Encourage informal landscaping, subdued road signage and lighting, andLUO,
parking lots visually subordinate to the buildings and landscaping.                 Project DPP    Implementer
                                                                                    Review
   ·   In Kahaluu, implement the landscape, fencing and signage improvements CIP     DOT    Implementer
public rights-of-way and in lands recommended in the Kahaluu Community Master Plan.
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                                 Program     Agency    Role
Vehicular Access
   ·   Study the impact of large vehicles on residential streets and implemenCIPts       DTS       Implementer
recommendations where warranted.                                                                Community Advocate
   ·   In Kahaluu, implement the traffic calming and transportation measures, i.e.,
roadway treatments, bus stop relocation, and bikeway that are recommended in the    CIP         DOT, DTS  Implementer
Kahaluu Community Master Plan.
Outlying Commercial Uses
   ·   Outside of the Rural Commercial Centers, structures occupied by existiLUO,
commercial, light industrial or community facility uses may be rebuilt or remodeled Project     DPP       Implementer
within their present floor area, provided they meet the design guidelines for Rural Review
Commercial Centers.
   ·   Further explore and define the needs for a community baseyard and vocational
training center in Waimānalo, as part of the implementation of the Waimānalo      CIP         DDC       Implementer
Business Plan.
Sec 3.6.1.2 and 3.6.1.3 Commercial and Industrial Uses - Suburban and Community Commercial Centers
Architectural Character and Building Mass
   ·   Retain the residential character; height, size, and massing of buildinLUO,
compatibility with adjacent residential areas.                                      Project     DPP       Implementer
                                                                                    Review
   ·   Limit the total floor area of Suburban Community Centers to a maximum
100,000 square feet and limit aggregate floor area of all properties within
Community Commercial Centers to 350,000 square feet.
   ·   Encourage gable and hip-form roofs, using breaks in the roof line to reduce
the apparent scale of large roof plates.
   ·   Express residential character by using exterior materials and colors that
are contextual with the neighborhood character.
Vehicular Access
                                                                                    LUO,
   ·   Provide access to the parking and loading areas from a collector streeProject     DPP       Implementer
when available.                                                                     Review
                                                                                    Subdivision
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                                Program Agency Role
   ·   Encourage use of shared driveways to access parking areas between
buildings.
   ·   Permit access to a local residential street only if it is for emergency or
secondary access and would not encourage through traffic along the local street.
Pedestrian and Bicycle Facilities
   ·   Provide pedestrian access from the public sidewalk or other off-site LUO,    DPP,
pedestrian pathway to the entrance of establishments in the commercial center that Project PRIV   Implementer
does not require crossing a traffic lane or parking lot aisle or driveway.         Review
   ·   Provide direct pedestrian connection from the interior walkways in the
commercial center to a bus stop, if a bus stop is nearby.
   ·   Provide bicycle racks for security. Locate bicycle racks to be visible and
readily accessible from the street entry.
Visual Screening, Lighting, and Signage
   ·   Visually screen parking and service areas from streets and residentiaLUO,
areas.                                                                             Project DPP    Implementer
                                                                                   Review
   ·   Include a landscaped screen of trees and hedges along the street frontages
and property lines.
   ·   Use only fully-shielded lighting which does not exceed the minimum
standards necessary to meet safety and security requirements in parking lots.
   ·   Ensure compatibility between the type, size, design, placement, and color
of signage and the context of adjacent facilities and uses.
Sec 3.6.2.3 Commercial and Industrial Uses - Regional Town Centers (Kailua and Kāne’ohe)
Mix of Uses
   ·   Locate public uses serving a regional purpose – such as Satellite City
Halls, regional libraries, police substations, post offices, and civic centers –         DDC,   Implementer
within or adjacent to Regional Town Centers and not in outlying areas. Public      CIP     DAGS    
facilities that have smaller service areas or that are an integral part of a               DPP    Advocate
regional network, such as elementary schools, fire stations, pump stations, and
utility substations, may be located in outlying areas.
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                                 Program Agency Role
                                                                                    LUO,
   ·   Locate service industrial uses within enclosed buildings.             Project DPP    Implementer
                                                                                    Review
   ·   Locate, design, and operate uses that generate undue noise levels in aLUO,
that will keep noise to an acceptable level in adjacent areas.                      Project DPP    Implementer
                                                                                    Review
Architectural Character and Building Massing
   ·   Allow variation in architectural character, depending on the context, the
theme, and the community’s approved urban design guidelines for the particular    LUO,
center. For portions of commercial center buildings that are adjacent to, or        Project DPP    Implementer
readily visible from, residential areas, encourage architectural character that     Review
reflects and are compatible with the residential character; or screen from view
from such areas by landscaping.
   ·   Avoid blank facades on portions of buildings visible from public areas by
using texture, articulation, color, and fenestration to create visual interest.
   ·   Limit building heights to 40 feet, as is currently established, with height
setback transitions from street frontages, the shoreline, and adjacent residential
areas.
   ·   Limit the total floor area belonging to a single business to 90,000 square
feet.
   ·   Locate street facades of buildings at or near the street property line and
incorporate display windows. Orient the primary entries to commercial
establishments toward the sidewalk.
   ·   Locate parking for individual commercial structures behind or to the side of
the building. Secondary entries to business establishments may be provided from
parking areas.
   ·   Encourage the development of cooperative parking agreements among
neighboring businesses and landowners.
Pedestrian, Bicycle, and Transit Facilities
   ·   Provide street frontage improvements for bus stops, including a bus shCIPer   DTS/   Implementer
and a dedicated loading lane, along all abutting streets that have bus routes.              DDC
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                                 Program Agency Role
   ·   Provide a pedestrian pathway from the bus stop to an entrance to the main
building of the commercial center. The pathway should be clearly indicated with     LUO,
special paving or markings and covered to provide weather protection, where         Project DPP    Implementer
feasible, if the commercial center building is not directly connected to the bus    Review
shelter.
   ·   Provide bicycle racks for security. Locate bicycle racks to be visible and
readily accessible from the street entry to the commercial center.
Visual Screening, Lighting and Signage
   ·   Buffer noise and other adverse impacts related to parking, loading andLUO,
service areas from adjacent residential areas with proper siting and by landscaped  Project DPP    Implementer
berms or solid walls fronted by landscaping.                                        Review
   ·   Plant a landscape screen, consisting of trees and hedges, along streets
fronting parking lots or garages.
   ·   Visually screen storage areas for vehicles, equipment, and supplies from the
street and adjacent lots by privacy walls and buildings, fronted by landscaping to
soften the appearance of large solid walls.
   ·   Signage may be directly illuminated, but discourage use of direct
illumination of building features. Use only fully-shielded lighting should be
shielded to avoid direct visibility from residential areas.
Sec 3.6.2.4 Light and Extractive Industry
                                                                                    LUO,
Visual Screening, Lighting and Signage                                              SWM,    DPP    Implementer
                                                                                    Project
                                                                                    Review
   ·   Buffer noise and other adverse impacts from quarrying operations from
adjacent urban uses, wildlife preserves and public roads by a combination of
landscaped berms and setbacks.
   ·   For light industrial uses, buffer noise and other adverse impacts from
parking, loading and service areas from adjacent urban uses, wildlife preserves and
public roads by a combination of solid walls or berms and landscaped setbacks.
   ·   Plant a landscape screen, consisting of trees and hedges, along roads
fronting parking lots or garages.
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                                Program Agency Role
   ·   Visually screen storage areas for vehicles, equipment, and supplies from
adjacent roads, wildlife preserves and urban uses by privacy walls and by building
orientation. Soften the appearance of screening walls by landscaping in front.
   ·   Use fully-shielded lighting that balances the needs for public safety,
security, energy conservation, and wildlife protection.
Drainage and Waste Material                                                        SWM,    DPP,   Implementer
                                                                                   PHS     DOH
   ·   Manage stormwater runoff through application of Best Management Practices
(BMPs) or containment or filtering onsite. To minimize the creation of impervious
surfaces, alternatives to hardscape are encouraged. Avoid discharge into adjacent
wildlife preserves, water resources, sanitary sewage systems, or other urban use
areas.
   ·   Prevent leachates from underground storage tanks or fill material from
migrating offsite, applying particularly stringent measures to sites near wildlife
preserves.
   ·   Prevent litter and other waste material from encroaching into adjacent
sites through the use of proper operational means, as well as landscaping.
Sec 3.7.2 Institutional Uses
                                                                                   LUO,
Architectural Character and Building Massing                                       Project DPP    Implementer
                                                                                   Review
   ·   Reflect in the site plan a campus-like environment with a relatively low
building coverage ratio and low profile, emphasize open space and landscaping.
   ·   Vary the architectural character, depending on theme and purpose of the
use. Design portions of buildings that are adjacent to or readily visible from
residential areas to reflect that residential character or be screened from view
from such areas by landscaping.
   ·   Limit building heights to two to three stories or 40 feet, including the
roof form. Provide height setback transitions from street frontages, the
shoreline, and adjacent residential areas.
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                                 Program Agency Role
Pedestrian, Bicycle, and Transit Facilities
   ·   Provide street frontage improvements for bus stops, including a bus shCIPer   DTS/   Implementer
and a dedicated loading lane, along all abutting streets that have bus routes.              DDC
   ·   Provide a pedestrian pathway from the bus stop to an entrance to the mProject
building of the institution. Clearly indicate the pathway with special paving or    Review  DPP    Implementer
markings.
   ·   Design and place bicycle racks to provide security and be visible fromLUO,
main street or parking entry to the institution.                                    Project DPP    Implementer
                                                                                    Review
Visual Screening, Lighting and Signage
   ·   Buffer the noise and other adverse impacts from parking, loading, and LUO,
service areas from adjacent residential areas by a combination of walls or berms    Project DPP    Implementer
and landscaped setbacks.                                                            Review
   ·   Plant a landscape screen, consisting of trees and hedges, along streets
fronting parking lots or garages. Plant shade trees throughout parking lots.
   ·   Visually screen storage areas for vehicles, equipment, and supplies from the
street and adjacent lots by privacy walls and buildings, fronted by landscaping
used to soften the appearance of large solid walls.
   ·   Signage is non-illuminated or indirectly illuminated. Outdoor lighting is
fully-shielded to avoid light trespass over residential areas.
Sec 3.8.2 Military Areas
Architectural Character and Building Massing
   ·   When buildings and structures are visible from an adjacent non-militarBase    MIL    Implementer
reflect the scale and design character of the adjacent non-military use or screen   Master  DPP    Advocate
from view from such areas by landscaping.                                           Plan
   ·   Limit building heights to two to three stories or 40 feet, including the
roof form, except to meet specific mission-critical design requirements. Height
setback transitions are provided from streets, the shoreline, and adjacent
residential areas.
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                                 Program Agency Role
Pedestrian, Bicycle, and Transit Facilities
   ·   Provide street frontage improvements for bus stops, including a bus shBase
and a dedicated loading lane along all abutting streets that have bus routes.       Master  MIL    Implementer
                                                                                    Plan
   ·   Provide a clearly indicated pedestrian pathway, such as special paving or
marking, from the bus stop to the base’s main entrance.
   ·   Design and place bicycle racks to provide security and be visible from the
main street or parking entry.
Visual Screening, Lighting and Signage
   ·   Buffer the noise and other adverse impacts from parking, loading, and Base
service areas from adjacent residential areas by a combination of solid walls or    Master  MIL    Implementer
berms and landscaped setbacks.                                                      Plan
   ·   For parking lot lighting, fully-shielded fixtures and low intensity lamps.
   ·   Plant a landscape screen, consisting of trees and hedges, along streets
fronting parking lots or garages. Plant shade trees throughout parking lots.
   ·   Visually screen storage areas for vehicles, equipment, and supplies from the
street and adjacent lots by privacy walls and buildings, fronted by landscaping
used to soften the appearance of large solid walls.
   ·   Use non-illuminated or indirectly illuminated signage. Fully shield lighting
to avoid light trespass into residential and public areas.
Sec 4.1.6 Transportation Systems
Commuter Travel
   ·   Encourage the Department of Transportation’s Highways Division to coINF,uct
new bridges that do not flood at Waiāhole and Waikāne stream crossings at         CIP,    DOT    Implementer
Kamehameha Highway.                                                                 OPS
   ·   Provide improved services and facilities for express buses, such as moINF,
frequent, larger-capacity and more comfortable vehicles.                            CIP,    DTS    Implementer
                                                                                    OPS
   ·   Provide park-and-ride and bus transfer facilities as a joint or modifiINF,se
of an existing parking area or adjacent to uses that are related to commuter trips, CIP,    DTS    Implementer
such as child-care centers and convenience stores.                                  OPS
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                                 Program Agency Role
   ·   Establish transit centers to function as collector or distribution hubINF,
which provide an interface between “circulator” shuttle and trunk bus routes.   CIP,    DTS    Implementer
                                                                                    OPS
   ·   Promote ridesharing and vanpooling.                                   OPS     DOT    Implementer
   ·   Increase person-carrying capacity on trans-Koolau highways and KalaniaINF,e
Highway for commuter travel without expanding rights-of-way or exacerbating delays  CIP,    DOT    Implementer
in access to the highway from collector streets during peak periods.                OPS
Local Trips
   ·   Identify and take measures to reserve the option for potential future INF,t-  DTS,   Implementer
of-ways acquisitions at locations where minor connections between existing local    CIP     DOT    Advocate
street would improve mobility and reduce congestion on collector streets.                   DPP
   ·   Implement roadway modifications recommended in the Kahaluu Community MINF,r   DTS,   Implementer
Plan and the Kāneohe Town Plan.                                                    CIP     DDC
   ·   Modify rights-of-way by changes to travelway widths, curb radii, pavement
width, pavement texture, installation of appropriate signage, and more generous             DPP
landscape planting in selected areas; especially along designated bike lanes and    SR&R    DTS,   Implementer
routes, principal pedestrian routes and street crossings, and near bus stops.       OPS     DDC    Implementer
Expand the bikeway network by implementing the proposals in the State of Hawai’i
Bikeway Master Plan and the City and County of Honolulu Oahu Bike Master Plan.
   ·   Design streets to accommodate personal mobility vehicles for travel within    DOT,
and between town cores and residential areas.                                       CIP     DTS,   Implementer
                                                                                            DDC
Sec 4.2.4 Water Systems
   Where new reservoirs and other above-ground infrastructure is necessary, avoid
impacts to significant scenic resources; where such impacts are unavoidable,        CIP     BWS    Implementer
implement appropriate mitigation measures.
   Require installation of low-flush toilets, flow constrictors, and other water BLDG    DPP    Implementer
conserving devices in commercial and residential developments.                              BWS    Advocate
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                                 Program Agency    Role
   Investigate the feasibility of bulk-heading Waiāhole Ditch to restore water iINF     BWS       Implementer
the natural dikes.
                                                                                    LUO,    DPP, BWS
   Utilize climate-appropriate, indigenous plant material and drip irrigation    Project DDC/DPR,  Implementer
systems in newly installed, smaller-scale landscaped areas.                         Review  PRIV      Implementer
                                                                                    CIP
   Use recycled (R-1 or R-2) water for the irrigation of golf courses, as well asCIP,
for landscaping, and agricultural areas where this would not adversely affect       OPS     PRIV, ENV Implementer
potable groundwater supply or other aspects relating to public health.              Project BWS, DPP  Implementer
                                                                                    Review
                                                                                            BWS,
   Investigate the feasibility of small-scale rain catchment systems in                  U.S.D.A.
agricultural areas to use for irrigation, groundwater recharge and filtering of     INF     Soil      Implementer
stormwater runoff sediments.                                                                Conserva-
                                                                                            tion
                                                                                            Service
   Confirm that adequate potable and non-potable water is available prior to     Project BWS       Implementer
approval of new residential and commercial development.                             Review
Sec 4.3.4 Wastewater Management
                                                                                    INF,    DDC       Implementer
   Complete improvements to the Kailua WWTP service area facilities              CIP     ENV       Implementer
                                                                                    OPS
                                                                                    INF,    DDC       Implementer
   Complete planned improvements to the Waimānalo WWTP service area facilities. CIP     ENV       Implementer
                                                                                    OPS
   Replace outdated individual cesspools with septic tanks and individual                DOH, ENV,
wastewater systems in areas outside of planned municipal wastewater service areas,  PHS     PRIV      Implementer
employing public programs or policies to support private conversion efforts.
   Provide adequate horizontal separations and landscape elements (e.g. berms andINF,    DDC ENV   Implementer
windrows) between wastewater facilities and adjacent residential designated areas.  CIP OPS           Implementer
Sec 4.4.2 Electrical and Communications Systems
   Initiate a region-wide program to place utility lines underground and relocateINF,    UTIL      Implementer
and/or streamline existing overhead utility and communications lines, focusing on   CIP     DDC, DOT, Advocate
the following priority areas:                                                               DPP
   ·   Streets within Regional Town Centers, especially where overhead utility
lines conflict with existing or planned street tree canopies;
   ·   Locations where overhead utility lines are prominently visible within a
scenic viewshed identified in Exhibit 3.2.
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                             Program Agency Role
      Locations where major construction projects within rights-of-way present
the opportunity to coordinate the undergrounding of facilities through shared
trenching and to minimize construction-related disruptions.
   Where full undergrounding of utility lines is cost-prohibitive or                 UTIL
impractical due to disruption of existing uses and utility connections, utility INF,    DDC,   Implementer
poles may be visually streamlined by undergrounding lower-hanging               CIP     DOT,   Advocate
communications lines and related equipment, if this would result in substantial         DPP
visual improvement at a much lower cost.
                                                                                OPS,    UTIL,
                                                                                TAX,    PUC,   Implementer
   Promote the use of renewable energy sources and energy conservation measur       TAX,    
through both regulatory and tax incentive measures.                                    DBEDT   
                                                                                BLDG,   DPP    Implementer
                                                                                LUO
   Co-locate communications and power equipment and devices with similar     Project DLNR,
facilities in order to minimize the number of supporting structures and         Review  DPP    Implementer
dispersal of sites.
Sec 4.5.2 Solid Waste Handling and Disposal
   Promote the recycling of waste materials by providing expanded collection OPS     ENV    Implementer
facilities and services, and public outreach and education programs
   Expand the use of automated refuse collection in residential areas.       OPS     ENV    Implementer
   Develop programs for reducing the production of solid waste.              OPS     ENV    Implementer
   Provide a convenience refuse transfer station, including a green-waste droINF,
off site, to serve Kahaluu at a location close to Kamehameha Highway between    CIP,    ENV    Implementer
‘Āhuimanu and Waikāne.                                                      OPS
   Analyze and approve siting and/or expansion of sanitary landfills based onINF     ENV    Implementer
island-wide studies and siting evaluations.
Sec 4.6.2 Drainage Systems
   Emphasize retaining or detaining stormwater for gradual release into the  SWM,    DPP,
ground as the preferred strategy for management of stormwater.                  Project DFM    Implementer
                                                                                Review
   Prevent the blocking of downstream channels during major storm events by
properly maintaining large-capacity boulder and debris basins in upper valleys  OPS     DFM    Implementer
above urbanized areas.
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                             Program Agency   Role
   Integrate planned improvements to the drainage system into the regional open      DDC,DTS, Implementer
space network by emphasizing the use of retention basins, creation of passive   CIP,    DFM       
recreational areas, and recreational access for pedestrians and bicycles        INF     DPR      Advocate
without jeopardizing public safety.
   In places where the hardening of stream channels is unavoidable or highly
desirable to prevent significant loss of property or threat to public health            DDC      Implementer
and safety, design improvements in a manner which protects natural resource and CIP     ENV      Advocate
aesthetic values of the stream, consistent with the guidelines expressed in
Section 3.1.3.4.
   Emphasize periodic maintenance of stream channels and stormwater detention
basins, including natural wetlands, to improve and retain their capacity for    OPS     DFM      Implementer
flood conditions while taking care to maintain their biological and aesthetic           ENV      Advocate
values.
   Designate a public agency to assume jurisdiction over abandoned irrigation
ditches and reservoirs for the purpose of maintaining them as important         OPS     DLNR     Implementer
elements of the flood control system.
Sec 4.7.2 School and Library Facilities
   Encourage coordination between the Department of Parks and Recreation and
the DOE regarding the development and use of athletic facilities such as
playgrounds, play fields and courts, swimming pools, and gymnasiums where the   OPS     DOE, DPR Implementer
joint use of such facilities would maximize use and reduce duplication of
function without compromising the schools’ athletic programs.
   Support the DOE’s requests for fair share contributions from developers OPS     DPP, LUC Implementer
ensure that adequate school facilities are in place.
   Apply the guidelines for institutions in Section 3.7.2 when a new public oProject DPP
private school campus or a significant increase in enrollment capacity at one   Review  DAGS,    Implementer
of the existing campuses is proposed.                                           CIP     DOE,     Implementer
                                                                                        PRIV
Sec 4.8.2 Civic and Public Safety Facilities and Community Resilience
   Locate permanent Satellite City Halls in the Regional Town Centers of     CIP,
Kāneohe and Kailua to reinforce these areas as a regional focal point or       OPS     DDC, DCS Implementer
gathering spot for activities and services.
 
 
Table 5.1: Implementation Matrix
Policies/Guidelines                                                             Program Agency Role
                                                                                        DAGS,  Implementer
   Design new public buildings such as schools and recreation centers to servOPS,    DOE,    
a secondary function as an emergency shelter.                                   CIP     DDC    Advocate
                                                                                        DEM
   Design new City buildings which are used for public assembly and able to  OPS,    DDC    Implementer
serve as emergency shelters such that they can withstand a category 3           CIP     DEM    Advocate
hurricane.
                                                                                        DAGS,  Implementer
   Survey and retrofit, as appropriate, existing public buildings to serve a OPS,    DOE,    
secondary function as hurricane-resistant emergency shelters.                   CIP     DDC    Advocate
                                                                                        DEM
   Provide incentives for private organizations to create hurricane-resistantLUO,TAX DPP,   Implementer
shelter areas in their facilities and for homes to include hurricane-resistant  CIP     TAX    Advocate
safe rooms.                                                                             DEM
 
APPENDIX A: CONCEPTUAL MAPS
This appendix includes three conceptual maps used to illustrate the vision for
Koolau Poko’s future development. The maps include:
Map A-1: Open Space
Map A-2: Land Use
Map A-3: Public Facilities
These maps illustrate the long-range vision of the future of the plan area and
the major land use, open space, and public facility policies that are
articulated in the plan. In examining these maps the reader should keep in mind
that:
   1.   These maps are general and conceptual, and are not intended to be used
to determine specific land use boundaries. Such boundaries are to be determined
during the review of specific land use or public facilities investment
decisions, and their exact locations are to be guided by the vision and
policies of this Plan.
   2.   These maps illustrate the Plan’s visions and policies which are
presented in Chapters Two, Three, and Four. These policy statements are
considered the most important elements of the Plan.
The maps are considered illustrations of policies. However, the text should be
consulted to determine the appropriate application of the Plan vision,
policies, and guidelines for any specific project or location. In case of
disagreement, the text should prevail over the map depiction.
A brief explanation of the terms used in each of these maps follows.
A.1   COMMUNITY GROWTH BOUNDARY
The Community Growth Boundary (CGB) is intended to define and contain the
extent of developed or “built” areas of Koolau Poko’s urban fringe and rural
communities. Its purpose is to provide an adequate supply of land to support
the region’s established suburban and rural communities while protecting lands
outside the boundary for agricultural and open space preservation values. Areas
within the CGB are generally characterized by significant tracts of
residential, commercial, industrial or mixed-use development, and smaller, more
dispersed, less intensively developed residential communities and towns areas
that are clearly distinguishable from the unbuilt or more “natural” portions of
the region. Each generation should re-evaluate the relevance of the boundary in
light of their own time.
From north to south, the Koolau Poko CGB generally circumscribes the
residential district of Waikāne, the residential, business, and industrial
districts of Waiahole and Waihee; and the residential, low-density apartment
and business districts of Kahalu‘u and ‘Āhuimanu. The CGB should also include
approximately 24 acres of land in ‘Āhuimanu (TMK Nos. 4-7-032:001 through 4-7-
032:005; 4-7-032:007 through 4-7-032:009; 4-7-032:025; 4-7-032:036; and 4-7-
032:51) to allow for rezoning from the agricultural district to the residential
district, for the development of individual homes for the existing long-time
residents.
In Kāneohe, the CGB begins at the southern end of Heeia Fishpond and follows
the residential district towards Kahekili Highway, and encompasses almost all
of the country district lots of the Haikū Plantation. Thereafter, the CGB
follows the residential district towards and encompasses the Haikū Village,
Windward Community College and the Hawai‘i State Hospital, including the
Keapuka residential district and an agricultural district located between the
H-3 Highway and the Keapuka residential district. Thereafter, the CGB heads
north to the Likelike Highway and Kahekili Highway intersection before heading
south and then east along the residential district of Keapuka towards and
encompassing most of Hawaiian Memorial Park, the proposed expansion of the
Hawaiian Memorial Park, the proposed Kawaewae Heiau cultural preserve, and the
Hawaii State Veterans Cemetery before heading northeast to Kokokahi. The
extension of the CGB in this area is solely limited to 28.2 acres for the
expansion of the active cemetery area, and 14.5 acres for the proposed Kawaewae
Heiau cultural preserve, and should not be construed to be suitable for any
other urban-type development on the old 156-acre Pikoiloa Tract. The CGB
contains the residential districts of Waikalua, Kokokahi, Mahinui before
terminating at the intersection of H-3 Highway and Kāneohe Bay Drive. In this
area, the CGB includes the Kapaa industrial district and further north,
portions of the military installation at Mōkapu Peninsula are also included in
the CGB.
At north Kailua, from the coast, the CGB follows the residential district
adjacent to the Nuupia Fishpond, heading south along Kawainui Marsh to Kailua
Town Center, then along the base of the ridge line above Enchanted Lakes
Subdivision and thereafter, along Kalanianaole Highway. Kaelepulu Pond and its
drainage outlet to the Kailua Beach are excluded from the CGB. From
Kalanianaole Highway, the CGB winds northward along the Kailua Heights, Keolu
Hills, and Kaiwa Ridge residential districts. Thereafter, the CGB follows the
Lanikai residential district until its terminus at Wailea Point. South of
Kawainui Marsh, the CGB encompasses the residential districts of Pohakupu and
Maunawili. On the east, the CGB generally encompasses the residential and
business districts of Waimānalo Town, including recent expansions to Hawaiian
homesteads. Further east, the CGB includes the Waimānalo Beach residential
districts on either side of Kalanianaole Highway including recent Hawaiian
Homestead lot additions located in the agricultural district.
A.2   AGRICULTURAL AREA
Agricultural areas are lands with agricultural value by virtue of current
agricultural use or high value for future agricultural use, including those
areas identified as Prime, Unique, or Other Important lands on the Agricultural
Lands Important to the State of Hawaii (ALISH) maps. These are lands suitable
for crop growing, grazing and livestock raising, flower cultivation, nurseries,
orchards, aquaculture, or similar activities.
Under the State Constitution, the State is to identify Important Agricultural
Lands (IAL). Once identified, these lands cannot be rezoned except under a
“super majority” vote. To date, IAL lands have not been identified. In 2005,
Act 183 was adopted to address this mandate. It established a two-step process:
   ·   The State Legislature would adopt incentives to assure the long term use
and protection of IAL.
   ·   The State Legislature would approve adequate funding to allow the
counties to prepare maps identifying IAL lands which would then be adopted by
the State Land Use Commission.
Act 233, enacted in 2008, adopted the incentive programs. To date, no state
funding has been appropriated to the City and County of Honolulu for the
mapping; however, the Department of Planning and Permitting has begun the
mapping process. Lands identified for agricultural purposes by this Plan are
serving as a basis for the county mapping process.
In Koolau Poko, the Agricultural Areas include the following:
   ·   Areas in the agricultural districts, except areas in the inventory of
Hawaiian Memorial Park and the Hawai’i State Veterans Memorial Cemetery,
developed golf courses, and public nature preserves or nature parks;
   ·   Areas in the country district, except those parcels immediately
adjoining a residential district lying within the Community Growth Boundary;
and
   ·   The campus of Le Jardin Academy.
A.3   PRESERVATION AREA
The Preservation Area is established to protect undeveloped lands which form an
important part of the region’s open space fabric, but that are not valued
primarily for agricultural uses. Such lands include important wildlife habitat,
archaeological or historic sites, significant landforms or landscapes over
which significant views are available, and development-related hazard areas.
The Preservation Area generally includes undeveloped lands that:
   ·   Are necessary for protection of watersheds, water resources, and water
supplies;
   ·   Are necessary for the conservation, preservation, and enhancement of
sites with scenic, historic, archaeological or ecological significance;
   ·   Are necessary for providing and preserving park lands, wilderness and
beach reserves, and for conserving natural ecosystems of endemic plants, fish,
and wildlife, for forestry, and other activities related to these uses;
   ·   Are located at an elevation below the maximum inland line of the zone of
wave action, and marine waters, fishponds, and tidepools unless otherwise
designated;
   ·   Comprise offshore and outlying islands unless otherwise classified;
   ·   Are generally characterized by topography, soils, climate or other
related environmental factors that may not be normally adaptable or presently
needed for urban community or agriculture use;
   ·   Have general slopes of 20 percent or more that provide for open space
amenities and/or scenic values;
   ·   Are susceptible to floods and soil erosion, lands undergoing major
erosion damage and requiring corrective attention, and lands necessary to the
protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public by reason of soil
instability or the land’s susceptibility to landslides and/or inundation by
tsunami and flooding;
   ·   Are used for state or city parks outside the Community Growth Boundary;
or
   ·   Are suitable for growing commercial timber, grazing, hunting, and
recreation uses, including facilities accessory to such uses when such
facilities are compatible with the natural and physical environment.
The Preservation Area is intended to include the following:
   ·   Areas within the State Conservation District and other areas within the
preservation district, but not located within the Community Growth Boundary or
Agricultural Areas as described above;
   ·   Public nature preserves and nature parks;
   ·   Golf courses and cemeteries not located within the Community Growth
Boundary and/or Agricultural Areas as described above;
   ·   Military lands, except those at MCB Hawai’i developed with uses
associated with the residential, apartment, commercial, industrial and mixed-
use districts;
   ·   Correctional and detention facilities mauka of Kalanianaole Highway; and
   ·   The campuses of the Oceanic Institute and Sea Life Park.
The Preservation Area excludes such features, sites or areas located within the
Community Growth Boundary or Agricultural Areas.
A.4   MAP A-1: OPEN SPACE
The Open Space Map illustrates the region’s major open space patterns and
resources as outlined in Chapter 3. It highlights major open space elements and
resources, including agricultural and preservation lands, major recreational
parks and golf courses, important views, and important boundaries.
This map also indicates the general locations of community and neighborhood
parks, public access points along the shoreline, and major trails providing
mountain access.
A.5   MAP A-2: LAND USE
The Land Use Map shows the desired long-range land use pattern for Koolau Poko,
i.e., the land use pattern that will be realized through implementation of the
Koolau Poko Sustainable Communities Plan. The map contains the following plan
elements within the Community Growth Boundary:
RESIDENTIAL. The category consists of single-family homes in areas currently
configured with relatively large lots, e.g., lots of one acre or more and
referred to as “rural communities”. Also within the “rural communities” the
category consists of single-family homes in “country” settings, in areas with
current lot sizes ranging from just less than one acre to about one-eighth acre
(future subdivisions, if any, of “rural communities” areas are anticipated to
have lots no smaller that about one-quarter acre). Within the “suburban
communities”, the “Residential” category consists of single-family homes or
townhouses with individual entries.
LOW-DENSITY APARTMENT. These uses generally refers to low-density, low-rise
multi-family residences, including townhouses, stacked flats and apartment
buildings. Dwelling units in these buildings may share common exterior entries.
RURAL COMMERCIAL CENTER. These centers are labeled “RC” and generally represent
clusters of commercial establishments intended to service the surrounding rural
community. Uses typically include grocery and sundry stores and other services
and shops catering to common household convenience items, as well as
establishments providing goods and services in support of agricultural
activities.
SUBURBAN COMMERCIAL CENTER.  These centers are labeled “SC” and generally
represent clusters of commercial establishments intended for neighborhood
service. Uses typically include grocery and sundry stores and other services
and shops catering to common household- or neighborhood-level convenience
items.
COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL CENTER.  These centers are labeled “CC” and generally
represent clusters of commercial establishments with a retail shopping center
as a nucleus and encompassing up to 50 acres. In addition to the uses found in
Neighborhood Commercial Centers, Community Commercial Centers may include
offices, service industrial establishments, entertainment facilities and social
centers.
REGIONAL TOWN CENTER.  The Regional Town Centers for Koolau Poko are comprised
of the main town areas of Kailua and Kaneohe. These centers are labeled with
the designation “TC.” The Regional Town Centers may contain a wide variety of
uses, including commercial establishments, civic services, mixed use
commercial- residential areas, and mixed use industrial-commercial areas.
INDUSTRIAL. Industrial areas lying outside the Regional Town Centers are found
at Kapaa and the MCB Hawai’i.
INSTITUTIONAL. Major institutional uses include: the Oceanic Institute near
Makapuu; the Job Corps campus in Waimānalo; the correctional and detention
facilities and corporation yards adjacent to Mount Olomana and the Pohakupu
neighborhood; Castle Medical Center; the windward campus of Hawaii Pacific
University; and the combined campus areas of Windward Community College and the
Hawaii State Hospital.
MILITARY. The general areas of MCB Hawaii and Bellows that are used primarily
for activities related to national defense are shown on the Land Use Map. At
MCB Hawaii, these areas are distinguished from other support areas used for
housing, preservation, recreation, and commercial and industrial activities
although it is recognized that those support areas will remain integral to the
base.
PUBLIC FACILITIES. The existing highways and major roads, the Kailua and
Waimanalo wastewater water treatment plants, and public intermediate and high
schools are depicted with appropriate symbols, and are shown primarily to
provide points of orientation.
A.6   MAP A-3: PUBLIC FACILITIES
The Public Facilities Map illustrates major existing and future public
facilities and major privately-owned facilities including golf courses. Its
purpose is to display the public resources or assets available within the
region. It also depicts general locations of future transit centers and future
bike facilities.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8557.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8553.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8555.png]
 
Notes
1  Pukui and Ebert, Hawaiian Dictionary, 1986.
2  In Re: Boundaries of Pulehunui, 4 Haw. 239, 241 (1879).
3  State of Hawaii Department of Land and Natural Resources, Na Ala Hele - Hawaii
   Trail and Access System Program Plan, May 1991.
   Hawaii Wetland Management Policy Workgroup, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
4  State of Hawaii Department of Health, and Sarah Young, Hawaii Wetland Management
   Policy, April 1999.
5  State of Hawaii Department of Land and Natural Resources, Kawai Nui Marsh Master
   Plan, July 1994. This master plan is currently being updated by DLNR.
6  Office of State Planning, Hawai’i Coastal Zone Management Program, Hawai’i’s
   Coastal Nonpoint Pollution Control Program Management Plan, Volume I, June 1996.
7  McAllister, J. Gilbert. Archaeology of Oahu, 1933. p. 57.
8  As of August 2012.
9  Hawaii Pacific Engineers. Waimānalo Wastewater Facilities Plan, April 1997.
10 The Rules Relating to Storm Drainage Standards was updated in 2012.
ARTICLE 7: KOOLAU LOA
Sections
   
24-7.1   Definitions
   
24-7.2   Applicability and intent
   
24-7.3   Adoption of the Koolau Loa sustainable communities plan
   
24-7.4   Existing zoning and subdivision ordinances, approvals, and
applications
   
24-7.5   Consistency
   
24-7.6   Review of development and other applications
   
24-7.7   Zone change applications
   
24-7.8   Annual capital improvement program review
   
24-7.9   Five-year review
   
24-7.10   Authority
   
24-7.11   Severability
   
24-7.12   Conflicting provisions
§ 24-7.1 Definitions.
   Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions govern the
construction of this article.
Department or Department of Planning and Permitting. The department of planning
and permitting of the City and County of Honolulu.
Development. Any public improvement project, or any public or private project
requiring a zoning map amendment.
Development Plan or Sustainable Communities Plan. A plan document for a given
geographic area, which consists of conceptual schemes for implementing and
accomplishing the development objectives and policies of the general plan for
the several parts of the city.
Director. The director of the department of planning and permitting.
Environmental Assessment or EA. A written evaluation prepared in compliance
with the environmental council's procedural rules and regulations implementing
Hawaii Revised Statutes Chapter 343 to determine whether an action may have a
significant environmental effect.
Environmental Impact Statement or EIS.  An informational document prepared in
compliance with the procedural rules and regulations of the environmental
council established in HRS § 341-3(c) for the implementation of HRS Chapter
343; and which discloses the environmental effects of a proposed action,
effects of a proposed action on the economic and social welfare of the
community and State, effects of the economic activities arising out of the
proposed action, measures proposed to minimize adverse effects, and
alternatives to the action and their environmental effects.
Finding of No Significant Impact or FONSI. A determination based on an
environmental assessment that the subject action will not have a significant
effect and, therefore, will not require the preparation of an environmental
impact statement.
Functional Plan. The public facility and infrastructure plans prepared by
public agencies to further implement the vision, policies and guidelines set
forth in the Koolau Loa SCP.
General Plan. The general plan of the city as defined by Charter § 6-1508.
Koolau Loa SCP. The Koolau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan attached to
Ordinance 21-1 as Exhibit A and made a part hereof.
Planning Commission. The planning commission of the city.
Project Master Plan. A conceptual plan that covers all phases of a development
project. The project master plan describes how the project conforms to the
vision for Koolau Loa, and the relevant policies and guidelines for the site,
the surrounding lands, and the region.
Significant Zone Change. A zone change that involves at least one of the
following:
(1)   Changes in zoning of 10 or more acres of land to any zoning district or
combination of zoning districts, excluding preservation or agricultural zoning
districts;
(2)   Any change in zoning of more than five acres to an apartment, resort,
commercial, industrial, or mixed-use zoning district; or
(3)   Any development that would have a major social, environmental, or policy
impact, or major cumulative impacts due to a series of applications in the same
area.
Special Area. A designated area within the Koolau Loa Sustainable Communities
Plan area that requires more detailed planning efforts beyond what is contained
in the Koolau Loa SCP.
Special Area Plan. A plan for a special area.
Unilateral Agreement. A conditional zoning agreement made pursuant to ROH §
21-2.80 or any predecessor or successor provision that imposes conditions on a
landowner or developer's use of the property at the time of the enactment of an
ordinance for a zone change.
Vision. The future outlook for the Koolau Loa region extending out to the year
2035 and beyond, which seeks to preserve the region's overall rural character
and its natural, cultural and scenic resources. Some growth in housing and
related support services is envisioned to support the planned expansion of the
Brigham Young University-Hawaii. Nevertheless, the future of the Koolau Loa
region is to remain country, characterized by small towns and villages with
distinctive identities that exist in harmony with the natural settings, defined
by mountain ridges and scenic open spaces.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.1) (Added by Ord. 21-1)
§ 24-7.2 Applicability and intent.
(a)   The Koolau Loa SCP area encompasses the entire area from the mountains to
the northeastern shoreline of Oahu stretching from Waialee on the northwest
end, along the ridgeline of the Koolau Loa Mountain Range in a southeasterly
direction to Kaoio Point at its southeast end.
(b)   It is the intent of the Koolau Loa SCP to provide a guide for orderly and
coordinated public and private sector development in a manner that is
consistent with applicable general plan provisions, including the designation
of Koolau Loa as a rural area where growth will be managed so that "an
undesirable spreading of development is prevented."
(c)   The provisions of this article and the Koolau Loa SCP are not regulatory.
Rather, they are established with the explicit intent of providing a coherent
vision to guide all new public and private sector development within Koolau
Loa. This article guides public investment in infrastructure, zoning and other
regulatory procedures, and the preparation of the city's annual capital
improvement program budget.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.2) (Added by Ord. 21-1)
§ 24-7.3 Adoption of the Koolauloa sustainable communities plan.
(a)   This article is adopted pursuant to the Charter § 6-1509 and provides a
self-contained development plan document for Koolau Loa. Upon enactment of this
article, all proposed developments will be evaluated against how well they
fulfill the vision for Koolau Loa enunciated in the Koolau Loa SCP and how
closely they meet the policies and guidelines selected to implement that
vision.
(b)   The plan entitled, "Koolau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan," attached as
Exhibit A, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article.
(c)   
Chapter 24, Article 1, entitled "Development Plan Common Provisions," in its
entirety is no longer applicable to the Koolau Loa SCP area. This article and
the Koolau Loa SCP, as adopted by reference by this ordinance, supersede any
and all common provisions previously applicable to the Koolau Loa SCP area.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.3) (Added by Ord. 21-1)
§ 24-7.4 Existing zoning and subdivision ordinances, approvals, and
applications.
(a)   All existing subdivisions and zoning approved prior to February 11, 2021
continue to remain in effect following February 11, 2021.
(b)   Subdivision and zoning ordinances applicable to the Koolau Loa SCP area
enacted prior to February 11, 2021 continue to regulate the use of land within
demarcated zones of the Koolau Loa SCP area until such time as the subdivision
and zoning ordinances may be amended to be consistent with the Koolau Loa SCP.
(c)   Notwithstanding adoption of the revised Koolau Loa SCP, applications for
subdivision actions and land use permits accepted by the department for
processing prior to February 11, 2021 continue to be subject only to applicable
ordinances and rules and regulations in effect at the time the application is
accepted for processing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.4) (Added by Ord. 21-1)
§ 24-7.5 Consistency.
(a)   In the performance of their prescribed powers, duties and functions, all
city agencies shall conform to and implement the policies and provisions of
this article and the Koolau Loa SCP. Pursuant to Charter § 6-1511.3, public
improvement projects and subdivision and zoning ordinances must be consistent
with the Koolau Loa SCP.
(b)   Any questions of interpretation regarding the consistency of a proposed
development with the provisions of the Koolau Loa SCP and the objectives and
policies of the general plan are ultimately resolved by the council.
(c)   In determining whether a proposed development is consistent with the
Koolau Loa SCP, the responsible agency shall primarily take into consideration
the extent to which the development is consistent with the vision, policies,
and guidelines set forth in the Koolau Loa SCP.
(d)   Whenever there is a question regarding consistency between existing
subdivision or zoning ordinances, including any unilateral agreement, and the
Koolau Loa SCP, the existing subdivision or zoning ordinances prevail until
such time as they may be amended to be consistent with the Koolau Loa SCP.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.5) (Added by Ord. 21-1)
§ 24-7.6 Review of development and other applications.
   The review of applications for zone changes and other development approvals
will be guided by the vision of the Koolau Loa SCP. Decisions on all proposed
developments will be based on the extent to which the project enabled by the
development approval supports the policies and guidelines of the Koolau Loa
SCP.
   The director may review other applications for improvements to land to help
the responsible agency determine whether a proposed improvement supports the
policies and guidelines of the Koolau Loa SCP.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.8) (Added by Ord. 21-1)
§ 24-7.7 Zone change applications.
(a)   All zone change applications relating to land in the Koolau Loa SCP area
will be reviewed by the department of planning and permitting for consistency
with the general plan, the Koolau Loa SCP, and any applicable special area
plan.
(1)   The director shall recommend either approval, approval with changes, or
denial. The director's written review of the application becomes part of the
zone change report, which will be sent to the planning commission and the city
council.
(2)   A project master plan must be part of an EA or EIS for any project
involving 10 acres or more of land. The director shall review the project
master plan for its consistency with the Koolau Loa SCP.
(3)   Any development or phase of development already covered by a project
master plan that has been fully reviewed under the provisions of this article
does not require a new project master plan, provided the director determines
that the proposed zone change is generally consistent with the existing project
master plan for the affected area.
(4)   If a final EIS has already been accepted for a development, including one
accepted prior to February 11, 2021, then a subsequent project master plan is
not required for the development.
(b)   Projects that involve a significant zone change are required to submit an
environmental assessment to the department of planning and permitting prior to
an application for a zone change being accepted. Any development or phase of a
development that has already been assessed under the National Environmental
Policy Act ("NEPA"), HRS Chapter 343 (Hawaii Environmental Policy Act, "HEPA"),
Chapter 25, or the provisions of this article, and for which a FONSI has been
filed or a required EIS has been accepted, are not subject to further EA or EIS
requirements under this chapter unless otherwise required by NEPA or HEPA.
(c)   The department shall review the environmental assessment. Based on review
of the EA, the director shall determine whether an EIS will be required or
whether a FONSI should be issued.
(d)   If an EIS is required, the EIS must be accepted by the director before a
zone change application may be initiated.
(e)   Zone changes are to be processed in accordance with this section; Section
5.5 of the Koolau Loa SCP;
Chapter 2, Article 24, Part A; and
Chapter 21.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.7) (Added by Ord. 21-1)
§ 24-7.8 Annual capital improvement program review.
   Annually, the director shall work jointly with the director of budget and
fiscal services and other city agencies to review all projects in the city's
capital improvement program and budget for compliance and consistency with the
general plan, the Koolau Loa SCP and other development plans, any applicable
special area plan provisions, and the appropriate functional plans. The
director shall prepare a written report of findings to be submitted to the
council in accordance with Charter § 6-1503.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.9) (Added by Ord. 21-1)
§ 24-7.9 Five-year review.
(a)   The department shall conduct a comprehensive review of the Koolau Loa
SCP, adopted by reference in §
24-7.3(b), every five years subsequent to February 11, 2021, and shall report
its findings and recommended revisions, if any, to the council.
(b)   The Koolau Loa SCP will be evaluated to assess the appropriateness of the
plan's regional vision, policies, guidelines, and implementing actions, as well
as its consistency with the general plan.
(c)   Nothing in this section should be construed as prohibiting the processing
of a revision to the Koolau Loa SCP at any time in the event either the
director's biennial report or the council recommends consideration of such a
revision, pursuant to the Charter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.10) (Added by Ord. 21-1)
§ 24-7.10 Authority.
   Nothing in this article should be construed as an abridgement or delegation
of the responsibility of the director, or of the inherent legislative power of
the council, to review or revise the Koolau Loa SCP pursuant to the Charter and
the above procedures.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.12) (Added by Ord. 21-1)
§ 24-7.11 Severability.
   If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or
property or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity does not affect the
validity of the other provisions or applications of this article that can be
given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the
provisions of this article are declared to be severable.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.13) (Added by Ord. 21-1)
§ 24-7.12 Conflicting provisions.
   Any provision contained in this article as it pertains to land within the
Koolau Loa SCP area prevails should there be any conflict with the common
provisions or any other provisions under
Chapter 24.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.14) (Added by Ord. 21-1)
KO'OLAU LOA SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9425.png]
 
PREFACE
The Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan has been prepared in accordance
with the Charter-prescribed requirements for development plans, and is to be
accorded force and effect as such for all Charter- and ordinance-prescribed
purposes. It is one of eight community-oriented plans intended to help guide
public policy, investment, and decision-making over the next 25 years. Each of
these plans addresses one of eight geographic planning regions on O‘ahu,
responding to specific conditions and community values of each region.
Of the eight documents, the plans for ‘Ewa and the Primary Urban Center, to
which growth and supporting facilities will be directed over the next 25 years
and beyond, have been entitled “Development Plans.” They will be the policy
guides for development decisions and actions needed to support that growth.
Plans for the remaining six areas, which are envisioned as relatively stable
regions for which public actions will focus on supporting existing populations,
have been entitled “Sustainable Communities Plans” in order to appropriately
indicate their intent.
Ko‘olau Loa is a Sustainable Communities Plan. Its vision statement and
supporting provisions are oriented toward maintaining and enhancing the
region’s ability to sustain its unique character, current population, growing
families, lifestyle, and economic livelihood that all contribute to its
vitality and future potential.
There has been a recent surge in widespread community discussions, actions and
laws adopted to address sustainability. In 2005, the State Legislature convened
a statewide group to draft the Hawai‘i 2050 Sustainability Plan, whose primary
purpose is to provide policy recommendations for creating a sustainable
Hawai‘i. In 2007, greenhouse gas emissions goals for 2020 were enacted (Act
234, 2007). Public service announcements dealing with conserving water and
electricity abound. The concept of buildings that are designed, built and
occupied with environmental considerations at the forefront largely did not
exist when the original Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans
were adopted. This setting raises the question of the role of the Development
Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans. Are they the City’s version of a
sustainability plan?
The answer is that they are the land development portion of a larger blueprint
for sustainability. As discussed previously, the General Plan sets long-term
goals for the City and County of Honolulu, across eleven major elements.
Perhaps its most substantive chapter deals with population, and hence land
development distribution. It sets the growth management strategy for O‘ahu. The
Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans provide more detail on this
land management strategy, assuring that how we use the land now, and in the
future, responds to the three major elements of a sustainable place: economic
health, social equity, and environmental protection.
The issues addressed either directly or indirectly by these regional plans
certainly overlap with other planning responsibilities of other departments,
such as water delivery and consumption, crime reduction, increasing public
health, and developing responsive transportation systems. Collectively, these
efforts comprise the strategy of developing a sustainable future for O‘ahu.
P.1   THE SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN PROCESS
This document is the culmination of a planning effort lead by the City and
County of Honolulu’s Department of Planning and Permitting. This effort
comprised a process that encouraged and enabled significant involvement from
the community. In its final form, this Plan will have considered input received
from the Planning Advisory Committee, three community-wide meetings, and a
number of meetings with community leaders and representatives of government
agencies.
P.2   HONOLULU LAND USE PLANNING AND MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
The City and County of Honolulu guides and directs land use and growth through
a three-tier system of objectives, policies, planning principles, guidelines
and regulations. The General Plan forms the first tier of this system. First
adopted by resolution in 1977, the General Plan is a relatively brief document,
consisting primarily of broad statements of objectives and policies. It has
been amended several times, but the basic objectives and policies set forth in
the 1977 Plan remain intact.
The second tier of the system is formed by the regional Development Plans and
Sustainable Communities Plans, which are adopted and revised by ordinance.
These plans address eight geographic regions of the island, including the
Primary Urban Center, East Honolulu, Central O‘ahu, ‘Ewa, Wai‘anae, North
Shore, Ko‘olau Loa and Ko‘olau Poko. Under the current program, the Primary
Urban Center and ‘Ewa plans are “Development Plans,” and the other regions are
referred to as “Sustainable Communities Plans” to reflect their policy intent.
The third tier of the system is composed of the implementing ordinances,
including the Land Use Ordinance (Honolulu’s zoning code) and the City’s
Capital Improvement Program. Mandated by the City Charter, these ordinances
constitute the principal means for implementing the City’s plans. These
ordinances are required to be consistent with the General Plan, the Development
and Sustainable Communities Plans, and each other.
In addition to these three Charter-mandated tiers, the Development Plans and
Sustainable Communities Plans are supplemented by two planning mechanisms that
are not required by the Charter, including the functional planning process and
special area planning. Functional planning activities, some of which are
mandated by state or federal regulations, provide long-range guidance for the
development of public facilities such as water, wastewater disposal, and
transportation. Special area plans are intended to give specific guidance for
neighborhoods, communities or specialized resources.
P.3   AUTHORITY OF THE DEVELOPMENT AND SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLANS
The authority of the Development and Sustainable Communities Plans (herein
referred to as “Development Plans” for simplicity) is derived from the City
Charter, which mandates preparation of a General Plan and Development Plans to
guide “the development and improvement of the city.” Together with the General
Plan, the Development Plans provide policy guidance for the land use and
budgetary actions of the City. This is the authority the originally adopted
Development Plans carried, and it remains unchanged.
Section 6-1511 of the City Charter provides that “public improvement projects
and subdivision and zoning ordinances shall be consistent with the development
plan for that area.” Although the Development Plans are not themselves
regulatory, they “regulate the regulators.” They are policy tools and are to be
used, in conjunction with the programs and budgets of the City, to accomplish
the objectives of the City and as guides for the decisions made in the private
sector.
P.4   1992 CHARTER AMENDMENT TO REVISE THE DEVELOPMENT PLANS
In 1992 the City Charter Commission recommended, and the voters of Honolulu
adopted, amendments to the City Charter. Chief among its findings, the Charter
Commission concluded that the Development Plans were overly detailed and had
created processes that duplicated the zoning process. To eliminate this
unnecessary duplication, the 1992 Charter amendments changed the definition of
Development Plans from “relatively detailed plans” to “conceptual schemes.”
The 1992 Charter amendments established that the purpose of the Development
Plans is to provide:
   •   “priorities . . . (for the) coordination of major development
activities;” and
   •   sufficient description of the “desired urban character and the
significant natural, scenic and cultural resources . . . to serve as a policy
guide for more detailed zoning maps and regulations and public and private
sector investment decisions.”
In response to the 1992 Charter amendments, the Planning Department launched a
thorough review of the Development Plans. The goal of that review was the
revision of all eight of the Development Plans to bring them into conformance
with the Charter-mandated conceptual orientation. The Plan presented in this
document conforms to that mandate.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This Plan is organized in five chapters and an appendix, as follows:
   •   Chapter 1: Ko‘olau Loa’s Role in O‘ahu’s Development Pattern defines the
region’s role and identity within the overall framework of island planning and
land management.   
   •   Chapter 2: The Vision for Ko‘olau Loa’s Future summarizes the
community’s vision for the future of the region, and describes important
elements of that vision.   
   •   Chapter 3: Land Use Policies and Guidelines is the Plan’s policy core.
It provides policy guidance for the region’s various land use elements.
   •   Chapter 4: Public Facilities and Infrastructure Policies and Guidelines
outlines policies and guidelines to support the land use policies of Chapter 3.
   •   Chapter 5: Implementation addresses needs for carrying out provisions
outlined by the Plan.
The key recommendations contained in each chapter are briefly summarized in the
following sections.
E.1   CHAPTER 1: KO‘OLAU LOA’S ROLE IN O‘AHU’S DEVELOPMENT PATTERN
Chapter 1 provides an overview of the relationship between O‘ahu’s General Plan
and the County’s Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans, and
provides specific context for the Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan
within this land use paradigm. Consistent with the directed growth policies of
the City’s General Plan, Ko‘olau Loa is projected to maintain its country
character and to experience little growth throughout the Plan’s 25-year
planning horizon. The Plan supports this and includes policies to maintain the
region’s current country ambiance. Development is largely limited to small
residential projects within or contiguous to existing development, minimal
infill commercial development, and support housing and services for the planned
expansion of Brigham Young University-Hawai‘i. Cultural and natural resources
will continue to be protected, and the Plan retains the patterns of development
characteristic of the region.
E.2   CHAPTER 2: THE VISION FOR KO‘OLAU LOA’S FUTURE
This chapter presents the overarching concepts and goals of the Ko‘olau Loa
Sustainable Communities Plan. It presents the vision statement for the long-
range future of the region, and the key vision elements that the policies and
guidelines in this Plan are based upon.
The vision for Ko‘olau Loa seeks to preserve the region’s rural character and
its natural, cultural, scenic, and agricultural resources. Limited growth in
housing is needed to sustain the current population and growing families, as
well as housing and related support services envisioned to support the planned
expansion of Brigham Young University-Hawai‘i. Nevertheless, the region will
remain country, characterized by small towns and villages with distinct
identities that exist in harmony with the natural settings of mountain ridges
and winding coastline.
E.3   CHAPTER 3: LAND USE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
Chapter 3 presents policies and guidelines for the principal types of land uses
and resource management in Ko‘olau Loa. The Vision for Ko‘olau Loa’s future
described in Chapter 2 is to be implemented through the application of these
policies and guidelines. A summary of the major policies related to each land
use type is provided in the following sections.
E.3.1   OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION
The emphasis for the policies and guidelines for Open Space is placed on the
region’s rural character, the preservation of scenic views and natural
resources, providing recreational resources and promoting accessibility to
shoreline and mauka areas.
E.3.2   AGRICULTURE
The policies and guidelines related to Agricultural Areas recognize the
importance of protecting existing agricultural land from being converted to
urban uses, thus preserving the availability and crop production potential of
those lands. The desire to maintain the economic viability of agricultural land
is emphasized, along with the relationship between agricultural activities,
drainage and water quality.
E.3.3   PARKS AND RECREATION
Policies and guidelines for Parks and Recreation stress the protection and
enhancement of recreational resources; the need to ensure compatibility of
adjoining uses; a desire to develop integrated bikeways and parks; the
acquisition and improvement of coastal lands; and the importance of parks and
recreation areas as contributing factors to the aesthetic, cultural and
environmental value of the region’s open space resources.
E.3.4   HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
The Plan emphasizes the importance of historic and cultural resources as an
integral fabric of the Ko‘olau Loa community. It also underscores the need to
properly identify historic and cultural resources and protect them from
development, so they can be preserved for future generations. In addition, this
section acknowledges the cultural and historic significance of kuleana lands.
E.3.5   RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITIES
The policies and guidelines related to Residential Communities propose to
maintain sufficient inventory of land within the Community Growth Boundary to
accommodate existing and future housing needs of residents within the Ko‘olau
Loa area. It allows for limited expansion of residential areas in Kahuku and
Lā‘ie to meet existing pent-up demand and anticipated future housing needs
related to the expansion of employment opportunities in the region. The
existing inventory of residential land for the communities of Ka‘a‘awa, Hau‘ula
and Punalu‘u will be maintained, and future residential needs in these
communities will be met through infill residential development on
appropriately-zoned vacant lots within existing neighborhoods. No new housing
areas are designated in these areas. The importance of respecting and
preserving the natural setting of the Ko‘olau Loa region is stressed by
requiring development in residential areas to be sensitive to physical
constraints and to have minimal impact on the area’s rural character. Finally,
rural design considerations for zoning and subdivisions approvals are
supported, as is affordable housing that meets the need for the region’s pent-
up demand and overcrowding.
E.3.6   COMMERCIAL AREAS
Guidance for Commercial Areas is focused on respecting rural design elements,
maintaining rural character, and serving the communities in which they are
located.
E.3.7   BUSINESS/LIGHT INDUSTRIAL AND TECHNOLOGY PARK AREAS
Policies and guidelines for Industrial and Technology Park Areas allow for a
technology park in association with Brigham Young University-Hawai‘i. Design
that respects rural elements, with careful site planning and use of ample
landscaping is supported, along with adequate buffering to protect against
operations that discharge air or water pollutants, or generate high noise
levels.
E.3.8   VISITOR FACILITIES
Policies and guidelines for Visitor Facilities support the existing visitor
attractions and accommodations centered in Lā‘ie and Turtle Bay Resort, and a
limited number of small-scale eco-tourism and agricultural-tourism operations
that complement the rural character and adjacent land uses. Emphasis is placed
on ensuring that visitor facilities are compatible with the rural character of
the region and have minimal impact on cultural, historic, recreational and open
space resources.
E.3.9   INSTITUTIONAL USES
Policies and guidelines describing Institutional Uses support the retention and
long-term viability of Kahuku Medical Center and the Ko‘olau Loa Community
Health and Wellness Center, and the expansion of student enrollment at Brigham
Young University-Hawai‘i to help maintain its long-term viability within the
community.
E.4   CHAPTER 4: PUBLIC FACILITIES AND INFRASTRUCTURE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
This chapter presents the policies and guidelines related to public facilities
and infrastructure in Ko‘olau Loa. Policies related to each facility type are
summarized in the following sections.
E.4.1   TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
Policies and guidelines for Transportation Systems emphasize the importance for
adequate highway safety and access for all residents, and for consultation with
area residents in planning transportation system improvements. There is the
need for reduced reliance on private passenger vehicles, and a desire for an
integrated system of bikeways is recognized.
E.4.2   WATER SYSTEMS
This section of Chapter 4 provides an overview of the protection and regulation
of water resources at the State and County levels, including the preparation of
regional watershed management plans for O‘ahu by the Board of Water Supply.
Policies and guidelines emphasize the importance of responsible management of
water resources, including streams and natural drainage systems, watersheds,
and coastal areas; the need for water conservation measures (including
recycling); and the protection of all water sources.
E.4.3   WASTEWATER TREATMENT
Policies and guidelines for Wastewater Treatment call for the provision of
adequate public and private wastewater treatment facilities and improvements to
existing wastewater systems. In addition, using reclaimed water for irrigation
purposes and developing alternative technologies for wastewater treatment that
reflect the community’s values and rural character are recognized.
E.4.4   ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS
Policies and guidelines for Electrical Systems emphasize the importance of
adequate and reliable electric service, the need for visually compatible
facilities, and support for the use of renewable energy sources and
conservation measures.
E.4.5   SOLID WASTE HANDLING AND DISPOSAL
The section on Solid Waste Handling and Disposal focuses on providing adequate
resources for efficient solid waste collection, in addition to promoting
recycling and other source reduction programs dedicated to minimizing the
amount of solid waste generated.
E.4.6   DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
Policies and guidelines for Drainage Systems call for improvements to mitigate
storm runoff and to provide adequate protection from flooding, with an emphasis
on low-impact design strategies that minimize nonpoint source pollution and
support the retention of storm water on-site and in wetlands.
E.4.7   SCHOOL FACILITIES
Guidance for public schools focuses on the provision and maintenance of school
facilities that serve the needs of the community, and ensuring that schools
have adequate capacity to accommodate new residential development. This section
also supports facility and drainage improvements at Kahuku High and
Intermediate School, and emphasizes the importance of integrating school
facilities with other community uses.
E.4.8   CIVIC AND PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES
Policies and guidelines for Civic and Public Safety Facilities promote an
integrated approach to public safety, which enables police, fire, ocean safety,
civil defense, and emergency medical efforts to share resources and
information, as appropriate, and adequate staffing and facilities to ensure
effective and efficient delivery of basic government service and protection of
public safety.
E.5   CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION
This chapter discusses the various measures that support implementation of this
Plan, including the regulatory mechanisms, physical improvements, and other
actions that are needed to realize the Plan’s vision. Section 5.7 presents an
Implementation Matrix to help organize and facilitate plan implementation. The
Implementation Matrix, which is based on the policies and guidelines presented
in Chapters 3 and 4, identifies the specific actions, corresponding programs,
and agencies that have a role in implementation.
E.6   APPENDIX
Appendix A contains three color maps that illustrate some of the Plan’s textual
provisions. These maps are intended to be conceptual illustrations of the text,
and should be considered secondary to the policies and guidelines articulated
in the text.
1.   KO‘OLAU LOA’S ROLE IN O‘AHU’S DEVELOPMENT PATTERN
Ko‘olau Loa spans the northern half of O‘ahu’s windward coast (
Exhibit 1-1). It is bordered on the north by the Waiale‘e community just beyond
Kawela Bay, and on the south by the ridgeline just beyond the north end of
Kāne‘ohe Bay. The residential communities located along Kamehameha Highway, the
only arterial roadway linking this area with the North Shore and Ko‘olau Poko,
include Kahuku, La‘ie, Hau‘ula, Punalu‘u, Kahana and Ka‘a‘awa. The rural
character of this region and its cultural and agricultural history are
reminiscent of old Hawai‘i.
The General Plan of the City and County of Honolulu directs growth to the
urbanized areas of O‘ahu and the urban fringe areas in the Central O‘ahu and
‘Ewa regions, and limits growth in the other urban fringe areas and rural areas
of O‘ahu (
Exhibit 1-1). It designates the Ko‘olau Loa region as a rural area where
physical growth and development will be managed so that “an undesirable
spreading of development is prevented,” and “population densities are
consistent with the character of development and environmental qualities
desired for the area” (General Plan, page 15). The General Plan also specifies
that Ko‘olau Loa’s natural resources and predominately “country” character
should be maintained by allowing only limited development in established
communities, and that agricultural lands along the Windward, North Shore, and
Wai‘anae coasts are to be maintained for diversified agriculture.
In this context, the vision of the Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan is
to maintain and enhance the man-made and natural elements that make Ko‘olau
Loa’s rural character so unique and special, in contrast to the urbanized areas
of O‘ahu. Consistent with the General Plan policies to preserve the region’s
open space and country atmosphere of the rural areas, the Ko‘olau Loa
Sustainable Communities Plan allows for limited growth to accommodate existing
and future housing and employment needs, maintaining a population that is
consistent with the General Plan.
This Plan affirms Ko‘olau Loa’s desired character as a rural area by
establishing the following policies for future land use and development in the
region:
   •   Recognize traditional ahupua‘a principles and adapt the ahupua‘a where
practicable in Ko‘olau Loa.
   •   Maintain and, where possible, expand critical open space areas and
shoreline views between the existing pattern of community development so as to
preserve a separation between the natural and built environment within each
ahupua‘a.
   •   Preserve continuous coastal views and scenic views of ridges, valley
slopes, and prominent land features.
   •   Preserve the existing strong relationship between the natural landscape
of the mountains to the ocean, and the man-made landscape of agricultural
fields and small rural communities.
   •   Promote and expand diversified agriculture and aquaculture.
   •   Promote access to mountain and shoreline resources for recreational
purposes and traditional hunting, fishing, gathering, religious, and cultural
practices.
   •   Preserve the “country” lifestyle as expressed by rural housing clusters
or neighborhoods which are defined by open space and blend into the surrounding
landscape with as little disruption as possible to the scenic quality of the
area.
   •   Use rural residential development standards so that new infrastructure
and site layout requirements keep with the desired rural character of the
region.
   •   Provide for new employment-based development which will offer quality
jobs and be compatible with the existing communities’ rural fabric and the
natural environment.
   •   Establish country town design guidelines for commercial and other non-
residential use areas so that new development will be in keeping with the
region’s rural character.
   •   Limit visitor accommodations and facilities to the existing resort-
designated areas at Turtle Bay Resort and Lā‘ie.
   •   Support and encourage improvements at existing educational and
recreational facilities.
   •   Support a limited expansion of the Brigham Young University-Hawai‘i
campus and associated off-site housing at Lā‘ie to accommodate projected future
student enrollment and related support services.
   Exhibit 1-1: General Plan Designations
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9431.png]
 
2.   THE VISION FOR KO‘OLAU LOA’S FUTURE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9429.png]
 
This chapter presents the vision for Ko‘olau Loa’s future, its key elements and
the general framework for implementation. Together they provide the foundation
for the policies and guidelines discussed in Chapters 3 and 4 which direct
future land use and development decisions in the Ko‘olau Loa region. The vision
emerged through community input and participation, as well as planning studies
and agency meetings.
The vision for Ko‘olau Loa extends to the year 2035. Between 2000 and 2035, the
Lā‘ie area is projected to experience some growth in housing related to
sustaining the current population, growing families, working residents, and
increases in student enrollment and related support staff associated with the
planned expansion of Brigham Young University-Hawai‘i. Overall, the region will
remain rural, with wide open spaces, agricultural lands and rural communities
continuing to define the rural landscape.
It is projected that Ko‘olau Loa’s resident population will increase from
approximately 14,500 residents in 2000 to about 15,500 in 20352, representing
an increase of less than one percent per year over a 35-year period. DPP
projections for the year 2035 indicate that the region’s population will
account for approximately 1.4 percent of the island-wide population in the year
2035, which is consistent with the General Plan’s population distribution
policies.
The vision for Ko‘olau Loa seeks to preserve the region’s rural character and
its natural, cultural and scenic resources. The community envisions a safe and
healthy environment based on strong family values, where residents have access
to quality jobs, affordable housing and ample recreational opportunities within
the region. Ko‘olau Loa will remain country, characterized by small towns and
villages with distinctive identities that exist in harmony with the natural
settings, defined by the mountain ridges and scenic open spaces which help give
the region its unique form of organization.
A fundamental component of this vision is the ahupua‘a concept. In traditional
Hawaiian life, an ahupua‘a, or land division, was a complete ecological and
economic production system that provided all the resources to sustain the
community living within its boundaries. Ahupua‘a boundaries were the natural
geographic formations such as mountain ridges, gulches and streams, and
ahupua‘a were typically wedge-shaped, extending from the top of the mountain
into the outer edge of the ocean reef. Fish and marine resources were harvested
from the ocean, kalo (taro) and ‘uala (sweet potato) were raised in the
lowlands, and upland areas provided trees and other forest products.
The ahupua‘a concept is a holistic approach to land management that recognizes
the connections between land-based and marine-based natural resources and the
dependent relationships between ecological functions. Resources were managed
for the collective good of all living within the ahupua‘a, based on the
principle that activities in one part of the ahupua‘a affected all other parts.
The ahupua‘a concept is used as the organizing basis for land use planning and
natural resource management in Ko‘olau Loa. Adapted to reflect the region’s
contemporary development patterns, it recognizes traditional ahupua‘a divisions
between existing communities and helps to enhance the distinctions between the
natural and built environment.
The following statements, or key vision elements, describe specific features of
Ko‘olau Loa in the year 2035 and beyond. Successful implementation of these
elements is integral to the desired future of Ko‘olau Loa. Although the key
vision elements describe conditions in the year 2035, the vision elements are
written in the present tense, from the perspective of the year 2035 looking
back into the past.
2.1   THE COMMUNITY GROWTH BOUNDARY GUIDES LAND USE
The Community Growth Boundary guides development and preserves open space and
agricultural areas. It has remained fixed through the 2035 planning horizon,
and no new development has occurred outside the Community Growth Boundary. The
Community Growth Boundary has served as a valuable tool to guide development,
redevelopment, and resource management within existing zoning designations or
future zoning designations and other standards or guidelines that may be
developed in response to the provisions of this Plan, other established
entitlements, or in accordance with pertinent policy and character described in
this Plan.
The Community Growth Boundary defines, protects, and contains communities in
areas that the General Plan designates “rural” and that exhibit the physical
characteristics of rural lifestyles. The boundary provides adequate lands for
facilities needed to support established communities, and protects such
communities from more intense land uses and patterns of development associated
with more urban areas. The Community Growth Boundary also preserves areas
outside the boundary for agriculture or other resource or open space values.
Where appropriate, the area within this boundary also contains open space
elements considered essential to the character of the rural community being
defined. Open space elements within Community Growth Boundary may include lands
designated “Park,” “Agriculture,” “Preservation,” or areas with development-
related hazards such as steep slopes or unstable soils.
Rural communities defined by this boundary consist of residential communities
and towns that are smaller, more dispersed, and less intensively developed than
those in O‘ahu’s urban and urban fringe areas. Development character is
generally low-density, low-rise, small scale, and reflective of a “country”
setting. Within residential areas, the landscaping and front yards that provide
the foregrounds to the dwellings are the principal visual elements. In
commercial areas, the pedestrian environment and associated amenities
predominate, and storefronts are typically found on both sides of the street.
Commercial buildings are oriented principally toward the street, relate readily
to the human scale, and are organized to encourage interaction between the
public and private domains.
The main objectives of the Community Growth Boundary are to:
   •   Preserve Agricultural Lands, Significant Open Space, and Natural
Resources. The Community Growth Boundary has prevented the encroachment of
development onto productive agricultural lands, and protects agricultural
lands, significant open space, and natural resources outside the boundary.
   •   Promote an Efficient Development Pattern. The Community Growth Boundary
has focused new development to “infill” sites within and adjacent to the
existing communities. A compact form of development concentrated in distinct
communities along the coast has resulted in relatively lower development costs,
more efficient utilization of existing infrastructure systems, and reduced
reliance on the automobile by making transit, walking, and bicycling more
feasible and attractive as alternative modes of travel.
   •   Provide Sufficient Capacity for Projected Growth. Areas within the
Community Growth Boundary provided ample capacity to accommodate projected
residential and commercial development. Since 2000, there has been limited
expansion of residential areas in Kahuku and Lā‘ie, in addition to previously
designated but undeveloped residential areas within each community. This has
provided sufficient housing for job growth associated with operations at the
Turtle Bay Resort and expansion of the Brigham Young University-Hawai‘i at
Lā‘ie.
   •   Protect Natural and Scenic Resources. Significant natural landscape
features have been more effectively protected from physical changes because the
Community Growth Boundary clearly defines the potential areas for new community
development. These natural scenic landscape elements include the mountain
ridges, valleys, open areas, and coastal resources.
The Community Growth Boundary generally circumscribes the built sections of
Ka‘a‘awa, Kahana, Punalu‘u, Hau‘ula, Lā‘ie, and Kahuku. It also includes
pockets of agricultural lands and parks, which are to be preserved and
maintained as such unless otherwise designated, to retain the open space
character within the Community Growth Boundary.
2.2   NATURAL, RECREATIONAL AND CULTURAL RESOURCES ARE PRESERVED AND ENHANCES,
AND CONTRIBUTE TO KO‘OLAU LOA’S SENSE OF “OLD HAWAI‘I”
Protection of this region’s resources and rural character has island-wide
importance because of its unique quality and beauty to both residents and
visitors. Natural resources continue to be conserved through retaining natural
drainage ways and protecting valuable plant and wildlife habitats. Open space
is preserved in recreation and preservation areas, parks, and agricultural
areas, and the region’s many significant scenic mauka and makai views of
mountain ridges, valleys, slopes and coastline are protected.
Of Ko‘olau Loa’s many natural resources, the following wetland areas have been
identified by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) (James Campbell
National Wildlife Refuge Comprehensive Conservation Plan, September 2011).
These wetland areas are noted because of the occurrence and abundance of native
waterbirds, including the endangered Hawaiian stilt (ae‘o), Hawaiian coot
(‘alae ke‘oke‘o), Hawaiian duck (koloa maoli), Hawaiian moorhen (‘alae ‘ula),
and migratory waterfowl and shorebird:
   •   Turtle Bay Golf Course Ponds
   •   Kuilima Mitigation Pond
   •   Punaho‘olapa Marsh
   •   James Campbell Natural Wildlife Refuge, Ki‘i Unit and Punamanō Unit 5
   •   Kahuku Aquafarms (former AmOrient)
   •   Kahuku Airstrips Ponds
   •   Kahuku Prawn Farm
   •   Lāie Aquaculture Farm/Po‘ohaili Wetlands
   •   Hau‘ula
   •   Punalu‘u Prawn Farm
   •   Ahupua‘a o Kahana State Park/Huilua Pond
   •   Ka‘a‘awa Wetlands
Other natural resources, including streams and gulches which contain important
biological, scenic, cultural and recreational values, are preserved and
protected from development or incompatible activities. The following streams
and gulches and their associated watersheds in Ko‘olau Loa were identified in
the State Commission on Water Resource Management, Hawai‘i Stream Assessment
(December 1990) for their outstanding aquatic resources:
   •   Koloa Gulch
   •   Kaluanui Stream
   •   Punalu‘u Stream
   •   Kahana Stream
   •   Ka‘a‘awa Stream
   •   Makaua Stream
It should be noted that the above lists of wetlands and streams were based on
available information. In general, any activities in the vicinity of streams
and wetlands need to ensure that their biological, scenic, cultural or
recreational values are not impaired.
A konohiki approach to management of natural resources has been re-established
and is maintained in order to properly sustain and protect them. In summary,
konohiki practices focus on sustainable usage and systematic management of
natural resources, respecting ecosystem relationships and using the ahupua‘a as
a contextual or management unit. This approach is actively used in the
management, monitoring, and regulating of uses to avoid resource misuse or
mismanagement.
The Ko‘olau Loa region contains several different types of historic and
cultural resources. For example, the plantation era is an important period that
made a substantial contribution to the development of this region. Reminders of
that period, such as the Kahuku Sugar Mill site, are valuable records of the
past. Significant historic features from earlier pre-contact periods or
significant vistas associated with cultural features are also being preserved.
2.3   AGRICULTURAL LANDS ARE PRESERVED FOR AGRICULTURAL USES
Agricultural lands, including lands currently in agricultural use and lands
available for future agricultural use, have been protected from urban
development through the establishment of the Community Growth Boundary.
Agricultural lands provide economic and open space value, and contribute to the
region’s identifiable rural character. By supporting the active use of these
lands for agricultural purposes, the opportunity to retain and protect
diversified agriculture and aquaculture activities on small and large farms has
been enhanced. Successful agricultural operations are being pursued on former
sugarcane lands and in the mauka portions of valleys, while aquaculture uses
have been expanded near Kahuku, Malaekahana, Punalu‘u and Ka‘a‘awa.
2.4   RECREATIONAL AREAS AND RESOURCES ARE MAINTAINED AND ENHANCED
Ko‘olau Loa contains numerous undeveloped areas and natural resources which
offer a variety of outdoor recreational opportunities, as well as cultural
experiences. The region contains numerous beach parks along its coastline and
State parks such as Kaluanui (formerly Sacred Falls), Mālaekahana and Ahupua‘a
O Kahana. These resource areas are recognized as important open space and
recreation assets.
The existing parks and recreation areas are maintained and have been enhanced
to utilize the region’s abundance of natural and scenic resources for the
enjoyment of residents and visitors. At the same time, the value of these
resources is protected from overuse. Existing beach access is maintained and
new shoreline access properties have been acquired along narrow stretches of
ocean-front land. An open space system of landscaped pathways has been
developed to link communities together along major roadways, streams, wetlands
and other drainage ways.
2.5   RURAL AREA DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ARE USED TO MAINTAIN THE RURAL CHARACTER
OF RESIDENTIAL AREAS
The need for additional housing related to long-term growth in Ko‘olau Loa is
being met by the “infill” development of existing vacant lands within each of
the region’s rural communities. In addition, limited expansion of residential
areas in Kahuku and Lā‘ie accommodates long-term housing demand related to
employment needs at Turtle Bay Resort, the expansion of diversified employment
opportunities in La‘ie, and the continued growth of Brigham Young University-
Hawai‘i.
The physical changes brought about by infill home construction or expansion in
existing, built-up neighborhoods has been slower and subtler than the
development that has occurred on moderate-sized vacant parcels. In any case,
rural residential lot and subdivision development standards have been adopted,
and are effectively being used to ensure that development reflects the rural
character unique to the Ko‘olau Loa region.
2.6   COMMERCIAL AREAS ARE ENHANCED AND COUNTRY STORES CONTRIBUTE TO KO‘OLAU
LOA’S RURAL FABRIC
The character of the region’s commercial areas, as well as its stand-alone
“Country Stores,” has been enhanced through design guidelines that are
appropriate to the scale and theme of the region and communities they serve.
Rural architectural style guidelines have been established for the Kahuku Sugar
Mill site, and commercial centers in Ka‘a‘awa, Hau‘ula and Lā‘ie, with building
and landscape treatment recommendations unique to the character and needs of
each commercial area.
Design guidelines have also been established to provide information regarding
the appropriate rehabilitation or renovation of existing commercial centers and
country-store operations. “Country Store”-type establishments are an important
part of Ko‘olau Loa’s character and have been encouraged to renovate or
reconstruct accordingly. These small businesses provide convenient locations
for residents to eat out, get groceries or gather to socialize; and for
visitors to shop in locally run stores and purchase a variety of handcrafted
items. In general, these businesses remain limited to their original locations
and have not expanded along Kamehameha Highway, in order to maintain the rural
character of the region’s “front door” and avoid the creation of a commercial
strip along the coastal highway.
2.7   DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES REFLECT PRINCIPLES OF SUSTAINABILTY
Ko‘olau Loa is a community that has successfully managed change, and is
flourishing and prospering. For Ko‘olau Loa, this means ensuring that planned
growth and development has respected and adhered to the principles of
sustainability.
Ko‘olau Loa’s principles of sustainability have promoted the long-term health
of the land and its people, and its community resources for current and future
generations:
   •   Protect agricultural lands, physical and biological resources, and where
desired, open spaces and view planes.
   •   Use resources so they are not depleted, permanently damaged or
destroyed.
   •   Encourage planning, development and construction technologies that
minimize environmental impacts and promote the use of green building practices.
   •   Respect the cultural, social and physical resources that shape
residents’ sense of community and rural quality of life.
   •   Honor the process of change. Make no decisions without first
understanding the effects such change will have on the land and community
resources.
   •   Strive for balance between economic prosperity, social and community
well-being, and environmental stewardship. Adopt a multi-disciplinary approach
acknowledging the importance of our community capital in land use and
infrastructure planning decisions.
   •   Consider the long-term effect of our actions and take into account the
interests of our future generations when planning for the future.
3.   LAND USE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
The key element in implementing the vision for Ko‘olau Loa’s future, as
described in Chapter 2, is the application of the resource management
principles of the ahupua‘a concept to land use planning and development
decisions. This concept defines the essence of Ko‘olau Loa’s rural character
and provides the foundation for the organization of land uses within the
region, in addition to shaping many of the land use policies and guidelines
presented in this Chapter.
The vision for Ko‘olau Loa described in Chapter 2 will be implemented through
the application of the land use policies and guidelines presented in Chapters 3
and 4. Proposed land use policies are intended to outline future actions and
agency decision-making once the Plan is adopted. Policies are broad statements
of intent that express the City’s overall philosophy toward particular land
uses. Guidelines provide more specific guidance to public agencies and private
entities in terms of planning, design and implementation of projects and
programs in the various land use categories.
Chapter 3 is organized under the following headings:
SECTION
3.1   OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION
3.2   AGRICULTURE
3.3   PARKS AND RECREATION
3.4   HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
3.5   RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITIES
3.6   COMMERCIAL AREAS
3.7   BUSINESS/LIGHT INDUSTRIAL AND TECHNOLOGY PARK AREAS
3.8   VISITOR FACILITIES
3.9   INSTITUTIONAL USES
3.1   OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION
Open space preservation is a key element of the vision for Ko‘olau Loa’s
future. Long-term protection and preservation of scenic resources, agricultural
areas, natural areas, and recreational areas are important to maintaining the
rural character of Ko‘olau Loa for both residents and visitors.
The open space system consists of areas that serve important ecological,
recreational and scenic functions, including undeveloped mauka and shoreline
areas, parks and recreational resources, natural gulches and drainageways,
utility corridors, and agricultural areas. It also includes the open space
“gaps” that provide visual definition and physical separation between the
existing rural communities in support of the region’s rural development
pattern.
The City and County of Honolulu Land Use Ordinance (LUO) and accompanying
zoning maps (Chapter 21, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu) prescribe the
allowable uses of land for the City and County of Honolulu. The LUO identifies
the various zoning districts, the uses allowed within each zoning district, and
the applicable development standards within each district.
Table 3-1 presents the acreage within each zoning district in Ko‘olau Loa. The
vast majority of the land within Ko‘olau Loa is identified for uses that
contribute to open space. With less than 5 percent of the land area zoned for
residential, commercial or resort uses, more than 95 percent is zoned for
either preservation or agricultural use, including approximately 37 percent
zoned either AG-1 Restricted Agricultural or AG-2 General Agricultural and
about 59 percent zoned either P-1 Restricted Preservation or P-2 General
Preservation.
Table 3-1 City and County of Honolulu Zoning Districts in Ko‘olau Loa
District Acreage Percent Total
Table 3-1 City and County of Honolulu Zoning Districts in Ko‘olau Loa
District                     Acreage  Percent Total
R-7.5 Residential            24.8     0.07%
R-5 Residential              973.2    2.63%
A-1 Low Density Apartment    33.1     0.09%
A-2 Medium Density Apartment 5.5      0.02%
B-1 Neighborhood Business    44.8     0.12%
B-2 Community Business       48.1     0.13%
Resort                       302.0    0.82%
AG-1 Restricted Agricultural 3,112.7  8.40%
AG-2 General Agricultural    10,521.4 28.39%
Country                      193.8    0.52%
P-1 Restricted Preservation  20,589.2 55.56%
P-2 General Preservation     1,210.9  3.27%
            TOTAL37,059.5 100.00%
 
A number of policy initiatives and economic incentives are available to assist
government agencies and community organizations to preserve existing open space
resources. Some mechanisms that have been effective in other communities that
could be investigated include:
   •   landbanking (purchasing unimproved land before development pressures are
experienced);
   •   transfer of development rights (a regulatory approach that allows land
owners to transfer or sell their rights to develop one parcel of land to a
different parcel of land, thereby shifting development from areas designated
for agricultural use or open space to a location where development is
encouraged);
   •   establishment of a regional open space district (a zoning special
district overlay);
   •   creation of a land conservation trust; and
   •   open space and conservation easements (a legal agreement that limits the
future development of the property, often provides economic incentives for
landowners such as tax exemptions).
3.1.1   POLICIES
Open space will be used to:
   •   Maintain the region’s rural character, protect and preserve scenic views
and natural resources, provide recreational resources, and promote
accessibility to shoreline and mauka areas.
   •   Define and maintain clear boundaries and separations between existing
rural communities.
   •   Provide adequate shoreline setbacks that consider shoreline changes
resulting from erosion hazards and rising sea levels, based on adopted
projections of shoreline erosion rates and sea level rise.
   •   Allow outdoor lighting at the minimum level necessary for public safety,
security and community aesthetics consistent with the goals of energy
conservation and environmental protection.
3.1.2   GUIDELINES
The following provides a brief description of regional open space resources in
Ko‘olau Loa. They are followed by guidelines for carrying out the policies
related to each open space element.
3.1.2.1   Mountain Areas and Trails
Major trails, which are inventoried by the State Department of Land and Natural
Resources (DLNR), provide access to the mountainous areas of Ko‘olau Loa.
Within the region, the State’s Na Ala Hele Program actively manages the Hau‘ula
Loop and Ma‘akua Ridge trails. These trails all begin along the mauka edge of
Hau‘ula, extend for 2.5 to 3.0 miles respectively, and provide valuable and
often unique backcountry experiences.
Other trails in the region that are under private ownership could add other,
equally valuable wilderness experiences if issues of public access, use, safety
and landowner liability are satisfactorily addressed. These trails include but
are not limited to the Ko‘olau Ridge Trail, which offers simultaneous views of
Central O‘ahu and the windward coastlines and valleys, the Castle Trail, which
begins in Punalu‘u, and other trails such as those that lead to Lā‘ie Falls,
Malaekahana Falls and Turtle Falls (Hau‘ula). Access to mauka resources to
maintain traditional and customary rights of Native Hawaiian practitioners
should be provided, in accordance with State Law.
Guidelines pertaining to mountain areas and trails are as follows:
   •   Maintain, protect, and/or restore native forests in the State
Conservation District.
   •   Identify and protect endangered species habitats and other important
ecologically sensitive areas from such threats as fire, alien species, feral
animals and human activity.
   •   Avoid the establishment of utility corridors and other uses that would
disturb areas with high concentrations of native or endangered species.
   •   Maintain and enhance mauka trail systems, including sufficient parking
areas and signage at trailheads.
   •   Support State efforts to seek opportunities for cooperative agreements
with private landowners to gain access to trails leading to public lands.
3.1.2.2   Shoreline Areas
The Ko‘olau Loa shoreline extends for over 20 miles between Ka‘a‘awa Valley and
Kawela Bay. The shoreline provides residents and visitors with significant
active and passive recreational resources, and contributes significantly to the
region’s rural Hawaiian character and lifestyle. Therefore, mauka-makai and
lateral public access to the shoreline should be maintained and improved to the
greatest extent possible. In addition to their recreational value, shoreline
areas also provide significant scenic value. It is important to retain and,
where possible, expand visual access to the shoreline from the coastal highway.
It is equally important to maintain the physical integrity of these shoreline
areas.
In October 2015, the State obtained a conservation easement and restriction on
development rights for lands at the Turtle Bay Resort pursuant to Act 121
(Session Laws of Hawaii 2015). The conservation easement and development
restrictions protect, in perpetuity, lands for open space, additional public
park areas, and shoreline access from Kawela Bay to Kahuku Point.
The DLNR has developed a Coastal Lands Program (CLP) to manage and protect the
state’s natural shoreline. The CLP aims to balance conservation and appropriate
land uses, and oversees the implementation of technical recommendations and
policies embodied in the Coastal Erosion Management Plan (COEMAP).
Guidelines pertaining to shoreline areas are:
   •   Maintain and, where possible, enhance the physical integrity and habitat
value of shoreline areas.
   •   Preserve rare and sensitive coastal resources including coastal strand
vegetation, sand dunes, and anchialine pools. Establish buffer zones around
these resources where necessary.
   •   Identify and protect endangered species habitats and other important
ecologically sensitive areas from such threats as fire, alien species, feral
animals and inappropriate human activity.
   •   Maintain existing makai view openings along the coastal highway. Avoid
obstructions, such as walls and heavy landscaping which block views, except
where necessary for safety reasons. Maintain public beach parks to avoid
unnecessary landscape screening or the placement of park structures within the
view corridor. Recommendations of the Coastal View Study (1987) should be
incorporated.
   •   To the extent possible, acquire shallow developed beach-front lots which
would be impractical to redevelop given existing zoning standards or wave
hazard considerations in order to improve public access and lateral shoreline
views along Kamehameha Highway.
   •   Maintain and enhance public access to the shoreline and lateral access
along the coast, including the provision of parking areas. Public access should
be provided at approximately 1/2-mile intervals in rural areas, or at closer
intervals when justified by public demand, traditional use patterns, the
quality of the recreational resources, or natural barriers that impede
shoreline access.
   •   Establish additional minimum setbacks for structures near the shoreline
in erosion hazard areas, and implement other management strategies to protect
unstable sandy beach areas that impact Kamehameha Highway along the Ka‘a‘awa,
Punalu‘u and Hau‘ula shorelines.
   •   Adopt development standards that require new structures along the
shoreline to incorporate structural and design elements compatible with coastal
hazards such as coastal erosion, tsunami and hurricane overwash.
   •   Incorporate best available science and information from the City Climate
Change Commission when evaluating updates to land use policies and regulations
relating to climate change and sea level rise.
   •   Prohibit off-road vehicular and motorcycle use in shoreline areas,
including but not limited to the placement of barriers to prevent vehicular
access along the beachfront.
   •   Maintain the untamed landscape quality of the Kahuku shoreline.
   •   Implement management practices that protect nearshore coral reefs from
damaging activities such as soil erosion, non-point source pollution, dredging,
and alterations to near-shore water circulation.
   •   Minimize the adverse effects of artificial lighting on wildlife and
human health by balancing the need of outdoor lighting for night utility,
security, and desire for reasonable architectural expression with the need to
conserve energy and protect the natural environment.
   •   Adopt outdoor night lighting standards that encourage efforts to
minimize glare and stray light, and reinforce the differences between urban and
rural communities.
   Exhibit 3-1: Natural, Recreational and Cultural Resources
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9437.png]
 
3.1.2.3   Wildlife Sanctuaries
Ko‘olau Loa contains the following wildlife sanctuaries and preserves (
Exhibit 3-1, Natural, Recreational and Cultural Resources):
   •   State Seabird Sanctuaries. There are five islands designated as State
Seabird Sanctuaries which are located off the coast of Lā‘ie and Mālaekahana:
Moku‘auia, Kīhewamoku, Pulemoku, Kukuiho‘olua, and Mokuālai. These off-shore
islands are managed by the DLNR Division of Forestry and Wildlife, and provide
habitats for the wedgetail shearwater as well as other migratory waterbirds and
rare coastal species.
   •   National Wildlife Refuge. The James Campbell National Wildlife Refuge
(NWR) is managed by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). It was
established in 1976 to provide wetland habitat for four endangered native
waterbirds, including the ae‘o (Hawaiian stilt), ‘alae ke‘ok‘eo (Hawaiian
coot), kōloa maoli (Hawaiian duck), and ‘alae‘ula (Hawaiian moorhen), as well
as shorebirds and migratory waterfowl. The refuge consists of both natural and
artificially maintained wetlands, including the 126- acre Ki‘i wetland unit and
the 134-acre Punamanō wetland unit. The refuge boundary was expanded to
approximately 1,100 acres in 2006 (James Campbell NWR Expansion Act of 2005,
U.S. Public Law 109-225) to allow for additional wetland acreage and the last
remaining intact coastal dune system on O‘ahu to be added. The USFWS plans to
acquire additional lands within its boundary as funding is made available.
      The James Campbell National Wildlife Refuge Comprehensive Conservation
Plan was completed in 2011. The Plan describes refuge management plans for the
next 15 years, and identifies specific actions to restore and protect wetlands
and habitats, and maintain the remote, undeveloped character of the coastline.
Guidelines relating to wildlife sanctuaries in Ko‘olau Loa are as follows:
   •   Respect and establish an appropriate balance between natural habitats
and human uses in the management of wildlife sanctuaries. Appropriate buffers
between uses should be established wherever necessary.
   •   Retain existing preservation zoning in the vicinity of Kahuku’s
Punaho‘olapa Marsh, Punamanō and Ki‘i Pond National Wildlife Refuges.
   •   Encourage landowners to establish additional sanctuaries in other areas
within the region that provide habitats for endangered wildlife, flora and
fauna.
3.1.2.4   Natural Gulches, Streams and Drainageways
The ridges and valleys of the Ko‘olau Loa mountain range form natural streams
and drainageways throughout the region. Significant perennial streams include
those identified by the State Commission on Water Resource Management, Hawai‘i
Stream Assessment, (December 1990) and other drainageways as identified by the
Department of Design and Construction or Department of Planning and Permitting.
Wetlands are generally described as areas which are covered or saturated with
water, whose substrate is primarily characterized by undrained moist or
saturated soils and which support aquatic plants. Like streams and gulches,
wetlands are important environmental resources that can provide irreplaceable
benefits for flood protection, water quality, fish and wildlife habitat, and
opportunities for recreation, education and research. The U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, and various State and County agencies have responsibilities for the
protection and management of wetlands.
Wetlands, stream channels, and drainageways are the primary means for carrying
water from the inland areas to the ocean and are generally capable of handling
normal rainfall runoff. However, during periods of intense rainfall, some of
these drainageways overflow and create flooding problems. Section 4.6 “Drainage
Systems” summarizes these conditions. In these cases, improvements which
effectively address and correct the causes of these flood conditions are
needed.
Guidelines pertaining to natural gulches, streams and drainageways in Ko‘olau
Loa are:
   •   Preserve the aesthetic and biological values of natural gulches, streams
and drainageways as part of the open space system. Restore and protect
ecologically sensitive areas and ecosystems which should be maintained and
enhanced as open space elements. Any activities in the vicinity of these areas
need to ensure that the open space system will not be significantly impacted or
that biological values will not be significantly degraded.
   •   Identify and protect endangered species habitats and other important
ecologically sensitive areas from such threats as fire, alien species, feral
animals and incompatible human activity.
   •   Minimize soil erosion, and runoff of pesticides, fertilizers and other
non-point source contaminants into streams, wetlands and marine habitats with
strategies such as stream setbacks, erosion control devices, integrated pest
management plans, and revegetation of disturbed areas. Incorporate erosion
control measures and best management practices as recommended in the State of
Hawai‘i Coastal Non-point Pollution Control Program Management Plan (October
2010), to prevent pollution of wetlands, streams, estuaries, and nearshore
waters.
   •   Where feasible, establish setbacks along rivers, streams, and shoreline
areas to preserve these resources and protective buffer zones around
biologically sensitive areas to minimize habitat disturbance. Where possible,
provide access as part of the open space network.
   •   Restrict uses in these areas to conservation uses, compatible
recreational uses such as walking and bicycling, traditional and customary
rights of Native Hawaiian practitioners, and controlled surface water diversion
for agricultural purposes. Avoid development in ecologically sensitive areas;
if activities are allowed, minimize impacts and implement mitigative measures
that will fully offset any loss of resources.
   •   Restore, protect and maintain stream habitat values along the entire
stream length, from the headwaters through the muliwai (nearshore marine zone
created when freshwater streams flow into the ocean) to the marine reef system,
to avoid degradation or interruption of habitat for native organisms and to
provide for the health of the entire ecosystem.
   •   To the extent possible, limit any modifications to natural gulches and
streams, except for measures which are necessary for flood protection. If
modifications are needed, they should minimize impacts on biological habitats
and natural resources, complement the existing rural character and aesthetic
quality, and maintain existing water quality and the rate and volume of
freshwater run-off into near-shore waters. Drainageway modifications may
include stream-side vegetation and rip-rap boulder lining of stream banks;
channelization should be a last resort and should be limited to v-shaped bottom
channels and/or other appropriate measures that preserve environmental habitat
qualities and capabilities to maintain a stream flow during low rainfall
periods.
   •   Enhance, restore and preserve streams while providing public access for
recreational and cultural purposes.
   •   Develop an implementation schedule with input from community and public
agencies to establish permanent instream flow standards that support sound
watershed management. The setting of instream flow standards should weigh the
benefits of instream and non-instream uses of water resources, including the
economic impact of restrictions of such uses.
   •   Support the implementation of the Ko‘olau Loa Watershed Management Plan.
3.1.2.5   Parks
Parks provide important open space areas that meet the recreation needs of
Ko‘olau Loa’s residents and island-wide visitors. While beach parks serve
island-wide needs, parks within the community provide active recreation space
for the region’s residents in the form of playfields, courts and other
facilities. There are approximately 43 acres of City-owned beach parks and
shoreline right-of-ways and 26 acres of City-owned community-based parks in
Ko‘olau Loa. Four State parks account for almost 6,750 additional acres. In
addition to their recreational value, parks provide visual relief from urban
land uses and are valuable resources that contribute to the region’s open space
system. Policies and guidelines for parks are discussed in Section 3.3 relating
to Parks and Recreation.
3.1.2.6   Golf Courses
There are three golf courses in Ko‘olau Loa: two private courses associated
with the Turtle Bay Resort and the City and County’s municipal nine-hole course
at Kahuku (see Section 3.3). The City has a short-term lease agreement for the
municipal course. All three golf courses are open to public play. These golf
courses are important elements of Ko‘olau Loa’s open space system because they
provide areas for active recreation while preserving the visual quality of the
northern end of the region. In addition to their open space and aesthetic
value, golf courses serve the practical purpose of reducing flooding and non-
point source pollution. The location, design, and grading of golf courses, and
siting of water features can contribute in a significant way to a passive
stormwater drainage management system. Wildlife habitats are enhanced or
created as a by-product of retention/detention capabilities that this
integrated system provides.
Guidelines pertaining to golf courses in Ko‘olau Loa are:
   •   Optimize and maintain the function of golf courses as passive
drainageways to maximize their potential to serve as drainage retention areas,
as well as wildlife habitats.
   •   Maintain golf course designs to provide view amenities for adjacent
developed areas, including public rights-of-way, parks and vista points.
   •   Provide safe access through golf courses, as necessary, for regional
continuity of shoreline access.
   •   When necessary for safety reasons, use screening, landscape treatment,
setbacks and modifications to the course layout rather than fencing or solid
barriers.
   •   Maintain golf courses to minimize environmental impacts such as
siltation, pesticide and fertilizer runoff, and disturbance to coastal,
riparian and wetland habitats.
   •   Expand the existing Kahuku public golf course in conjunction with flood
control measures.
   •   Encourage the use of non-potable water resources for golf course
irrigation.
3.1.2.7   Kahuku Training Area
The Kahuku Training Area consists of approximately 9,400 acres of mauka lands
above Kawela Bay and Kahuku Town that the United States Army uses for military
training purposes. As the Army’s second largest contiguous ground maneuver
training area on O‘ahu, the Kahuku Training Area supports various tactical
training scenarios, including mountain and jungle warfare, pyrotechnics, and
air support training. The federal government owns approximately 8,260 acres of
the training area, while approximately 1,150 acres are leased from the State of
Hawai‘i. Less than three acres are owned by other interests, which include the
City and County of Honolulu and the ‘Ōpana Wells site currently owned by the
Kuilima Resort Company. Military access to the site is via either Kamehameha
Highway or Drum Road, a military access road that links Kahuku and Helemano
Military Reservation. Existing training facilities and sites are being upgraded
and modernized to support the Army’s 2nd Brigade, 25th Infantry Division
Stryker Brigade Combat Team.
This large area of mauka lands is an important open space and visual resource
along Ko‘olau Loa’s northern boundary. Approximately 1/2 of the training area
is located within the State Conservation District. These undeveloped lands
which border the agricultural areas of the lower plains should, as much as
possible, be maintained in their natural state.
Guidelines pertaining to the Kahuku Training Area are:
   •   Encourage the U.S. Army to manage its training area lands to minimize
potential adverse drainage impacts to adjacent lowland areas. Storm water
runoff from the Kahuku Training Area should not be increased from existing
conditions, and long-term measures should be considered to reduce runoff.
   •   Discourage live-fire training in the area. This is consistent with the
Army’s stated position that the Kahuku Training Area will continue to be used
for tactical maneuver training with no live-firing of weapons.
   •   Encourage the U.S. Army to conduct training exercises in a manner that
will not significantly disturb the natural vegetation and wildlife; alter the
landform that contributes to runoff; and affect the flow of natural streams and
drainageways. For example, the Army’s current policy of restricting or
prohibiting blanks and pyrotechnic use during the dry seasons to minimize any
fire hazard should be maintained as long as this area is used for training
purposes.
3.1.3   RELATION TO OPEN SPACE AND LAND USE MAPS
The following components of the regional open space system are shown on the
Open Space and Land Use Maps in Appendix A:
   •   Mountain Areas. These areas are to remain outside of the designated
Community Growth Boundary.
   •   Natural Gulches and Drainageways. Gulches in the steeper sloped areas
both within and beyond the Community Growth Boundary are indicated for
preservation.
   •   Shoreline Areas. Shoreline areas with high scenic or wildlife value,
generally along the Kahuku coastline between Mālaekahana and Kahuku Point, are
designated for preservation and are located outside the Community Growth
Boundary.
   •   Parks. Areas designated as parks are labeled with the park’s name and,
where space allows on the maps in Appendix A, the general location and land
area of the park is outlined and colored.
   •   Golf Courses. The three golf courses in Ko‘olau Loa are shown because of
their recreational value and visual contribution to the landscape.
   •   Kahuku Training Area. Although depicted as military on the map, these
lands are an important open space resource that should to the greatest extent
possible be maintained in their natural wild state.
3.2   AGRICULTURE
With an abundance of natural resources and fresh water to support agricultural
and aquacultural activities, Ko‘olau Loa was historically a major population
center for pre-contact Native Hawaiians. Wetland taro lo‘i (fields) irrigated
by a system of ‘auwai (irrigation ditches) were abundant at Lā‘ie and through
Hau‘ula, Punalu‘u and Kahana valleys, while the upland forest areas and
streams, fishponds and nearshore fishing grounds were harvested for other
necessary staples.
Today, the agricultural lands found throughout the region serve as a key
component of Ko‘olau Loa’s rural character and open space. Whether actively
cultivated in diversified crops or aquaculture, or used for more passive
ranching activities, agricultural lands serve as important natural separators
between the concentrations of small rural communities and support economic
opportunities that are compatible with the region’s rural character.
The Sustainable Communities Plan protects agricultural lands from urban
development through the establishment of the Community Growth Boundary,
accompanied by policy statements and guidelines that encourage agricultural
activities and the long-term success of the industry. By supporting the active
use of these lands for agricultural purposes, the opportunity to retain and
protect diversified agriculture and aquaculture activities on small and large
farms is enhanced.
The Sustainable Communities Plan calls for the preservation and expansion of
agricultural lands and encourages diversification of agriculture-related
enterprises to maintain the viability of agriculture throughout Ko‘olau Loa.
Over 25 percent - or more than 9,000 acres - of the Ko‘olau Loa region is
designated for Agriculture use on the Sustainable Communities Plan Land Use
Map. As evidenced by the extensive network of traditional Native Hawaiian
agricultural systems that were once a common feature of the landscape and the
region’s history of agricultural productivity, existing agricultural lands in
Ko‘olau Loa have the potential to support expanded agricultural production on
O‘ahu.
Agricultural operations including ranching, truck crops, vegetables, taro,
indigenous Hawaiian plants, shrubs, trees, and flowers and landscaping plants
are currently being pursued on former sugarcane lands and in the valleys
throughout the region. Aquaculture uses have also been developed in outlying
areas near Kahuku and in rural areas and valleys within Malaekahana, Punalu‘u
and Ka‘a‘awa. These agricultural activities contribute significantly to the
diversified economic base for the Ko‘olau Loa region and provide area residents
with local employment and economic development opportunities that foster a
connection with the land. The Punalu‘u Ahupua‘a Plan (Kamehameha Schools 2009),
which encompasses all of the 3,600 acres in the ahupua‘a of Punalu‘u under the
ownership of Kamehameha Schools, portrays Punalu‘u as a major agricultural
ahupua‘a within Ko‘olau Loa centered around traditional Hawaiian agricultural
and cultural practices and environmental stewardship.
In 2006, the James Campbell Estate sold nearly 2,000 acres of largely
agricultural land north of Kahuku to various private interests. With new
landowners considering development alternatives that provide greater economic
returns than agriculture ventures, agricultural lands have become increasingly
vulnerable to higher-value, non-agricultural development pressures. As land
ownership has changed, the conditions that have historically supported the
continuation of small farmers in Ko‘olau Loa have also changed, such that small
farming operations that rely on agricultural leases are finding it difficult to
secure long-term leases. The long-term viability of the agricultural industry
in Ko‘olau Loa requires appropriate incentives that can ensure the long-term
availability and use of agricultural lands and minimize the economic barriers
that are impeding the industry’s continued growth.
Under the State Constitution, the State is to identify important agricultural
lands (IAL). Once identified, these lands may not be rezoned except under a
“super majority” vote. In 2005, Act 183 was adopted to address this mandate. It
established a two-step process: first, incentives to assure the long term use
and protection of IAL are to be established, and second, with adequate state
funding, the counties would prepare maps identifying IAL lands to be adopted by
the State Land Use Commission. In 2008, Act 233 adopted the incentive program.
The Department of Planning and Permitting began the mapping process in early
2012, resulting in the Honolulu City Council adopting Resolution 18-233, CD1,
FD1, on June 5, 2019. Resolution 18-233, CD1, FD1, recommended the designation
of certain lands on O‘ahu as IAL as required in Article XI, Section 3 of the
State Constitution, and Chapter 205 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes. Resolution
18-233, CD1, FD1, included maps and a list of tax map key numbers of lands
proposed for IAL designation. The State Land Use Commission will make a final
disposition of O‘ahu’s IAL designation. Lands identified for agricultural
purposes by this Sustainable Communities Plan served as one criteria for
identifying IAL.
3.2.1   POLICIES
The following policies relate to the agricultural areas designated in the
Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan:
   •   Preserve the availability and crop production potential of lands
designated as Agriculture in the Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan.
   •   Protect and preserve agricultural lands from conversion to uses that are
primarily residential, industrial, or commercial in purpose.
   •   Promote and support the long-term economic viability of the agriculture
industry.
   •   Encourage the diversification of agriculture-related enterprises for the
continued production of truck-crops, vegetables, flowers and landscaping
plants, aquaculture and ranching activities.
   •   Ensure that agriculture is the primary use of agricultural lands.
Prohibit the improper use of agricultural lands, including the development or
subdivision of agricultural designated and zoned lands for residential and
other non-agricultural uses, unless accessory to agricultural use with a direct
connection between those activities and the maintenance of agricultural uses on
the same or nearby properties.
   •   Recognize the function of agricultural areas as an important part of the
region’s natural drainage system. Cultivation activities or physical
improvements in agricultural areas should not adversely modify critical natural
drainage ways.
   •   Encourage landowners to offer affordable long-term leases to farmers.
   •   Protect coastal, riparian and wetland habitats from environmental
impacts such as soil erosion, siltation, pesticide and fertilizer runoff, and
other nonpoint source contaminants that flow from agricultural lands.
3.2.2   GUIDELINES
Guidelines relating to agricultural areas are:
   •   Discourage subdivision of Agriculture designated and zoned lands for
residential uses.
   •   Cluster agricultural subdivisions that include farm dwellings to avoid
the inefficient use of more productive agricultural lands and to reduce
infrastructure costs.
   •   Maintain adequate buffers between agricultural lands and new residential
development, with consideration given to prevailing winds and the noise or air-
borne emissions associated with the type of agricultural operation. Allow for
appropriate economic uses of buffer zones and if the buffer zone must remain
vacant, provide for it to be assessed at a lower property tax rate than
productive agricultural land.
   •   Design and locate buildings and other facilities that are accessory to
an agricultural operation in a way that minimizes the impact on nearby
community and residential areas, and the road system.
   •   Enforce permitted uses on agricultural lands to ensure that the use is
contributing to meaningful and credible agricultural production on the same or
nearby properties.
   •   Allow facilities necessary to support intensive cultivation of arable
agricultural lands to be located in agricultural areas.
   •   Allow recreational or educational programs or other activities which
provide supplemental income necessary to sustain the primary agricultural
activity, as long as they are compatible with the character of the rural
agricultural area and are accessory to the primary agricultural use of the
site.
   •   Use best management practices and conservation procedures to reduce soil
erosion, siltation, and nonpoint source runoff.
   •   Expand the use of alternative and renewable water resources for
agricultural use, as appropriate.
   •   Support conservation initiatives of the Windward O‘ahu Soil and Water
Conservation District and encourage farmers to apply for, maintain and
implement conservation plans.
   •   Establish economic and tax incentives to provide for long-term
agricultural leases.
   •   Identify and protect Important Agricultural Lands in accordance with Act
183 (2005).
   •   Encourage governmental agencies and landowners to upgrade and maintain
adequate agricultural infrastructure networks, including roadways and
irrigation systems.
3.2.3   RELATION TO OPEN SPACE AND LAND USE MAPS
The Open Space and Land Use Maps in Appendix A depict agricultural lands
outside the Community Growth Boundary. However, there are also pockets of
agricultural lands within the boundary which should be protected and maintained
for agricultural purposes or open space values.
3.3   PARKS AND RECREATION
Ko‘olau Loa has an abundance of natural and scenic resources that provide a
variety of outdoor recreational opportunities, although the region lacks a
sufficient supply of community-based parks and play fields. The City and County
of Honolulu Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR) and the DLNR, Division of
State Parks maintain control of a number of parks and recreational facilities.
In addition, there are several golf courses at Kahuku and the Turtle Bay
Resort. The location of parks and recreation areas in Ko‘olau Loa are shown in
Exhibit 3-1.
Adequate parks and recreation areas are highly valued by area residents, as
opportunities to enjoy the outdoors and participate in recreational and
sporting activities are an essential component of the quality lifestyle that
residents desire. Parks and recreation areas in Ko‘olau Loa are popular,
highly-utilized resources used by local residents and residents living
elsewhere on O‘ahu, as well as tourists. In addition to the existing inventory
of community-based parks and playing fields being insufficient for the region’s
population, residents object to the poor condition of existing park facilities
and the lack of restroom facilities at various parks. It is important that park
facilities are adequately maintained and operated, that they are sufficient to
meet current park standards and the unique demands of the community, and that
any future development include adequate park capacity to accommodate current
and future demands. Private landowners and community organizations in the area
have expressed interest in providing land for park use or funding for park
development at a to-be-determined location in north Lā‘ie.
City and County Parks. The DPR’s Standards and Design Precepts for Future Park
Development (December 2004) is the long-range plan for park facilities on
O‘ahu. Parks are classified according to two basic categories: “island-based
parks” and “community-based parks.” Island-based parks serve the needs of the
island-wide population, and typically attract people from beyond the
neighborhood or district where the park is located. Community-based parks serve
more localized populations and provide passive and active recreational
facilities for residents of a specific community. Such parks also serve as
community-gathering places, and their location and design often form an
important part of a community’s identity.
DPR’s classification of island-wide parks include regional parks, beach/
shoreline parks, beach/shoreline rights-of-way, nature parks/reserves,
botanical gardens, golf courses, and zoological parks. DPR’s standard for
island-wide parks is 25 acres per 1,000 defacto population. The size of the
park and the facilities to be provided are based on the character of the site,
intended use, and availability.
Existing DPR island-wide parks in Ko‘olau Loa are identified in
Table 3-2. There are eight public improved beach and shoreline parks and
several public beach rights-of-way scattered along the coastline in Ko‘olau
Loa. There is also one privately-owned beach park in Lā‘ie (Hukilau Beach Park)
that provides an additional 8.4 acres of valuable recreational space. The
privately-owned Hukilau Beach Park is considered to be a safer alternative for
beach-goers than the City-owned Lā‘ie Beach Park, which is a popular
bodyboarding and bodysurfing beach with dangerous shorebreak conditions
unofficially known as “Pounders.” The DPR has no current projects for
additional beach park development in Ko‘olau Loa, although long-term plans
include improvements to extend the shoreline area at Lā‘ie Beach Park, land
acquisition for the expansion of Kaluanui Beach Park, and the development of a
new beach park adjacent to Kahuku Golf Course.
Ko‘olau Loa does not have a regional park, nor are there plans to designate one
within the district. The closest regional parks are at Kualoa (in the Ko‘olau
Poko SCP area) and Hale‘iwa (in the North Shore SCP area).
Table 3-2 City DPR Island-Wide Parks in Ko‘olau Loa
Park Type/Name Acreage
Table 3-2 City DPR Island-Wide Parks in Ko‘olau Loa
Park Type/Name        Acreage
Regional Parks
None                  ---
Beach/Shoreline Parks
Hau‘ula Beach Park  9.1
Ka‘a‘awa Beach Par2.0
Kala‘e‘oio Beach P0.8
Kokololio Beach Park  15.5
Lā‘ie Beach Park   7.4
Maka‘ua Beach Park  0.1
Punalu‘u Beach Park 2.8
Swanzy Beach Park     4.8
Subtotal              42.5
Beach/Shoreline Rights-of-Way
Hau‘ula Beach Remnan0.01
Kaluanui Road         0.66
Kamehameha Highway    0.04
Subtotal              0.71
Nature Parks/Reserves
None                  ---
Botanical Gardens
None                  ---
Total Park Area       43.2
 
Community-based parks are intended to provide for active recreation and consist
of district, community and neighborhood parks, as well as other smaller park
areas (see
Table 3-3). Community-based parks provide courts and playing fields for various
sports and serve a wide array of active sports leagues.
The Ko‘olau Loa Region Park Master Plan (2008) provides an inventory of
existing recreational facilities within the region, and prioritizes physical
improvements to existing facilities and the acquisition for new park spaces.
Ko‘olau Loa contains two community-based park areas totaling approximately 26
acres. These are the 15.9-acre Kahuku District Park (undersized according to
DPR standards) and the 10.4-acre Hau‘ula Community Park located adjacent to the
elementary school (see
Table 3-4 ).
 
TABLE 3-3 TYPES OF CITY DPR COMMUNITY-BASED PARKS
             Minimum Population
Park Type    Size    Service Size Typical Facilities
             (Acres)
District     25      25,000       Playfields, playcourts, passive areas,
                                  gym/recreation complex, swimming pool
Community    10      10,000       Playfields, playcourts, passive areas,
                                  recreation building
Neighborhood 6       5,000        Playfields, playcourts, passive areas,
                                  comfort station
Mini Park    0.25    High Density Benches, picnic tables, children’s play
                     Area         area
 
TABLE 3-4 CITY DPR COMMUNITY-BASED PARKS IN KO‘OLAU LOA
Park Type/Name Acreage
TABLE 3-4 CITY DPR COMMUNITY-BASED PARKS IN KO‘OLAU LOA
Park Type/Name         Acreage
District Parks
Kahuku District Park   15.9
Community Parks
Hau‘ula Community Par10.4 (includes 6.7 acres of wetland)
Neighborhood Parks
None                   ---
Mini Parks
None                   ---
Total Park Area        26.3
 
In evaluating community-based recreational park needs, the DPR uses a standard
of two acres per every 1,000 residents, although this may vary according to
each community’s or region’s situation. Based on DPR’s population standard and
Ko‘olau Loa’s population in 2000, Ko‘olau Loa’s current inventory of community-
based parks (26.3 acres) is less than the 29 acres of park space identified by
DPR’s standard. The current park acreage of 26.3 acres is about three acres
below DPR’s standard of 29 acres; however, when the acreage of current usable
park space is considered, the deficiency is almost 10 acres less than DPR’s
standards (i.e., an estimated 60 percent of the Hau‘ula Community Park area is
unusable due to wetland conditions). Furthermore, given that the five distinct
communities in Ko‘olau Loa are widely spaced along the region’s linear
coastline, the resident population park standard does not consider the physical
separation and distribution of parkland when assessing the adequacy of existing
community-based parks. It is more appropriate to look separately at the needs
of each individual community in rural areas like Ko‘olau Loa.
Application of the community-based park standard (2 acres/1,000 people) to the
2035 population projections for the region indicates a need for 32 acres of
park acreage, which is about 6 acres more than the current inventory of 26.3
acres. The City normally develops community-based parks from lands dedicated to
the City by residential land developers, as per the park dedication standards
of the City’s Subdivision Ordinance (350 square feet of park space per
residential unit for Residential-zoned land, 100 square feet per unit for
Apartment-zoned land). Acquisition of land for a new community-based park would
most likely occur as part of any future residential development.
Golf Courses. There are three golf courses within Ko‘olau Loa, of which two are
privately owned and operated courses associated with the Turtle Bay Resort. The
Kahuku Golf Course, which is operated by the City’s Department of Enterprise
Services, is a nine-hole municipal course located along the coastal shoreline
makai of Kahuku town. The City’s long-term plans include acquiring 60 acres
adjacent to the Kahuku Golf Course and expanding the golf course to 18 holes in
conjunction with flood control measures.
In addition to their recreational value, golf courses are open space and
aesthetic resources that support efficient stormwater management and provide
additional wildlife habitat. Policies and guidelines for golf courses are
presented in Section 3.1.2.6. Development of any new golf courses within the
Ko‘olau Loa region is not desired, except for the possible expansion of the
Kahuku Golf Course if it serves to mitigate the drainage problem that currently
exists there.
State Parks. Ko‘olau Loa also contains four significant and unique State Parks:
Ahupua‘a O Kahana (formerly Kahana Valley State Park) and Kaluanui (Sacred
Falls) State Parks, Malaekahana State Recreation Area and Lā‘ie Point State
Wayside. There are also a number of rights-of-way that provide access to
recreation areas. With the exception of Kaluanui (Sacred Falls) State Park,
which was closed in 1999 due to liability concerns, these State parks offer a
variety of camping, hiking and recreational opportunities, as well as cultural
experiences for residents and visitors alike. Managed by the State DLNR
Division of State Parks, these parks are recognized as important open space and
recreational assets in the Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan (see
Table 3-5). A master plan for Kahana Valley was developed in 1974 and policies
for its implementation are currently in place, followed by the completion of a
study on the restoration of Huilua Fishpond in Kahana Valley. The DLNR is in
the process of completing a master plan for Kaluanui (Sacred Falls) with input
from the community and the Kaluanui Advisory Group.
 
TABLE 3-5 STATE PARKS IN KO‘OLAU LOA
Park Type/Name                                      Acreage
Ahupua‘a O Kahana State Park                      5,256.5
Mālaekahana State Recreation Area                  110.0
Kaluanui (Sacred Falls) State Park – closed in 1991,374.2
Lā‘ie Point State Wayside                        1.4
Total Park Area                                     6,742.1
 
In addition to the parks inventory described above, a 2015 Turtle Bay Resort
conservation easement agreement provides approximately 50 acres of land for
additional City parks at Kawela Bay and at Kahuku Point, and approximately 53
acres at Kawela Bay for State conservation land.
3.3.1   POLICIES
The following policies relate to island-wide parks, community-based parks and
other recreational resources in Ko‘olau Loa:
   •   Maintain, expand and enhance existing park resources and recreational
areas to provide high quality recreational experiences for residents and
visitors. Such improvements should occur in a timely manner. Parks and
recreation areas are a critical component of the region’s abundance of natural
and scenic resources and contribute to the attractiveness and accessibility of
Ko‘olau Loa’s coastline and mauka areas for both residents and visitors.
   •   Ensure that the development of park facilities avoids adverse impacts on
natural resources or processes in the coastal zone or any other environmentally
sensitive area.
   •   Ensure that park facilities, recreational resources and recreational
activities are compatible with surrounding land uses and rural character.
   •   Provide safe and convenient access to parks and recreation areas.
   •   Consider an expansion of the existing Kahuku public golf course to
mitigate the drainage problem that currently exists there.
   •   Develop an integrated system of bikeways to link parks and recreational
areas.
   •   Protect existing recreational resources from overuse and incompatible
uses.
   •   Expand or provide new community-based parks in areas where there is a
lack of sufficient facilities and where recreational needs of residents are not
being adequately met.
   •   Acquire and improve additional coastal lands and shoreline sites to
expand coastal-oriented beach and passive park resources.
   •   Ensure that physical improvements and landscaping features contribute to
the aesthetic, cultural and/or environmental value of these open space
elements.
3.3.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines provide more specific direction for implementing the
policies for the parks and recreation areas discussed above.
   •   Continue coordination efforts between the City DPR and the State
Department of Education (DOE) to co-locate neighborhood or community parks with
elementary or intermediate schools. Facilities should be designed and operated
to achieve efficiencies and reduce duplication in the development and use of
athletic, recreation, meeting and parking facilities, wherever possible, either
by dedication, or upon agreements between the developer, DOE, and DPR. Co-
located parks should be ready for public use upon opening.
   •   Where feasible, site community and neighborhood parks at the center of
neighborhoods to maximize accessibility.
   •   Provide for accessible pathways from surrounding streets to facilitate
pedestrian and bicycle access to parks in master plans for development of new
parks or redevelopment of existing parks.
   •   Link parks and recreational areas with the surrounding community using
connecting roadways, bikeways, walkways and landscape features or architectural
design.
   •   Develop a new community park in Lā‘ie with a community center facility.
   •   Expand the Hau‘ula Community Park to include a multi-purpose
recreational facility.
   •   Provide neighborhood parks in Ka‘a‘awa, Punalu‘u, and Kahuku (Adams
Field) to serve the residential population of these communities.
   •   Expand Kahuku District Park to support the development of a multi-
purpose recreational building and swimming pool complex.
   •   Acquire and/or improve additional shoreline areas for public
recreational uses, including adjacent areas at Kaluanui and Lā‘ie Beach Park.
   •   Encourage continued public access and use of Hukilau Beach Park to
provide beachgoers a safer alternative than other nearby public beaches.
   •   Establish community gardens to expand gardening opportunities for area
residents.
   •   Establish management strategies that minimize overcrowding and prevent
the negative consequences of overuse.
   •   Locate bus stops or loading areas at principal entries and adjacent to
convenient pedestrian access to main activity areas within the park.
   •   Use generous landscaping or other appropriate visual screens to minimize
the visibility of perimeter fencing and maintenance facilities from surrounding
areas.
   •   Provide landscaping along major roadways to serve as linear open space
features and create an inviting environment for walking, jogging and biking.
   •   Incorporate natural features of the site and native landscaping
materials when designing park improvements.
3.3.3   RELATION TO OPEN SPACE AND LAND USE MAPS
The following components of the parks and recreation areas are shown on the
Open Space and Land Use Maps in Appendix A:
   •   Parks. The general location of areas designated as parks are outlined
and colored. The park’s name is labeled, where space allows on the maps.
   •   Golf Courses. The three golf courses in Ko‘olau Loa are shown because of
their recreational value and visual contribution to the landscape.
   •   Shoreline Areas. Shoreline areas with high scenic or wildlife value,
generally along the Kahuku coastline between Mālaekahana and Kahuku Point, are
designated for preservation and are located outside the Community Growth
Boundary.
3.4   HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
The Ko‘olau Loa region contains several different types of historic and
cultural sites which are representative of its history and are valuable as
historic records and cultural references.
Early periods associated with Native Hawaiian use are represented by physical
remnants of the historic landscape and archaeological sites. In the 1930’s, J.
Gilbert McAllister conducted an archaeological survey of O‘ahu, which is
considered to be the most comprehensive report of the major archaeological
features documented in the region. While McAllister (1933) documented
approximately 57 sites within the region of Ko‘olau Loa, it is likely that many
of these sites may have been destroyed by land altering activities such as
agricultural cultivation and development. The plantation era is also an
important period which made a substantial contribution to and imprint on
Ko‘olau Loa’s history. Reminders of that period, such as the Kahuku Sugar Mill
site, are significant and valuable as records of the past.
There are literally hundreds of archaeological features known to exist in
Ko‘olau Loa, which attests to the richness of the region’s cultural heritage.
There are also numerous legends and historical accounts from Ko‘olau Loa’s past
which are important in Native Hawaiian culture.
Table 3-6 presents a sample of well-known cultural resources found in the
Ko‘olau Loa region. Although not listed in the table, there are other cultural
resources throughout Ko‘olau Loa, including undisturbed archaeological sites
deep within the region’s valleys and cultural resources listed on the National
and State Registers of Historic Places. More recent field studies of site-
specific development areas have identified additional archaeological sites,
which are recorded with the State Department of Land and Natural Resources,
Historic Preservation Division.
Table 3-6: Cultural and Pre-Contact Sites in Ko‘olau Loa
Feature Location Reference
Table 3-6: Cultural and Pre-Contact Sites in Ko‘olau Loa
Feature             Location     Reference
Waikane stone       Kawela       McAllister Site 259
Punamanō water holeKahuku Point McAllister Site 261
Kalaewila heiau     Kahuku Point McAllister Site 266
Wai‘āpuka pool   Mālaekahana McAllister Site 275
Paeo Fishpond       Lā‘ie     McAllister Site 277
Nioi heiau          Lā‘ie     McAllister Site 281
Laniloa Point       Lā‘ie     McAllister Site 284
Kaliuwa‘a Valley  Kaluanui     McAllister Site 290
Maka heiau          Punalu‘u   McAllister Site 291
Huilua fishpond     Kahana       McAllister Site 301
Source: McAllister, J. Gilbert, Archaeology of O‘ahu 1933
 
Comprehensive listings of recorded archaeological sites can be found in the
following references. It is probable that there are many other sites that have
not been discovered.
   •   J. Gilbert McAllister, Archaeology of O‘ahu (1933)
   •   E.P. Sterling and C. C. Summers, Sites of O‘ahu (1978)
   •   Fornander & Thrum, Ancient O‘ahu
   •   State Burial Sites Program Inventory/O‘ahu Burial Council
   •   State Historic Preservation Division Records
The abundance of kuleana lands remaining in Ko‘olau Loa is further evidence of
the use of the land by Native Hawaiians and the region’s cultural value. By
definition, kuleana lands are the fee simple parcels that were awarded to
native tenants by the Hawaiian Kingdom under the Kuleana Act of 1850. Intended
to allow Native Hawaiians to continue their traditional subsistence lifestyles,
kuleana awards were limited to lands used for subsistence agriculture, plus
small houselots distinct from the cultivated lands. For a variety of reasons –
including social, political and economic stresses and environmental conditions
– many of the original kuleana awards have been lost. Today, kuleana lands that
have endured are held in high regard, and are often significant as “family
lands” where families have lived for many generations. For families that have
been able to hold onto their kuleana, such lands often hold deep cultural and
historic value, and symbolize an individual’s connection to the land and
ancestral right to belong to a certain place.
Kuleana landowners are faced with a number of challenges that affect their
ability to maintain their kuleana. Such challenges include: (1) the ability to
afford property taxes (which have steadily increased as a result of development
in adjacent areas); (2) developing consensus among the many heirs that may hold
interest in the property (typical for land passed from one generation to the
next); and (3) protecting their kuleana rights to use their property (including
rights of access, rights for agricultural and residential uses, traditional
gathering rights and water rights).
3.4.1   POLICIES
The following policies relate to the preservation of historic and cultural
resources in Ko‘olau Loa.
   •   Encourage all activities within the Ko‘olau Loa area to respect
traditional and customary rights of Native Hawaiian practitioners in respective
ahupua‘a.
   •   Acknowledge the cultural and historic significance of kuleana lands.
   •   Integrate physical references that emphasize Ko‘olau Loa’s history and
cultural roots into the developed landscape.
   •   Protect existing visual landmarks and support the creation of new,
culturally appropriate landmarks at ahupua‘a boundaries.
   •   Preserve and protect, and if appropriate, restore historic and cultural
resources associated with Native Hawaiian and pre-contact periods.
   •   Preserve and protect significant post-contact cultural and historic
features, such as those established during the plantation era.
   •   Apply appropriate management policies and practices in the treatment of
historic and cultural resources. Such practices may range from total
preservation to integration with contemporary uses.
   •   Retain, wherever possible, significant vistas associated with
archaeological features and culturally sensitive areas.
3.4.2   GUIDELINES
The treatment of a particular historic or cultural site should depend upon its
characteristics and historic value. Appropriate treatments range from direct
physical access and/or use of a site to limited visual contact. In some cases,
adaptive reuse may be the only feasible way to preserve a site. In other cases,
however, it may be highly advisable to restrict access to protect the physical
integrity or sacred value of the site. The following guidelines should be used
to determine appropriate treatment for cultural and archaeological sites.
   •   Implement in situ preservation and appropriate protection measures for
sites that have high preservation value because of their good condition or
unique, historic, cultural and archaeological features, and for which the State
Historic Preservation Officer has recommended such treatment in conjunction
with the community.
   •   Consider the particular qualities of a site and its relationship to its
physical surroundings when determining the appropriate treatment for a site.
Determine the following on a site-by-site basis in consultation with the State
Historic Preservation Officer, O‘ahu Island Burial Council, local Hawaiian
cultural organizations, the owner of the land on which the site is located, and
the community:
      -   appropriate preservation methods;
      -   appropriate delineation of site boundaries and setbacks;
      -   appropriate restrictions on uses and development of adjacent lands;
and
      -   the appropriateness of public access and interpretation.
   •   Include sight lines and view planes that are significant to the original
purpose and value of the site in any restrictions placed on adjacent uses and
development.
3.5   RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITIES
The establishment of the Community Growth Boundary is intended to contain
development and keep it from spreading into significant agricultural and
preservation areas. The need for additional housing in Ko‘olau Loa will be met
primarily by the “infill” development of existing vacant lands within each of
the region’s rural communities, and by allowing the limited expansion of
residential areas in Kahuku and Lā‘ie. These areas are contiguous to and in
proximity to existing development and will also accommodate housing needs in
Kahuku related to long-term projected employment growth at Turtle Bay Resort.
In Lā‘ie, 200 units of workforce housing are designated on the Brigham Young
University-Hawaii campus to support its planned expansion and long-term
sustainability.
Vital, contemporary communities oriented toward meeting the needs of their
residents often offer a network of amenities to facilitate and enhance
individual, family, and community life. At their best, they may offer parks and
landscaped public open spaces, churches, community centers, and other places
for social and civic functions, residences or other facilities for persons with
special needs, and safe, pleasant bicycle and pedestrian connections that link
homes and important destinations. While this Plan refrains from prescribing
what the specific ingredients of any given community should be, it takes this
opportunity to cite the need, in each community, for appropriate elements which
aid and enhance the act of living as well as residence.
Table 3-7 presents Ko‘olau Loa housing trends from the 1990 and 2000 U.S.
Census. Between 1990 and 2000, Ko‘olau Loa’s housing inventory increased by
about 50 new homes, accounting for an increase of about 1.2 percent. During
this same period, the resident population in the region increased from 14,263
to 14,546 people and the number of households increased by 104 households,
representing a 2.0 percent population growth rate and a 2.9 percent growth in
the number of households, respectively. In general, the discrepancy between the
number of new housing units constructed between 1990 and 2000 and the
population and household growth experienced during the same period is reflected
in the increased household size reported in 2000.
According to the 2000 Census, Ko‘olau Loa’s housing inventory is comprised of
mostly older homes. Almost 1/4 of the structures are greater than 50 years old,
while slightly more than 50 percent are 30 years old or older. Only 1/4 of the
homes are less than 29 years old. Considering that the majority of the homes
are older homes, a trend towards an increase in the number of home renovation
and/or replacement projects in the near future is expected.
Table 3-7 Ko‘olau Loa Housing Trends: 1990 to 2000
Housing Data Category 1990 2000
Table 3-7 Ko‘olau Loa Housing Trends: 1990 to 2000
Housing Data Category 1990          2000
Total Housing Units   4,422         4,473
Occupied Units        3,578 (80.9%) 3,682 (82.3%)
Owner-occupied Units  1,657 (37.5%) 1,801 (40.3%)
Renter-occupied Units 1,921 (43.4%) 1,881 (42.1%)
Vacant Units          844 (19.1%)   791 (17.7%)
Homeownership Rate    46.3%         48.9%
Number of Households  3,578         3,682
Household Size        3.69          3.75
 
The median price of a single-family home sold on O‘ahu in 2000 was $295,000 and
the median condominium price was $125,000. (The average price for a single-
family home and condominium was $406,331 and $165,674, respectively.) In 2000,
the median family income for the island of O‘ahu was $60,142, which is about
$10,000 over the median family income in Ko‘olau Loa ($49,826). Between 2000
and 2005, the median sales price of a single-family home on O‘ahu increased 100
percent to $590,000 and the median condominium price increased 115 percent to
$269,000. (The average price for a single-family home and condominium was
$744,174 and $320,003, respectively.) Despite fluctuations in the real estate
market, home prices in Ko‘olau Loa have continued to increase, as the median
price of a single-family home sold on O‘ahu’s windward coast during the first
quarter of 2018 was $812,000 and the median condominium price was $251,900. In
contrast, an “affordable” single-family home for a family of four with an
annual income of $87,000 (80 percent of O‘ahu’s median income) would be priced
at $735,000, assuming a 10 percent down payment and financing at 4.5 percent.
There is a need for housing priced to meet the affordability of area residents.
Inflated real estate values and the lack of affordable housing have made it
difficult for many Ko‘olau Loa residents to purchase a home. In many cases,
families that are unable to purchase homes are moving from the area or
resorting to multi-generational living arrangements – either living in crowded
situations or adding rooms to existing homes to accommodate extended families –
as a way to afford the cost of housing. The trend towards larger, multi-
generational households is changing the appearance and composition of Ko‘olau
Loa’s rural neighborhoods. In many areas, yards appear to be getting smaller as
additional square footage is added to homes, and, as the number of people
living within a neighborhood increases, there is additional traffic, more cars
parked on public streets, and greater demand for infrastructure and public
services.
Alternative development layouts that allow for higher densities, along with
financing programs and alternative tenure strategies (e.g., long-term lease
options) that support home ownership, are needed to address the need for
affordable and appropriately-priced housing. The establishment of rural
development standards could also benefit affordable housing by lessening the
infrastructure costs associated with development. While single-family homes
have been the dominant housing type in the region, more high-density forms such
as attached multi-family housing and smaller lot sizes, including rental units
should be encouraged, as long as the integrity of existing neighborhoods and
the rural character is not altered.
While development of moderate-sized vacant parcels may be readily viable and
the effects may be more immediately apparent than infill development of small
parcels and single lots, physical changes brought about by incremental
intensification in existing built-up neighborhoods through infill and home
expansions are generally slower and more subtle. Effective residential lot and
subdivision design and development standards which identify standards such as
building heights, lot coverage, paving width of streets, and landscaping
requirements are needed to ensure that the long-term cumulative impact of the
gradual transformation of small parcels and single lots does not adversely
affect the character of existing neighborhoods.
3.5.1   POLICIES
3.5.1.1   Existing and New Residential Communities
The following policies are applicable to existing and new residential
communities:
   •   Respect and help to preserve the natural setting of the Ko‘olau Loa
region by requiring development in residential areas to be sensitive to
physical constraints and have minimal impact on the area’s rural character.
   •   Maintain sufficient inventory of land within the Community Growth
Boundary to accommodate existing and future housing needs of residents within
the Ko‘olau Loa area by supporting limited expansion of residential areas in
Kahuku and Lā‘ie to meet existing pent-up demand and provide land for
affordable work force housing.
   •   Increase housing affordability to Ko‘olau Loa residents.
   •   Maintain the existing inventory of residential land for the communities
of Ka‘a‘awa, Hau‘ula and Punalu‘u. Future residential needs in these
communities will be met through infill residential development on appropriately
zoned vacant lots within existing neighborhoods. No new housing areas are
designated in these areas.
   •   Adopt zoning, subdivision and related project design regulations which
foster a rural character in new residential developments and improvements to
existing residential areas.
   •   Encourage and support the development of affordable housing in the
region in order to address existing pent-up demand for housing and overcrowded
housing conditions.
3.5.2   GUIDELINES
This Plan recognizes three categories of residential development: Rural, Rural
Residential and Low Density Apartment.
Table 3-8 provides an overview of the density and height guidelines for
existing and planned residential developments.
 
Table 3-8 Density and Height Guidelines by Residential Category
Residential Category  Density (Housing Units) Building Height
Rural                 1 unit per acre         Not over two stories (25 feet
                                              maximum)
                                              Not over two-stories, but may
Rural Residential     5-12 units per acre     vary according to required flood
                                              elevation, slopes, and roof form.
                                              Generally not over four stories
                                              (60 feet maximum for gable or
Low-Density Apartment 12-30 units per acre    similar roof format), but may
                                              vary according to required flood
                                              elevation, slope, protection of
                                              natural features and roof form.
 
Except for pockets of existing apartments in Punalu‘u and Turtle Bay,
additional apartments for faculty, staff, and student housing in Brigham Young
University-Hawai‘i campus, and a limited number of additional dwellings at
north Lā‘ie, the majority of the housing in Ko‘olau Loa consists of single-
family homes in rural residential areas. It is important that residential areas
exhibit the physical characteristics of a rural context, including:
   •   Smaller building footprints, less lot coverage, and greater open space
than encountered in more urbanized areas;
   •   Alternative development patterns such as clustering and traditional
compact layouts to preserve open space and minimize infrastructure demands;
   •   Low-rise structures, generally not exceeding two stories;
   •   Relatively narrow roadway widths;
   •   Minimal amount of paved driveway surfaces;
   •   Landscaping and design alternatives that reduce impervious surfaces,
such as grassed swales rather than curbs and gutters; and
   •   Building, landscaping, and fencing design elements that impart an
informal, open feeling.
The City should utilize more flexible and appropriate subdivision standards for
roads and utilities in rural residential subdivisions. For example, current
City subdivision rules and regulations require curb/gutter/sidewalk for most
new subdivisions. These standards are essentially urban or suburban standards,
but may not be practical for most “Country” subdivisions with one-acre lots or
for residential subdivisions with R-20 or R-10 zoning located in rural areas.
More appropriate standards for rural residential subdivisions that do not
require urban style “curb/gutter/sidewalk” and underground drain lines are
desired by the community for aesthetic and economic reasons, and should be
studied. These rural type standards could result in less cost for the
development of these subdivisions, and thus more affordable lot prices for
local families. The simpler standards would also help to maintain the rural
quality of Ko‘olau Loa’s neighborhoods and residential areas.
3.5.2.1   Rural
This category consists of single-family homes on relatively large lots (e.g.,
lots of one acre or more). Development is low density and generally consists of
a single-family home with ancillary structures if necessary, low site coverage,
and a predominance of landscaped open space. Rural areas are intended to be
transitional areas between the denser, developed rural residential areas and
agricultural uses, and are located on existing Country-zoned lands between
Lā‘ie and Ka‘a‘awa. Agricultural activities are encouraged in rural areas.
Single-family homes surrounded by open landscapes such as fields or tree cover,
and largely unobstructed views and rural roadways are the principal visual
qualities of these areas. No intensification in the use of existing Rural areas
nor creation of new Rural areas is intended. Except for the subdivision of
existing Country-zoned lots into conforming lots, new Country-zoned lots should
not be allowed.
Rural areas should adhere to the following guidelines:
   •   Use rural development standards to establish building height limits and
lot coverages, roadway and setback widths, infrastructure requirements, and
architectural design guidelines.
   •   Encourage alternative development layouts that promote residential
clustering and open space preservation.
   •   Ensure compatibility between uses in rural areas and adjacent
agricultural lands, natural resources, views and cultural features.
Two variants of the Rural category are recognized by this plan:
   •   Inside the Community Growth Boundary, Rural areas may be developed as
large-lot residential uses.
   •   Outside the Community Growth Boundary, Rural areas should be used
primarily for agricultural uses.
3.5.2.2   Rural Residential
This category is intended to describe the bulk of existing and new residential
developments located within the Community Growth Boundary. Rural residential
areas are intended to consist of single-family homes in “country” settings, as
well as higher densities (e.g., smaller lot sizes, multi-family homes) around
Kahuku and Lā‘ie. Typical residential lot sizes range from just less than one
acre to about 3,500 square feet. Alternate development forms, such as cluster
or planned development housing approaches which provide development flexibility
for greater amounts of open space and common area facilities, the use of
reduced development standards which may lower development costs, or smaller lot
sizes and higher densities associated with affordable housing may also be used.
New Rural Residential development may occur through infill development on
existing residential-zoned parcels, or in areas designated for residential
development in Kahuku and Lā‘ie. Areas designated for future residential
development are intended to respond to existing housing needs of the region’s
residents, and also accommodate housing needs related to long-term employment
growth projected for the region. The intent of directing residential
development to these areas is not to promote larger lots, which may make them
unaffordable to area residents or may encourage sprawl, but to allow for more
site flexibility, integration of open space and neighborhood parks, and a joint
infrastructure system for cost efficiency.
The intent of the Rural Residential designation is to distinguish rural from
urban residential development. It is anticipated that Rural Residential will
carry development standards for roadways, building envelope, and other features
that will convey rural rather than urban character. New Rural Residential areas
in Ko‘olau Loa are intended to support densities ranging from five to 12 units
per acre or up to 14 units for cluster and planned development housing
approaches, so that they can remain affordable and at the same time reflect
rural character. They should adhere to the following guidelines:
   •   Use rural development standards to determine appropriate scale and
character, limit building heights and lot coverages, reduce current
requirements for the paving width of residential streets and infrastructure
systems, and encourage appropriate architectural design and ample native,
natural landscaping forms.
   •   Housing development generally should not be sited on areas where the
slope exceeds 20 percent. Where this does occur, housing should be developed to
avoid adverse visual impacts, potential slope stability problems and increased
runoff. Soils engineering and view studies may be necessary to determine the
appropriate density and site design for such locations.
   •   Building scale, roof form, and the quality of materials for infill and
new development, as well as future modifications to existing homes, should be
generally compatible with the predominant form and character of existing homes
on adjacent properties and with the neighborhood as a whole. Building heights
generally should not exceed two stories, but may vary according to required
flood elevation, protection of natural features, slope, and roof form.
Modification of zoning standards for residential development, such as
provisions for building scale or spacing, roadway widths, or sidewalks, and/or
changes in existing zoning district categories, may be necessary to promote
rural character.
   •   Sites on level terrain with fewer development constraints may have
overall site densities approaching the higher end of the range for Rural
Residential use. To achieve higher density while providing an attractive living
environment, optional design or rural development standards for clusters and
planned unit developments should be promoted in lieu of conventional
subdivision provisions.
   •   Avoid monotonous rows of garages and driveways along neighborhood street
frontages by employing features such as varied building setbacks and shared
driveways.
   •   Use plantation architectural features such as pitched roofs with varied
forms, exterior colors and finishes, building orientation, floor plans and
architectural details to provide visual interest and individual identity and
accentuate the rural setting.
   •   Support affordable housing initiatives in areas designated for new
housing development.
3.5.2.3   Low Density Apartment
This category consists of predominately two- to four-story townhouse complexes,
stacked flats, or low-rise apartment buildings with a maximum height of 60
feet. Densities may be in the range of 12 to 30 dwelling units per acre.
Except for an additional low-density apartment-zoned district at north Lā‘ie
and additional apartments on the Brigham Young University-Hawai‘i campus to
accommodate the housing needs of its planned expansion, no new Low Density
Apartment areas are recommended.
Low Density Apartment development should adhere to the following guidelines:
   •   Limit building heights to four stories with a maximum height of 60 feet,
including roof form, but may vary according to the required flood elevation,
steep slope of the site, or the desire to protect important natural features.
Gabled or similar roof forms should be used to reflect a primarily rural
residential design character.
   •   Employ building form and orientation, location of entries and landscape
screening, etc., to maintain the existing residential scale and provide greater
privacy and individual identity for housing units.
   •   Ensure compatibility of building scale, roof form and the quality of
materials with those of adjacent low-density residential areas.
   •   Apartment buildings at north Lā‘ie should be earth-tone in color and
should be screened from views along Kamehameha Highway.
3.5.2.4   Special Needs Housing
This Plan does not indicate specific housing or building types for special
needs housing. Rather, the Plan refers to facilities designed for certain
segments of the population with special living requirements. Categories of
special needs groups include low- and moderate-income sectors including long-
term rental housing and housing for the homeless, senior citizens, disabled
people, and people with health problems or individuals who need other forms of
special care. Often such housing includes special features and accessory
support services, such as congregate dining and social rooms; laundry,
housekeeping and personal assistance services; shuttle bus services (both
public and private) for residents; and skilled nursing beds or physical therapy
clinics. Temporary shelters and transitional housing for homeless and low-
income populations, permanent housing for persons requiring assistance to live
independently, and emergency safe havens are types of facilities that provide
special needs housing. There are several special needs housing facilities in
Ko‘olau Loa, such as the Kahuku Elderly Housing Project and the Ponds at
Punalu‘u in Hau‘ula.
Special needs housing development should adhere to the following guidelines:
   •   In general, apply Low Density Apartment building height and density
guidelines to special needs housing sites, as described in Section 3.5.2.3.
   •   Special needs housing, as an exception to standard density situations,
may have densities up to 30 units per acre if it consists primarily of smaller
dwelling units with residential scale and character. Special needs housing may
have congregate living facilities, and is for individuals who, for the most
part, do not rely on or require personal automobiles for travel.
   •   Whenever possible, locate special needs housing close to public transit,
community services and commercial activities.
   •   Require community and agency review of permits for special needs housing
proposals to maintain flexibility in the location of special needs housing and
promote flexible site design that preserves natural features or scenic
elements.
   •   Allow heights above 40 feet, subject to community and agency review,
only when warranted due to the required flood elevation, steep slope of the
site, or the desire to protect important natural features. Gabled or similar
roof forms should be used to reflect a primarily rural residential design
character.
   •   Ensure compatibility of building scale, roof form, and materials with
adjacent residential uses.
3.5.3   RELATION TO LAND USE MAP
Conceptual locations for Rural Residential areas are shown on the Ko‘olau Loa
Land Use Map in Appendix A, while the other residential areas are not
designated on the Land Use Map.
   •   Rural. Rural areas are recognized where they occur as a pre-existing
use, generally consistent with the Country zoning district. No new areas are
planned.
   •   Rural Residential. Areas with this designation should be zoned as
Residential subject to appropriate siting considerations, and the policies and
guidelines provided in Sections 3.5.1 and 3.5.2.
   •   Low Density Apartment. Apartment areas are not shown on the Land Use
Map, but are noted in Section 3.5.2.3 Low Density Apartment.
   •   Special Needs Housing. This land use is not specifically designated on
the Land Use Map, but it is allowed in residential areas subject to project-by-
project review for compatibility with surrounding uses.
Non-residential uses that are not specifically designated on the Land Use Map,
but are allowed in all residential areas include elementary schools, parks,
churches, community centers, child care centers, and public facilities and
utilities serving the area. It should be noted that some of these uses require
project review and/or public hearings and issuance of permits before they can
be developed in residential and rural areas.
3.6   COMMERCIAL AREAS
Commercial establishments in Ko‘olau Loa range in type from small, individual
stores along Kamehameha Highway to a grouping of many shops and other
commercial enterprises clustered together to form a shopping area. These types
are:
   •   Country Town
   •   Rural Regional Commercial Center
   •   Rural Community Commercial Center
   •   Country Stores
Brief descriptions of each type follow:
   •   Country Town. The country town generally distinguishes itself from its
larger, often new urban counterparts by its compactness, small scale and
mixture of different land uses, located in close proximity to each other. The
land use mixture may include retail and office commercial, dining
establishments, compatible service business and light industry activity, and
some residential uses. Buildings are usually one to two stories in height and
built to the street property line. Commercial activity is along street frontage
in typically “Main Street” settings. Country towns often lend identity to
adjacent rural communities.
      The commercial district at the north end of Kahuku Village is designated
as a Country Town. While current uses are primarily retail shops and
restaurants, the intent is to allow commercial, low impact industrial (crafts
manufacturing, light assembly, etc.), and residential uses in a compatible mix
that is characteristic of many plantation or neighbor island rural towns. The
arrangement of uses and the style and character of building designs would be
reminiscent of Kahuku’s plantation heritage.
   •   Rural Regional Commercial Center. The Rural Regional Commercial Center
is a consolidated cluster of commercial retail, offices, and dining
establishments that serve both the immediate and nearby communities, with the
primary intent of providing services within the region so that residents do not
have to travel outside Ko‘olau Loa. These establishments may be located on
adjacent, individual parcels or on a single, consolidated parcel. It is located
along a major roadway to enable convenient access without intrusion into
residential communities. Buildings are generally low-profile and small in
appearance, may include taller, vertical accents, and are generally compatible
with the scale of adjacent residential areas in locations where such
adjacencies exist. Its service area may be regional or sub-regional. Lā‘ie
Shopping Center is an example of this type of center.
   •   Characteristics which distinguish this type of commercial establishment
from urban or urban fringe counterparts include physical characteristics and
type of tenancy. Rural Regional Commercial Centers maintain a rural, small-
scale character. Buildings are visually organized, designed, or “broken up”
into pieces that approximate or relate to the scale of residential buildings.
They also feature elements that are “friendly” to someone walking. They feature
covered walkways, open ground-floor storefronts, pathways that offer adequate
resting and gathering, as well as walking space, and landscaping to shelter
people from the elements and accentuate the Center’s best features. While
supermarkets are encouraged, “Big Box” retail is not.
      The business center in the middle of Lā‘ie is designated as a Rural
Regional Commercial Center. It provides a mix of retail shopping, restaurant,
personal service, entertainment and professional office uses that serve a
regional consumer base which includes local residents, residents from
neighboring communities and, to a limited extent, tourists. It is operated as a
unit with shared parking and center management.
   •   Rural Community Commercial Center. The rural community commercial center
is a small cluster of commercial and service businesses which service primarily
the immediate community, providing a mix of limited convenience retail shopping
and service uses that meet the day-today needs of residents living in the
nearby neighborhoods. Since most are located along highways, these centers also
attract visitors and residents from outside the immediate community.
      This type of center typically consists of a cluster of establishments on
individual land parcels or a shop consolidated into one or a group of buildings
on a single parcel. Structures are generally low-profile (one to two stories)
and small in scale. The shopping center at Hau‘ula located at a prominent site
at the north or Lā‘ie end of the town, as well as the commercial area in
Ka‘a‘awa located along Kamehameha Highway across from Swanzy Beach Park are
designated as Rural Community Commercial Centers.
   •   Country Stores. This category generally refers to isolated, free-
standing retail or eating establishments located on commercially-zoned lands or
which exist as non-conforming uses. Its purpose is to recognize such
establishments and to provide guidance for renovation or reconstruction. It is
not intended to provide for new country stores.
      Country stores are generally small in scale and low in intensity of uses,
often assuming residential size and character. Their character generally
approximates that of old neighborhood grocery stores. These businesses serve a
variety of purposes, including convenience retail, shops selling art and crafts
and other specialty items, and restaurants. Most cater almost exclusively to
the needs of area residents, but some such as the restaurants and art studios
depend heavily on the business of island residents and visitors who are
traveling through the area.
3.6.1   POLICIES
3.6.1.1   Kahuku Country Town
   •   Maintain a plantation town character that reflects the building forms
and exterior appearance of traditional commercial and mixed-use buildings in
Hawai‘i’s plantation communities. The mill theme should continue to be a
dominant element for the town.
   •   Allow limited expansion to create sufficient critical and diversified
mass for the center’s continued viability to meet local and visitor shopping
needs.
   •   Allow for compatible mixtures of commercial, industrial and residential
uses within the Country Town. Emphasize commercial uses along the Kamehameha
Highway frontage.
   •   Emphasize commercial and related uses conducive to pedestrian activity
at the street level along main street frontages. Encourage adequate
landscaping, and where possible and appropriate, bikeway and public
transportation provisions to improve public thoroughfares through these
locations.
3.6.1.2   Lā‘ie Rural Regional Commercial Center
   •   Introduce a rural architectural character which incorporates appropriate
themes and building forms reflective of the diverse heritage of Lā‘ie’s
residents.
   •   Provide for a modest expansion of the district in order to meet future
resident and visitor needs associated with Lā‘ie’s anticipated long-term
housing and employment growth, and the expansion of visitor attractions. Given
its size, and potential mix of uses, Lā‘ie’s center has potential as a focal
point for the region’s shopping and services, and expansion is appropriate in
order to better serve adjoining communities as well as local residents.
   •   Limit uses primarily to commercial retail, business service
establishments, professional offices and public uses such as a satellite city
hall, library, post office, or other similar facilities, that provide services
to Lā‘ie and surrounding communities.
3.6.1.3   Hau‘ula and Ka‘a‘awa Rural Community Commercial Centers
   •   Maintain low-rise profile and small building scale, and emphasize rural
character in the maintenance, renovation, or redevelopment of the center or
site. Such actions or those which involve changes in the tenant mix to improve
the range and quality of local shopping and service uses should be oriented
toward maintaining the center’s primarily community-oriented role.
   •   Emphasize a mix of retail and service uses which meet the day-to-day
shopping needs of area residents.
3.6.1.4   Country Stores
   •   Recognize the contribution that existing country store-type
establishments make to Ko‘olau Loa’s unique rural character by allowing them to
remain and, where necessary, be renovated or reconstructed in accordance with
appropriate design criteria.
   •   In general, limit these establishments to their existing locations and
prohibit expansion that would alter their country store character or create
commercial strips along Kamehameha Highway. New locations for country stores
are not supported.
3.6.2   GUIDELINES
3.6.2.1   All Commercial Areas
   •   Architectural Style
      -   Utilize building forms and details which reflect the region’s rural
character and incorporate the style and any desirable distinctive features of
buildings in the community in which they are located.
      -   Encourage the use of building façades, sloped roofs, and breaks in
the roof line to reduce the apparent scale of large roof plates in commercial
buildings with multiple storefronts.
      -   Avoid blank façades on portions of buildings visible from the street.
Provide articulation through the use of building materials, finishes and
fenestration.
      -   Reflect a more residential scale and character in the portions of
commercial buildings that are adjacent to or readily visible from residential
areas.
   •   Building Scale and Massing
      -   Limit commercial buildings to a maximum 50,000 square feet of retail
space, and a 40- foot height limit, including roof form. In general, buildings
should maintain a low-rise, rural scale.
      -   Avoid the use of large, continuous buildings in new commercial
developments. Commercial buildings adjacent to residential areas should be
designed to recognize the balance between commercial needs and residential
concerns. In general, the physical composition of height, size, and massing of
commercial buildings in these locations should be compatible with adjacent
residential development.
   •   Site Design and Access
      -   Provide for the general visibility from Kamehameha Highway of
buildings within commercial centers, and employ adequate and appropriately
designed signage at entries.
      -   Provide access to parking and loading areas primarily from Kamehameha
Highway for the shopping areas in Kahuku and Lā‘ie, and exclusively for the
Rural Community Commercial Centers (Hau‘ula and Ka‘a‘awa) and country store
establishments that front the highway. Alternative access should be considered
when appropriate and feasible.
      -   Employ site design practices and provide facilities which promote
pedestrian, bicycle and public transit access.
      -   Improve bus stops in front of commercial centers, including pull-out
bus stop lanes and shelters for waiting passengers.
      -   Provide racks for bicycle parking at all commercial centers and
locate them where they are secure and visible from entry points or other heavy
circulation areas.
   •   Economic Viability
      -   Emphasize that existing commercial space should be occupied before
the development of new commercial properties is considered.
      -   Use existing commercial space and the planned future expansion of the
existing Lā‘ie rural regional commercial center to accommodate future
commercial needs.
   •   Visual Screening, Lighting and Signage
      -   Plant a landscape screen consisting of trees and hedges along streets
fronting parking lots.
      -   Provide shade trees throughout parking lots.
      -   Visually screen service areas from public and residential areas.
      -   Require indirect illumination for signage visible from residential
areas.
3.6.2.2   Kahuku Country Town
   •   Architectural Style
      -   Incorporate architectural themes and details in new buildings and
building renovations which reflect the traditional built forms and cultural
heritage of Kahuku and other plantation communities in Hawai‘i.
   •   Building Scale and Massing
      -   Promote the development of two-story as well as one-story buildings
to accommodate and encourage the desired mix of uses. The sugar mill theme
should be continued.
      -   Keep buildings relatively small in size and distinctive in character,
and avoid the development of long “shopping center”-type structures.
      -   Group buildings and related public spaces in a way which fosters a
pedestrian orientation and encourages travel on foot between different
establishments.
3.6.2.3   Lā‘ie Rural Regional Commercial Center
   •   Architectural Style
      -   Employ architectural design strategies, forms, and details in new
building design which reduce the sense of building mass of the center.
Incorporate architectural forms and details in future renovations of existing
buildings which visually reduce their apparent size.
      -   Incorporate architectural themes and details in new buildings and
building renovations which are appropriate to the region’s rural character.
   •   Building Scale and Massing
      -   Maintain the existing center’s low-rise building scale consistent
with the character of surrounding residential development.
      -   To the extent possible, site new buildings in a manner which
emphasizes a pedestrian orientation and encourages travel on foot between new
and existing establishments. Future renovation, redevelopment or expansion of
the Rural Regional Commercial Center should take or create opportunities to
implement a primarily pedestrian-oriented, village-like setting, in contrast to
its current linear form.
3.6.2.4   Hau‘ula and Ka‘a‘awa Rural Community Commercial Centers
   •   Architectural Style
      -   Encourage and support new building construction, existing building
renovation or site redevelopment in a manner which complements and conveys the
surrounding area’s rural character.
   •   Site Design
      -   Utilize landscaping within the parking lot and along the center’s
Kamehameha Highway frontage in order to soften its appearance and improve its
compatibility with the community’s rural character.
3.6.2.5   Country Stores
   •   Architectural Style
      -   Encourage renovations to existing establishments which maintain or,
where appropriate, improve upon the traditional stand-alone “country store”
architectural style found in Hawai‘i’s rural communities.
      -   Require the architectural character of any redeveloped buildings to
be harmonious with adjacent developments and setting in form, material,
finishes and color.
   •   Building Scale and Massing
      -   Retain the existing stand-alone, small-scale, limited setback, one-
story height building form in the redevelopment of any existing establishments.
3.6.3   RELATION TO LAND USE MAP
Commercial areas are shown on the Ko‘olau Loa Land Use Map in Appendix A as
follows:
   •   Country Town, Rural Regional Commercial Center, and Rural Community
Commercial Centers. The general location of these commercial areas is
designated by an appropriate symbol.
   •   Country Stores. Due to their relatively small-scale, their locations are
not depicted on the Land Use Map.
3.7   BUSINESS/LIGHT INDUSTRIAL AND TECHNOLOGY PARK AREAS
Industrial areas are intended for light and service-related industrial uses
associated with repair, processing, construction, manufacturing,
transportation, wholesaling, distribution, storage and similar economic
activities.
Technology parks are areas intended for light technology and service-oriented
industrial and business uses in a campus-like setting. Development intensity is
low, while open space and landscaping are the predominant visual and physical
elements. A technology park, which may be affiliated with the Brigham Young
University-Hawai‘i, has been designated adjacent to the campus.
3.7.1   POLICIES
The following policies are applicable to new and existing industrial and
technology park areas:
   •   Industrial uses serving the Ko‘olau Loa area should be located in the
existing Kahuku industrial site or in the area proposed for the Lā‘ie
Industrial Park.
   •   The Kahuku Sugar Mill industrial site may also accept agricultural
support activities.
   •   Light industrial areas should provide adequate space for uses and
services such as small warehousing facilities; repair facilities for
automobiles, appliances and agricultural machinery; light manufacturing such as
wood products and local crafts; and agricultural support industries including
processing for biomedical and plant products.
   •   Site development should respect and adequately address on-site and
adjacent cultural and natural resource values in compliance with applicable
federal and state regulations.
   •   No culturally sensitive area, habitat, water quality and other values
and characteristics of streams, wetlands, and other natural or cultural
resources should be disturbed. In addition, on-site development and associated
activities should take care to avoid adverse impacts on adjacent land uses and
activities.
   •   High technology enterprises such as telecommunications, technological
support services, computer parts manufacturing, business education, multi-
language translation, research and development, and film-related facilities
should be located in the Lā‘ie Technology Park planned adjacent to the Brigham
Young University–Hawai‘i campus.
Appropriately developed, the industrial area and the technology enterprise park
will serve to establish an appropriate land supply and locations for these uses
and provide a more competitive market for businesses seeking to locate these
activities.
3.7.2   GUIDELINES
3.7.2.1   Business/Light Industrial Areas
The following guidelines apply to business/light industrial areas:
   •   Appropriate Scale and Siting
      -   Minimize the visibility of large building volumes and tall building
or machinery elements from residential areas, commercial and civic districts,
resort areas, and parks through careful site planning and use of ample
landscaping.
   •   Environmental Compatibility
      -   Locate and buffer operations that discharge air or water pollutants,
even when treated, in areas where they would impose the least potential harm on
the natural environment, in case the treatment process fails to perform
adequately. Uses that generate high noise levels should be located and operated
in a way that will keep noise to an acceptable level in existing and planned
residential areas.
   •   Use Allocation
      -   Provide mostly small lots within the La‘ie Industrial Park to
accommodate small business service uses.
      -   No buildings should be primarily used for offices or business
services.
   •   Building Height and Mass
      -   Building heights should convey the area’s rural character and
generally not exceed 40 feet.
      -   Buildings should maintain a low-rise, rural character and be
compatible with surrounding land uses which include agricultural lands, open
space, and residential areas.
      -   Employ building coverage that is appropriate to the rural environment
and minimize visibility of structures with careful site planning and ample
landscaping.
   •   Visual Screening
      -   Minimize the visibility of parking, storage, industrial equipment and
operations areas from the street by planting a landscape screen.
      -   Encourage the use of native plants in landscaping.
3.7.2.2   Technology Park
The following guidelines apply to the technology park area:
   •   Appropriate Scale and Siting
      -   The character of the technology park should be relatively low in
scale and visibility. The form of the structures should be modeled on campus-
like business parks, but the architectural style should be in keeping with and
blend into the rural character of the technology park’s setting and adjacent
uses. The buildings should not be visible from off-site scenic viewpoints
looking mauka, and the site should be carefully planned and ample landscaping
used so the development is integrated into its surroundings.
   •   Environmental Compatibility
      -   The technology park is primarily intended for emerging and
technology-oriented industries and support services. Uses that should not be
permitted in the technology park include uses that: produce noise and noxious
emissions; uses connected with agricultural production and processing; large-
scale retailing/wholesaling commercial operations; dwelling units or overnight
accommodations of any kind.
   •   Use Allocation
      -   Uses are intended to be emerging and technology-oriented industries,
including but not limited to telecommunications, business education, and
research and development facilities.
   •   Building Height and Mass
      -   Building heights should convey the area’s rural character and
generally not exceed 40 feet.
      -   Buildings should maintain a low-rise, rural character and be
compatible with surrounding land uses which include agricultural lands, open
space, and residential areas.
      -   Employ building coverage that is appropriate to the rural
environment; avoid use of large, continuous buildings; and minimize visibility
of structures with careful site planning and ample landscaping.
   •   Visual Screening
      -   Soften the visual impacts of parking, storage, industrial equipment
and operations areas from the street by planting a landscape screen.
      -   Encourage the planting of native trees and plant materials.
3.7.3   RELATION TO LAND USE MAP
The industrial and technology park areas are shown on the Ko‘olau Loa Land Use
Map in Appendix A as follows:
   •   Industrial Park. The location of the existing industrial site in Kahuku
and the planned Lā‘ie Industrial Park are designated in their general locations
on the Land Use Map.
   •   Technology Park. The location of the planned Lā‘ie Technology Park is
not shown as it is intended to be adjacent to the Institutional area designated
for the Brigham Young University-Hawai‘i campus.
3.8   VISITOR FACILITIES
Ko‘olau Loa will remain a rural community with a predominance of open space and
low impact recreational opportunities for residents and visitors alike.
Facilities for visitor activities and accommodations in Ko‘olau Loa will be
centered at the Polynesian Cultural Center, the Lā‘ie Marriott Courtyard Hotel,
and within the existing resort destination boundaries at Turtle Bay Resort, and
supplemented by a limited number of small-scale eco-tourism and agricultural-
tourism operations that are compatible with the rural character and adjacent
land uses.
3.8.1   TURTLE BAY RESORT AND COASTLINE
Located at the north end of Ko‘olau Loa, the existing complex of the Turtle Bay
Resort – with an existing 452-room hotel, a 57-unit condominium project known
as the Ocean Villas, 368 Townhouse condominiums known as Kuilima Estates East
and Kuilima Estates West, and two golf courses – will continue to be a major
visitor accommodation in the area.
A State land use reclassification (Land Use Commission Docket A85-595), zone
change (Ordinance 86-99), and a special management area use permit and
shoreline setback variance (Resolution 86-308) allow the construction of up to
five new hotels with 3,500 resort units at the nearly 900-acre Turtle Bay
Resort property, providing expansion potential for the resort complex to
include a total of six hotels with 4,000 total resort units (including the
existing 452-room hotel). In 2015, settlement agreements between then-owner
Turtle Bay Resort and certain private parties affected three sites commonly
referred to as H-1, H-2, and RR-3 (the remaining development sites were not
affected by the settlement agreements). Development rights on these three sites
are limited to a total of 725 resort units.
In connection with the anticipated development of the Turtle Bay Resort
property, an environmental impact statement (EIS) was prepared in 1985 by the
then-owner of the property, Kuilima Resort Company. The EIS was accepted as
final under the Hawaii Environmental Policy Act (HEPA). When a subdivision
application in support of the resort expansion was submitted in 2005, a
coalition of community groups filed a civil lawsuit to require resort owner to
prepare a supplemental EIS (SEIS). In April 2010, the Hawai‘i Supreme Court
decided in favor of the community groups and ruled that an SEIS was required
under HEPA. Accordingly, an SEIS was prepared in 2013 by then-owner of the
property, Turtle Bay Resort, LLC, and the SEIS was accepted as final under
HEPA.
To allay community concerns regarding environmental and infrastructural impacts
associated with the full development permitted under the entitlements, in 2013
the then-owner of Turtle Bay Resort entered into negotiations with the State of
Hawaii, various community groups, and interested individuals to preserve
portions of the Turtle Bay Resort area in perpetuity. In October of 2015, the
parties arrived at an unprecedented conservation alternative to the plans for
full development. The then-owner of Turtle Bay Resort: (1) transferred fee
title to approximately 53 acres at Kawela Bay to the State of Hawaii, which was
then leased back to the owner of Turtle Bay Resort for a term of 65 years; (2)
transferred fee title to approximately 7.6 acres, also at Kawela Bay, to the
City and County of Honolulu, which is currently managed by the owner of Turtle
Bay Resort; and (3) encumbered approximately 568 acres of the Turtle Bay Resort
property with a conservation easement that prohibits development in perpetuity.
In effect, the owner of the Turtle Bay Resort agreed for itself and all future
owners of the Turtle Bay Resort property to forego the opportunity to develop
over 620 acres of land. As a result, almost two-thirds of the total Turtle Bay
Resort property have been preserved as open space, and public access trails
throughout the property have been established for future generations to enjoy.
3.8.1.1   Policies
Plans to expand the resort should be maintained, with surrounding areas to be
preserved for open space and low impact recreation. Resort expansion within the
context of existing land use approvals will provide a major source of jobs for
Ko‘olau Loa and North Shore residents, significantly improve shoreline access
and use opportunities for residents, and include other amenities that may be
enjoyed by residents and visitors alike. No further approvals resulting in an
expansion of the existing resort beyond what is consistent with the already
granted land use approvals should be granted.
3.8.1.2   Guidelines
Guidelines for the resort expansion should follow the approved Kuilima Resort
Urban Design Plan, which include the following:
   •   Shoreline Access
      -   Enhance public access to the shoreline through the creation of two
new major shoreline parks. Access through the main resort should also be
retained with public parking provided.
   •   Natural Environment
      -   Preserve and enhance existing features of topography, landscape and
views unique to the various use districts within the resort.
   •   Views and Vistas
      –   Site buildings and landscape areas in a manner that protects and
emphasizes the dramatic coastal views from within the resort.
   •   Cultural Resources
      -   Protect cultural resources and practices within the area.
3.8.2   VISITOR FACILITIES IN LĀ‘IE
3.8.2.1   Policies
The Polynesian Cultural Center (PCC) has been Hawai‘i’s top paid visitor
attraction for almost three decades and should be supported as a major
contributor to Ko‘olau Loa. PCC is unique in its primary orientation toward
Pacific Island themes. To maintain its continued viability, visitor attractions
like PCC must remain constantly aware of market trends and be able to adjust on
a timely basis to changing visitor interests.
Plans to renew and expand facilities as necessary to maintain the viability and
vitality of the PCC should be supported. Expansion of PCC may include expanding
mauka toward Hau‘ula, and towards the Brigham Young University-Hawai‘i.
3.8.2.2   Guidelines - Polynesian Cultural Center
Guidelines for the development of the Polynesian Cultural Center are as
follows:
   •   Design Character
      -   Design and construction of new facilities or renovations should be
consistent with existing architectural character or appropriate Polynesian
themes expressed in the existing center. The PCC should continue to improve its
overall design character and outward appearance as a Polynesian attraction,
with emphasis toward tropical landscaping.
      -   The architectural character of new facilities should respect the
region’s rural features.
   •   Appropriate Scale and Siting
      -   Expansion areas should be low-rise in character and set back from the
roadway and adjacent uses. The architectural character of new facilities should
respect the region’s rural features.
   •   Accessibility
      -   Impacts to Kamehameha Highway traffic flow should be minimized by
focusing traffic through existing intersections without creating new driveway
connections to the highway.
   •   Built Height and Mass
      -   Portions of the Center adjacent to residential areas should be
organized and designed to relate compatibly in scale, materials, character,
color, and function with existing residential structures and activity.
      -   Where functionally practical and visually appropriate, use breaks in
roof lines to reduce scale and apparent building mass.
   •   Views and Vistas
      -   Place any new parking and service areas behind the buildings or
otherwise visually screen them from streets and residential areas.
      -   Maintain and enhance view channels of the shoreline from Kamehameha
Highway.
   •   Landscaping
      -   Include a landscape screen of trees and hedges in setbacks from
street frontages and property lines.
      -   Plant and maintain shade trees throughout parking lots.
      -   Use native plants and landscaping materials that reflect PCC’s
Polynesian themes and complement the region’s rural character.
   •   Shoreline Access
      -   Provide a public pedestrian easement to the shoreline.
3.8.2.3   Guidelines - Visitor Accommodations in Lā‘ie
The following guidelines apply to any expansion of the Lā‘ie Inn:
   •   Design Character
      -   Maintain a rural character in any design or expansion. Any expansion
is envisioned to blend into the surrounding community in form and materials and
provide a feel of kama‘aina simplicity and elegance.
   •   Appropriate Scale and Siting
      -   Any redevelopment on the site should enhance the surrounding
community by incorporating appropriate size, orientation and materials.
   •   Environmental Compatibility
      -   Lā‘ie Inn expansion or redevelopment should respect flooding
constraints and cultural sensitivity of the site.
3.8.3   ECO- AND AGRICULTURAL-TOURISM OPERATIONS
Eco- and agricultural-tourism operations are an alternative form of tourism
activities. They may include guided hiking trips, water-based activities,
horseback riding or nature tours, and in some cases overnight camping and farm
tours/products. These operations could provide new employment and economic
opportunities for the residents of Ko‘olau Loa’s communities, alleviating the
need for people to commute outside of the region for employment.
3.8.3.1   Policies
Applicable regulations should be followed to address concerns about where eco-
and agricultural-tourism operations should be located, their hours of
operation, and allowable uses.
3.8.3.2   Guidelines
   •   Allowable Uses
      -   Such uses should be low impact, appropriate to sound management of
affected resources, compatible with other existing uses in the area, and
reflective of community values.
   •   Environmental Compatibility
      -   Eco- and agricultural-tourism uses should be compatible with the
natural environment and adjacent uses. Activities should not significantly or
negatively alter the natural state of the environment in which they take place
or impact other uses.
   •   Appropriate Scale and Location
      -   Facilities used for the assembly of participants and parking of
vehicles should be low-rise and small in scale. They should also be
sufficiently set back from public roadways and adjacent properties, and
screened with landscaping, so that they are not visible from these locations.
   •   Accessibility
      -   Eco- and agricultural-tourism operations should be reasonably
accessible from Kamehameha Highway and should not adversely impact traffic on
local streets.
   •   Visual Screening
      -   Visually screen parking areas from roadways, streets and residential
areas.
      -   Encourage the use of native plants in landscaping.
   •   Lighting and Signage
      -   Use only low-level or indirect lighting which meets safety and
security requirements.
      -   Ensure compatibility between the type, size, design, placement, and
color of signage and the context of adjacent uses and the area’s rural
character.
3.8.4   RELATION TO LAND USE MAP
Visitor facilities are shown on the Ko‘olau Loa Land Use Map in Appendix A as
follows:
   •   Resort Areas and Visitor Facilities. The general location and size of
the resort areas at the Turtle Bay Resort north of Kahuku and at Lā‘ie Inn, and
the visitor facilities area of the Polynesian Cultural Center are shown, as
illustrated on the Ko‘olau Loa Land Use Map in Appendix A.
   •   Eco- and Agricultural-Tourism. The locations for eco- and agricultural-
tourism operations are not depicted on the map. Their locations are to be
determined through appropriate zoning permit processes.
3.9   INSTITUTIONAL USES
The purpose of designating lands for institutional uses is to provide areas for
public and/quasi-public institutions such as schools and universities, major
health care facilities, utility plants and substations, corporation yards and
maintenance yards of public agencies, and religious, social and social service
institutions, as well as other public services.
3.9.1   HEALTH AND WELLNESS FACILITIES
Kahuku Medical Center is the primary health care facility in the region. It
provides a range of medical services for both Ko‘olau Loa and the North Shore.
Other medical providers in the region include the Kaiser Permanente’s medical
clinic in Kahuku, as well as several dentists and pharmacies.
In response to the growing demand for health care treatment and prevention
programs, the Ko‘olau Loa Community Health and Wellness Center has been
established in the Ko‘olau Loa area. Other facilities intended to meet the
needs of certain segments of the population, such as the elderly and/or
disabled people, those with health problems, and for those wanting to
participate in preventative-measure and educational programs may also be
established. These types of health and wellness facilities can take a variety
of forms, ranging from consolidated buildings to relatively small or even
residential-scale structures where training and clinical programs could be
offered to short-term participants. An example in Ko‘olau Loa is the Ponds at
Punalu‘u assisted living facility.
3.9.1.1   Policies
Where possible, government land use policies, public facility improvements and
community assistance programs should support the retention and long-term
viability of Kahuku Medical Center and the Ko‘olau Loa Community Health and
Wellness Center; allow for possible development of other health-related
facilities that will support the continued viability of those organizations;
and provide critical complementary health services for the community.
Development of other health and wellness facilities in Ko‘olau Loa should be
encouraged in order to enhance job opportunities and the availability of a
“continuum of care” for local residents. Such facilities should be located and
designed in a manner which is compatible with adjacent uses and the region’s
rural character.
3.9.1.2   Guidelines
   •   Design Character
      -   Health and wellness facilities should be low-density, residential-
scale buildings. The visibility of buildings or outdoor activities should be
minimized through site planning and landscaping.
   •   Compatibility with Environmental and Adjacent Uses
      -   Facilities should be sited so that the intensity of uses and hours of
operation are compatible with adjacent uses. The built environment should avoid
adverse impacts on natural resources. To retain a sense of place, facilities
should incorporate natural features and landscape materials that are indigenous
to the area.
   •   Accessibility
      -   Facilities should be easily accessible from a collector street or
major roadway while minimizing negative impacts on residential streets.
Sufficient on-site parking should be provided.
   •   Building Height and Mass
      -   Maintain a rural character in the height, size, and massing of
buildings in order to be compatible with adjacent residential or commercial
uses.
   •   Landscaping
      -   Minimize the visibility of parking areas from the street by planting
a landscape screen along street frontages.
      -   Encourage the use of native plants in landscaping.
3.9.2   BRIGHAM YOUNG UNIVERSITY – HAWAI‘I
Brigham Young University-Hawai‘i (BYU-H) is a four-year college with an annual
enrollment, as of 2018, of approximately 2,900 students from numerous countries
around the world. The existing BYU-H campus is approximately 204 acres in size,
and while nearly 25 percent of it is undevelopable, there is land area
available to accommodate planned future improvements to academic programs,
student housing, and other support facilities. BYU-H’s expansion area will
provide space for faculty, staff, and related entity workforce housing, and
other uses needed to support its long-term sustainability. BYU-H’s immediate
plans are to increase its student enrollment to a full-time equivalent of
3,200. BYU-H’s long-term plans are to possibly expand its enrollment to up to
5,000 students, which may extend beyond the Plan’s time horizon.
A technology park, which may be affiliated with the University, has been
designated adjacent to the BYU-H campus. Development policies and guidelines
for the technology park are addressed in Section 3.7.
3.9.2.1   Policies
Brigham Young University-Hawai‘i should continue to evoke a sense of place that
distinguishes it as an important educational and cultural institution and
unique asset to the Ko‘olau Loa region. The following are policies for
development and maintenance of the campus:
   •   Encourage the University to maintain its strong community orientation
and continue to serve the Ko‘olau Loa region as a center of education and
multi-cultural exchange, as well as support community activities and services
and provide adult educational opportunities.
   •   The design of new facilities should be environmentally sensitive and
compatible with the architectural character and culture of the existing campus
and adjacent residential areas.
3.9.3   RELATION TO LAND USE MAP
Institutional areas are shown on the Ko‘olau Loa Land Use Map in Appendix A as
follows:
   •   Health and Wellness. Locations for existing and possible new health and
wellness facilities are not depicted on the Land Use Map in Appendix A. They
are permitted in all areas subject to project-by-project review for
compatibility with surrounding uses.
   •   Schools and Universities. The general locations of existing public
schools are indicated on the Public Facilities Map. Brigham Young University-
Hawai‘i’s campus is shown in its approximate location and shape on the Land Use
Map.
   •   Other Institutional Uses. Major public facilities (both existing
facilities and future improvements) are identified by appropriate symbols on
the Public Facilities Map. Churches, social and social service institutions,
child care centers, fire stations, and other public facility and utility uses
serving the area are not specifically designated, but are allowed in all
residential and commercial areas, subject to appropriate zoning controls to
assure compatibility with surrounding uses.
4.   PUBLIC FACILITIES AND INFRASTRUCTURE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
The vision for Ko‘olau Loa will be implemented in part through application of
the policies and guidelines for public facilities and infrastructure which are
presented in the following sections.
Like many other rural communities in Hawai‘i and elsewhere that have been
touched by tourism and population growth in nearby urban areas, Ko‘olau Loa is
experiencing increased traffic congestion, overcrowded beaches and insufficient
parks and utility systems, primarily due to the influx of non-residents and
visitors stressing the community’s infrastructure. The provision of adequate
infrastructure systems and public facilities and services is a fundamental
component of the safe and healthy environment envisioned for Ko‘olau Loa. It is
important that the design of infrastructure systems – including transportation,
water, and wastewater treatment systems – reflect the rural qualities of the
region and preserve the natural environment, with particular emphasis on how
such systems are sized and designed. As a corollary concern, the impacts that
development proposals may have on Ko‘olau Loa’s infrastructure systems are
important considerations when analyzing entitlement and permit requests. For
example, while a proposal may provide a number of positive economic and social
benefits, the additional traffic generated by the project may have potential
adverse impacts to Kamehameha Highway and the region’s quality of life that
outweigh the positive impacts. Planning for long-term health of the community
should be comprehensive, considering the cumulative impacts of development and
not the incremental effects of individual actions.
Chapter 4 is organized under the following headings:
SECTION
4.1   TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
4.2   WATER SYSTEMS
4.3   WASTEWATER TREATMENT
4.4   ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS
4.5   SOLID WASTE HANDLING AND DISPOSAL
4.6   DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
4.7   SCHOOL FACILITIES
4.8   CIVIC AND PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES
4.1   TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
This section describes the existing road, transit, and bikeway network in
Ko‘olau Loa as well as plans for future improvements. These elements are shown
on the Public Facilities Map in Appendix A. This section concludes with
policies and guidelines to guide future transportation system development in
Ko‘olau Loa.
Act 54 (Session Laws of Hawai‘i, 2009) requires State and County transportation
departments to adopt and implement a complete streets policy and establishes a
task force to determine necessary standards and guidelines. The intent of a
complete streets policy is to create and configure a connected street system
that provides for all users, including but not limited to, pedestrians,
bicyclist and transit passengers of all ages and abilities.
Roadway System. The only arterial highway in Ko‘olau Loa is Kamehameha Highway
(State Highway 83). It is also the only roadway linking the northerly windward
O‘ahu coastline communities to the North Shore to the west and Ko‘olau Poko to
the southeast. Kamehameha Highway is a State-designated scenic highway, passing
directly along the shoreline in several sections, providing dramatic ocean and
coastal vistas and mauka views of the Ko‘olau Mountains.
Kamehameha Highway is a two-lane highway for its entire length in Ko‘olau Loa.
In recent years, modest improvements have been made along this 19-mile section
of coast highway, including paved shoulders, drainage improvements, lighting,
bus turn-outs and left-turn lanes at busy intersections. There are two existing
traffic signals in Ko‘olau Loa located at the Lā‘ie Shopping Center and the
entrance to Kahuku High School.
Other significant roadways in Ko‘olau Loa are generally oriented mauka-makai
serving the inland residential areas of Ka‘a‘awa, Punalu‘u, Hau‘ula, Lā‘ie and
Kahuku. Key intersections along this coast highway include Polinalina Road in
Ka‘a‘awa, Kanaka Niāo Road in Kahana Valley, Haleaha Road and Punalu‘u Valley
Road in Punalu‘u, Kukuna and Hau‘ula Homestead Roads in Hau‘ula, Naniloa Loop
and Hale La‘a Boulevard in Lā‘ie, Pualalea Road in Kahuku, and Kuilima Drive in
Kawela. There are few parallel connector roads within the communities.
Planning and development of major roadways is the shared responsibility of the
State Department of Transportation (DOT), the City Department of Transportation
Services (DTS), and the City Department of Planning and Permitting (DPP).
Planning and use of federal transportation funds is coordinated through the
O‘ahu Metropolitan Planning Organization (OMPO), a joint City-State agency.
According to the O‘ahu Regional Transportation Plan (ORTP) 2040 (OMPO, April
2016), there are no major improvement projects that would involve increasing
the capacity of Kamehameha Highway. Planned highway improvements incude a long-
term bridge replacement program, shoreline reinforcement in areas such as
Ka‘a‘awa, Punalu‘u and Hau‘ula where coastal erosion has impacted Kamehameha
Highway, and safety and operational improvements such as the installation of
turn lanes, guardrails, signage, and crosswalks at key intersections.
The community has stated a priority need for safety improvements to the narrow,
winding Kamehameha Highway through Ko‘olau Loa. These improvements include
widening travel surface and shoulder pavement in critical areas where it would
not adversely impact private property rights and cultural and historical sites,
lighting and drainage systems, and pedestrian and bicycling facilities to
improve safety for such users. Desired pedestrian and bicycling safety
improvements may include linking various bikeway segments to improve
connectivity, and providing safer bridge crossings and wider shoulders.
Improvements to increase highway capacity and accommodate more cars (such as
adding additional travel lanes) are not desired, unless considered necessary
for safety reasons. There is growing concern over the effects of coastal
erosion on Kamehameha Highway, and also strong desire for a secondary/emergency
access route to facilitate movement into and out of the region when Kamehameha
Highway is affected by high surf, flooding or road closures resulting from
major accidents. Driver safety awareness programs, adequate signage, and
minimizing the number of driveway and roadway connections along the highway are
other important considerations for highway safety.
The frequency of organized bicycling races that use Kamehameha Highway is a
concern for area residents, primarily due to the typical traffic interruptions
and delays associated with such events. Detailed planning, event staffing, and
traffic control is necessary to ensure participant safety, and minimize traffic
delays and conflicts between highway users.
Transit System. TheBus provides bus service island-wide, including the Ko‘olau
Loa community. On a normal weekday, nearly 40 percent of transit trips on
TheBus are between home and work. More than 40 percent of the weekday trips are
for other home-based trips, such as to school or shopping. The remainder are
non-home based trips and trips made by visitors. According to the ORTP 2030
(April 2006), TheBus system provides 93 numbered bus routes island-wide with a
fleet of 525 buses, including two bus routes that service the Ko‘olau Loa
region.
There are no formal park and ride facilities serving Ko‘olau Loa as a central
access point for buses and autos. The State discontinued operation of a vanpool
program that made federal tax credits available to participating employers and
employees. Vanpools work like an express bus on a smaller scale providing door
to door service, and they can be effective for outlying areas, particularly
when vanpools are arranged by groups with the same employer. There are no plans
to extend or expand the number of bus routes, but the frequency and capacity of
transit service will be increased by additions to the island-wide bus fleet.
DTS is in the process of reviewing island-wide bus service using a Bus Service
Improvement Plan completed in July 2008. It is anticipated that the vehicles
assigned to the windward coast will be higher capacity vehicles. Service will
also be enhanced by making roadway and bus facility improvements (i.e., bus
turn-outs, bus stop shelters) designed to make bus travel more efficient,
convenient and comfortable.
Bikeway System. Bike Plan Hawai‘i (2003) is the State DOT’s master plan for
bicycle facilities. Bike Plan Hawai‘i identifies 145.7 miles of existing
bikeways on O‘ahu, and 258.9 miles of proposed bikeways island-wide, which
would bring O‘ahu’s total bikeway network to 394.6 miles. A signed shared
roadway along Kamehameha Highway through Ko‘olau Loa is proposed as a future
project. The timetable for development will depend upon construction
feasibility, including right-of-way acquisition and funding. Bike Plan Hawai‘i
defines the various types of bikeways:
   •   Signed Shared Roadway. A signed shared roadway is any street or highway
specifically designated by signs for the shared use of bicycles and motor
vehicles or pedestrians. Such facilities are of two types: a) a widened curb
lane in an urban-type area; and b) a paved right shoulder in a rural-type area.
   •   Bicycle Lane. A bicycle lane is a portion of a roadway designated by
striping, signing, and/or pavement markings for the preferential or exclusive
use of bicycles. The right-of-way assigned to bicyclists and motorists are
delineated to provide for more predictable movements of each. Only crossflow by
motorists to gain access to driveways or parking facilities, and pedestrian
crossflows to gain access to parked facilities, bus stops, or associated land
use, are allowed.
   •   Shared Use Path. This is a right-of-way that is physically separated
from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier, and is either
within the highway right-of-way or has an independent right-of-way, often
shared with pedestrians, skaters, joggers and other non-motorized users.
A bikeway plan for bicycle routes along private streets throughout the
community of Lā‘ie has also been proposed by the Lā‘ie Citizens’ Advisory
Group. Through a collaborative effort of various community groups and
residents, an eight-foot wide shared use path was constructed between Lā‘ie and
Mālaekahana along Kamehameha Highway in 2011. The shared use path, which is
nearly 1-1/2 miles long and about 15 feet mauka of the highway, provides a
safer route for bicyclists and pedestrians traveling along the highway.
The 2019 O‘ahu Bike Plan Update is an island-wide plan that proposes to add 575
miles of bikeway to the existing 211 miles of bike lanes. In Ko‘olau Loa, the
2019 Bike Plan Update proposes the addition of 38 miles of bikeway: a shoulder
bikeway, and whenever possible, a parallel but separate shared use path along
Kamehameha Highway and Farrington Highway.
4.1.1   POLICIES
The following policies support the vision for a multimodal transportation
system for Ko‘olau Loa:
   •   To retain Ko‘olau Loa as a predominantly rural area with limited future
growth, its transportation system should provide:
      -   Adequate and safe access for all communities, shopping and recreation
areas in Ko‘olau Loa.
      -   Roadway improvements, developed in consultation with Ko‘olau Loa
communities, which emphasize highway safety as the highest priority while
providing efficient, pleasant travel experiences for all users.
      -   Adequate capacity for peak travel to and from community centers.
   •   Promote travel demand management measures (e.g., carpool and vanpool
programs) for both commuting and local trips.
   •   Provide an integrated system of bikeways for work, school, shopping
trips, and recreation, including rides to playgrounds, beach parks, and other
recreational areas.
   •   Support a multi-modal transportation system to reduce automobile
dependency. Provide more opportunities and support facilities for convenient
and safe alternative modes of transportation, including bus, pedestrian and
bicycle travel, and other modes of personal transportation.
4.1.2   GUIDELINES
   •   Commuter Travel. For commuter trips, the objective is to ensure that
travel time and peak periods do not lengthen commensurate with growth in
population.
      -   Provide improved services and facilities for express buses, such as
more frequent, larger-capacity and more comfortable vehicles and park-and-ride
facilities.
      -   Locate public bus stops to be convenient and accessible to
residential areas and hubs of community activity. Use architectural design
elements that complement the natural setting and generously shelter passengers.
      -   Promote the use of transportation demand management strategies,
including measures such as ridesharing (car and vanpooling), improved bus
service and routes, non-vehicular travel modes (both motorized and non-
motorized modes), and modified work hours, as well as work-from-home options to
reduce commutes.
      -   Provide safety improvements along Kamehameha Highway.
      -   Identify and establish an emergency/secondary access routes to
provide for the safe and efficient evacuation of residents and the movement of
emergency response personnel (e.g., fire, police, ambulance) in the event that
Kamehameha Highway is impassable due to natural disasters or other emergency
incidents.
      -   Work with the responsible State and City agencies and private
landowners to develop a regional pedestrian/bikeway system linking parks,
schools and commercial areas with residential communities.
   •   Local Travel. For local trips, the objective is to promote alternative
modes of travel and less automobile travel.
      -   Modify right-of-way design in selected areas, particularly along
principal pedestrian routes and street crossings, and near bus stops to improve
pedestrian and bicyclist safety and enhance the users’ experience – e.g.,
change travelway widths, pavement widths or texture, introduce signage, and
more generous landscape planting.
      -   Provide convenient pedestrian paths within commercial and other high-
activity areas to encourage people to walk short distances for multi-purpose
trips instead of moving the vehicle to another parking facility.
      -   Implement traffic calming measures appropriate for residential areas
to reduce speeding in excess of posted limits and discourage use of local
streets for bypass or shortcut, thereby sustaining overall safety and enjoyment
for pedestrians and bicyclists. The community and the City will work together
to identify streets where there are speeding or cut-through traffic concerns to
develop viable mitigative measures.
      -   Design off-street parking facilities more efficiently to encourage
joint use of parking and less pavement area dedicated to parking.
      -   Provide safe pedestrian walkways on bridges.
      -   Establish rural streetscape design and development standards within
residential areas consistent with the rural character of the region. Allow for
rural elements that reduce the amount of impervious surfaces, such as minimum
pavement widths to support traffic demands and emergency vehicle access, shared
driveways, reduced parking requirements, more landscaping, and grassed swales
as an alternative to sidewalks with curbs and gutters.
4.2   WATER SYSTEMS
Groundwater, which is water found beneath the earth’s surface, is one of
Hawai‘i’s most important natural resources. Used for agricultural, industrial,
and domestic purposes, groundwater is the principal source of O‘ahu’s municipal
water supply. Statewide, groundwater provides about 99 percent of Hawai‘i’s
domestic water and about 50 percent of all the freshwater used in the State.
Consequently, protecting the quality and quantity of groundwater resources is
essential to Hawai‘i’s future well-being.
In keeping with the rural character of Ko‘olau Loa, allocation of water is an
important issue that should be governed by the Ko‘olau Loa Watershed Management
Plan (2009). Water management strategies include water conservation,
groundwater development, surface water development, and effluent water reuse,
without adversely impacting stream flow or nearshore water quality. In the
development of water resources, it is important that the needs of Ko‘olau Loa
be met first, and that the transmission of water out of Ko‘olau Loa will not be
detrimental to Ko‘olau Loa. Hence, the availability of Ko‘olau Loa water for
the island-wide water supply needs will first account for all in-district
agricultural and urban needs, while balancing the environmental and cultural
value of the area’s stream systems.
The State enacted the Water Code (HRS Chapter 174C) in 1987 to protect, control
and regulate the use of the State’s water resources for the benefit of its
people and the environment. Under the Code, the City is responsible for
preparing the water use and development plan for the City and County of
Honolulu. This plan, called the O‘ahu Water Management Plan (OWMP), was
prepared by the Department of Planning and Permitting with the assistance of
the State Commission on Water Resource Management (CWRM) and the Board of Water
Supply, and approved by the City Council following extensive public review and
comment. The OWMP was adopted by the CWRM and the City Council in 1990.
Revisions of the Technical Reference Document for the OWMP (December 1998)
include updated supporting data, analyses, and conclusions, which reflect the
closing of O‘ahu Sugar Company and Waialua Sugar Company. Future revisions to
the OWMP will be submitted to the City Council for its review and approval.
Since 2013, the Board of Water Supply served as the primary agency responsible
for the implementation of the OWMP to account for watershed protection and
water use and development. In 2016, the Board of Water Supply published the
Water Master Plan (WMP), which has a planning horizon of 30 years. In addition,
to improve the integration of land use and water resources, watershed planning
has been divided into eight watershed management plans, which coincide with the
eight Development Plan and Sustainable Communities Plan areas. The goal of the
watershed management plan for each planning area is to formulate an
environmentally holistic, community-based, and economically viable WMP
balancing: (1) the preservation and management of O‘ahu’s watersheds; and (2)
sustainable ground and surface water use and development to serve present users
and future generations. Each watershed management plan will be submitted to the
City Council for adoption by ordinance.
The Board of Water Supply OWMP overview section of the WMP, 2009, evaluated
available water supplies and the water development needs of the existing and
new residential and commercial development (including retail, office, resort,
recreational, and industrial) likely by 2030 as a result of implementation of
the City’s Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans. There is
available water supply to accommodate projected water needs through the 2030
planning horizon. The Ko‘olau Loa Watershed Management Plan (2009) provides
guidance for the sustainable management and use of all water resources in the
watershed (both surface and ground water resources). The Board of Water Supply
and the Ko‘olau Loa community worked together since 2005 to prepare the Ko‘olau
Loa Watershed Management Plan. The Plan was adopted by the City Council in 2010
(Ordinance 10-18).
The three main sources of water in Ko‘olau Loa are ground, surface, and
recycled water. Groundwater supplies most of the Ko‘olau Loa residential,
commercial and agricultural needs and provides water for Ko‘olau Poko. Surface
water provides agricultural irrigation water for Punalu‘u and Kahana Valleys in
Ko‘olau Loa. Recycled water supplies some of the district’s irrigation water
needs in Lā‘ie and at Turtle Bay Resort. CWRM has adopted sustainable yields to
protect groundwater resources and regulate water use by water use permits.
Based on CWRM’s 2005 basal permitted uses of groundwater on O‘ahu (estimated at
about 295 million gallons per day (mgd)), there is approximately 112 mgd of
unallocated sustainable yield remaining in the island-wide groundwater supply
that could be developed. (This estimate accounts for interim instream flow
standards.)
Table 4-1 summarizes the available water in aquifers underlying the Ko‘olau Loa
area. The sustainable yield of the Ko‘olau Loa and Kahana aquifer systems in
2005 was about 51 mgd. In 2005, water use permit allocations for the two
aquifer systems accounted for about 23 mgd, while water withdrawals were
estimated at about 10 mgd.
 
Table 4-1: 2005 Groundwater Use by Aquifer (mgd)
Aquifer  Aquifer     Sustainable 2005 Water Unallocated Existing  SY Minus
Sector   System      Yield (SY)  Permits    Sustainable Water Use Water Use
                                 Issued     Yield       July 2005
Windward Ko‘olau Lo36          21.508     14.492      9.738     26.262
         Kahana      15          1.101      13.899      0.085     14.915
Total                51          22.609     28.391      9.823     41.177
Windward
Reference: O‘ahu Water Management Plan: Overview Section 2009
 
In Ko‘olau Loa, municipal water is supplied by the Board of Water Supply and
the La‘ie Water Company (LWC). The Board of Water Supply supplies water to most
of Ko‘olau Loa, while the LWC provides water to approximately 700 residences as
well as commercial and agricultural uses in La‘ie, BYU-Hawai‘i, and the
Polynesian Cultural Center. Total potable water consumption by the Board of
Water Supply in 2000 included 1.5 mgd consumed in-district, 8.2 mgd exported to
Ko‘olau Poko for urban uses in that district, and 0.3 mgd exported to the North
Shore district. The LWC provided approximately 1 mgd to their customers in
2000. Agricultural water in Ko‘olau Loa is supplied by stream diversions and
groundwater wells. Existing and future agricultural water needs are accounted
for in the Ko‘olau Loa Watershed Management Plan (2009).
Potential potable and nonpotable sources of water to meet future demands are
summarized in the following tables. BWS is proposing the increase of permitted
use for the Malaekahana and ‘Ōpana Wells potable water sources, as part of the
BWS’s development and operation of an integrated island-wide water system.
Table 4-2: Potential Groundwater Resources of Potable Water for Ko‘olau Loa
New Groundwater Estimated Yield Additional     CWRM Water      Potential
Source          (mgd)           Permitted Use  Management Area Development Plan
                                Required (mgd)                 Area(s) Served
Table 4-2: Potential Groundwater Resources of Potable Water for Ko‘olau Loa
                                 Additional                     Potential
New Groundwater  Estimated Yield Permitted Use  CWRM Water      Development
Source           (mgd)           Required (mgd) Management Area Plan Area(s)
                                                                Served
Mālaekahana     1.0             1.0            Ko‘olau Loa   Ko‘olau Loa
‘Ōpana Wells  1.0             1.0            Ko‘olau Loa   Ko‘olau Loa
Kaipapa‘u Well 1.0                            Ko‘olau Loa   Ko‘olau Poko
(1)
Kaluanui Wells*  1.5                            Ko‘olau Loa   Ko‘olau Poko
(1)
Ma‘akua Wells* 1.0                            Ko‘olau Loa   Ko‘olau Poko
(1)
Total Potable    1.0
Resources**
(1)   Potential transfer of existing permitted use from Punalu‘u Wells to
optimize pumpage.
*   Source already has an existing permitted use equal to or a portion of the
estimated yield.
**   Total does not include transfers of existing permitted use.
 
Table 4-3: Potential Nonpotable Water for Ko‘olau Loa
Resource Minimum Estimate (mgd) Maximum Estimate (mgd) Development Plan Area(s)
                                                       Served
Table 4-3: Potential Nonpotable Water for Ko‘olau Loa
                                             Minimum   Maximum   Development
Resource                                     Estimate  Estimate  Plan Area(s)
                                             (mgd)     (mgd)     Served
Recycled Water
Kahuku, Turtle Bay Resort, Lā‘ie Recycled 0.8       2.6       Ko‘olau Loa
Water
Nonpotable Water
Ko‘olau Loa Agricultural Wells(1)          6.3       12.6      Ko‘olau Loa
Punalu‘u Stream Irrigation System(2)       2.0       7.0       Ko‘olau Loa
Total Nonpotable Resources                   9.1       22.2       
(1)   Sustainable yield exists, but well sites have not been identified.
(2)   Effects of Surface Water Diversion and Groundwater Withdrawal on
Streamflow and Habitat, USGS Report 2006-5153.
 
4.2.1   POLICIES
The following policies seek to maintain an adequate supply of good quality
water, retain sufficient acreage in watersheds to ensure infiltration into
groundwater aquifers, and strengthen the protection of watersheds:
   •   Protect and preserve streams, wetlands’ natural drainage systems,
watershed areas and the shoreline and coastal areas. The high quality of the
region’s nearshore and coastal water should be maintained to benefit
recreation, the economy, and the region’s natural biological systems. Buffer
zones around streams and wetlands should be provided to protect the ecological
integrity of these features.
   •   Retain existing acreage in the State Conservation or the City
Preservation Districts to protect watersheds. In addition, important watershed
areas which are in designated but unused Agricultural or Urban Districts should
be reclassified to the State Conservation or City Preservation Districts, in
consultation with affected landowners, community and pertinent resource
agencies.
   •   Integrate management of all potable and nonpotable water sources,
including groundwater, stream water, storm water and effluent, following State
and City legislative mandates.
   •   Adopt and implement water conservation practices in the design of new
development and the modification of existing uses, including landscaped areas.
   •   Where feasible and appropriate, encourage use of nonpotable water for
irrigation of landscaping and agricultural lands to conserve the supply of
potable water. Consider the use of dual water lines to allow conservation of
potable water and the use of nonpotable water for irrigation and other
appropriate uses, where practical.
4.2.2   GUIDELINES
   •   Development and Allocation of Potable Water. While the State CWRM has
final authority in all matters regarding administration of the State Water
Code, the BWS coordinates development of potable water sources intended for
urban use on O‘ahu. The BWS and other public utilities confirms that adequate
potable and nonpotable water is available for a new residential or commercial
development to be approved. State and private well development projects should
be coordinated and made consistent with the Ko‘olau Loa Watershed Management
Plan.
   •   Water Conservation Measures. Conserve the use of potable water by
implementing the following measures, as feasible and appropriate:
      1.   Low flush toilets, flow constrictors and other water conserving
devices in commercial and residential developments as required by ordinance.
      2.   Indigenous, drought-tolerant plant material and drip irrigation
systems in landscaped areas, and use drip irrigation systems.
      3.   The use of recycled water for the irrigation of golf courses and
other landscaped areas where this would not adversely affect potable
groundwater supply.
   •   Streamflow and Nearshore Water Quality. Future water development should
not adversely impact stream flow or nearshore water quality.
4.3   WASTEWATER TREATMENT
The majority of development in Ko‘olau Loa is served by individual wastewater
treatment systems. Parts of Ko‘olau Loa are served by wastewater service areas,
including the County wastewater service area in Kahuku and Lā‘ie and the
private wastewater service area at Turtle Bay Resort.
   •   Kahuku Wastewater Treatment Plant. The Kahuku Wastewater Treatment Plant
(WWTP) is one of two municipal wastewater treatment facilities in the Ko‘olau
Loa region. The facility is located to the north of Kahuku town, beyond the
former sugar mill, near the Ki‘i Pond National Wildlife Refuge. The facility
has a design capacity of 0.4 mgd average flow and is operating at approximately
30 to 40 percent of capacity. The plant receives residential wastewater from
Kahuku Villages and the other residential and commercial uses in Kahuku town.
The Kahuku WWTP system is designed as a gravity flow collection system from the
mauka development areas. Disposal is via an injection well system into the
brackish groundwater.
   •   Kuilima Wastewater Treatment Plant. Turtle Bay Resort is served by a
private wastewater treatment facility, involving a natural oxidation ponds
treatment process. The Kuilima WWTP was designed for initial average flows of
0.66 mgd and can be expanded to 1.3 mgd. The resort currently uses less than
half of the existing capacity. Reclaimed water from Turtle Bay Resort is used
for golf course irrigation.
   •   Lā‘ie Water Reclamation Facility.  The Lā‘ie Water Reclamation Facility
(WRF) operated by the City and County of Honolulu is located in the mauka
portion of the community behind the BYU-H campus. The Lā‘ie WRF provides 0.9
mgd of treatment capacity utilizing an activated sludge aeration/clarifier
treatment process. Disposal of the treated effluent is through a combination of
water reuse for irrigation (agriculture and landscaping) and subsurface
disposal. The Lā‘ie wastewater collection system has been expanded to serve the
entire existing community. The capacity of the Lā‘ie WRF and collection system
can accommodate the existing and proposed development in Lā‘ie.
4.3.1   POLICIES
The following policies apply to wastewater treatment in Ko‘olau Loa:
   •   Encourage coordination between public agencies and private landowners in
addressing adequacy of wastewater treatment within the region.
   •   Support alternative technologies for wastewater treatment that reflect
the community’s values and rural character.
   •   Provide collection systems, where practical, to eliminate individual
cesspools, and to protect aquifers, streams, estuaries and nearshore waters
from contamination.
   •   Replace outdated individual cesspools with septic tanks and leaching
fields.
   •   Encourage water recycling at Kahuku Wastewater Treatment Plant.
   •   Treat and beneficially use, where feasible, reclaimed water for
irrigation as a water conservation measure and composted sewage sludge as a
soil enhancement.
4.3.2   GUIDELINES
   •   Water Recycling. As feasible and appropriate, beneficially use reclaimed
water for agriculture and landscaping irrigation, as well as other nonpotable
water uses.
   •   Kahuku Wastewater Treatment Plant. Upgrade the Kahuku WWTP to allow for
re-use of the treated effluent for irrigation purposes.
   •   Future Wastewater Facilities. Identify appropriate areas and
technologies for future wastewater facilities that maintain the rural character
and are proportionate to future population projections.
   •   Use of Buffer Zones and Landscape Elements. Establish and maintain a
sufficient separation between wastewater treatment plants and any nearby urban
uses to avoid significant adverse odor impacts, and provide sufficient
screening which substantially block views of such plants from developed areas,
parks and public rights-of-way.
   •   Adjacent Uses. Discourage new residential, commercial, resort, or school
uses in close proximity to wastewater treatment plants where odors are present.
4.4   ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS
The Hawaiian Electric Company expects that increased island-wide electrical
demand may create a need for additional facilities on O‘ahu before 2025. This
includes additional power generation capacity, sub-stations and transmission
lines. Growth policies in the General Plan of the City and County of Honolulu
direct significant residential growth to the Primary Urban Center, ‘Ewa and
Central O‘ahu Development Plan Areas. Ko‘olau Loa is designated as a rural area
and is projected to have limited future population growth. As such, Ko‘olau Loa
will not be a major source of future island-wide power demand. However, private
developers continue to explore the wind farm potential of sites in the Ko‘olau
Loa area. First Wind, an independent wind energy company, completed
construction of the 30-megawatt, Kahuku Wind project in March 2011. The
project, which is located mauka of Kahuku town, consists of 12 wind turbines
and a battery energy storage system, and generates enough energy to power up to
7,700 O‘ahu homes each year.
Hawaiian Electric is committed to increasing its renewable energy portfolio,
and is engaged in a broad spectrum of renewable energy-related initiatives and
activities that will occur in Ko‘olau Loa, including residential solar water
heating, biofuels crop research, and photovoltaics.
Communications for Hawaiian Electric have become an increasingly important and
integral part of the island’s energy delivery system. Fiber optics and radio
links improve operations, control, and service of the utility’s electrical
system. The utility’s long-range plan is to further improve mobile radio
communications, with the adaptation of mobile data, and completion of a
microwave radio communications loop system around the island. Hawaiian Electric
has proposed plans to improve the mobile radio coverage with the addition of
new telecommunication sites and upgrades at existing sites throughout O‘ahu,
including communications sites in the Ko‘olau Loa area.
4.4.1   POLICIES
The following pertains to electrical systems in Ko‘olau Loa:
   •   Provide adequate and reliable electrical service.
   •   Locate and design system elements such as renewable energy facilities
(e.g., wind and solar), electrical sub-stations, communication sites, and
transmission lines, including consideration of underground transmission lines,
to avoid or mitigate visual impacts on scenic and natural resources, as well as
public safety considerations.
   •   Discourage the use and installation of overhead utility lines and poles.
Strong consideration should be given to placing replacement and new
transmission lines underground to enhance viewplanes, increase highway safety
and improve utility service.
   •   Encourage the development and use of renewable energy sources and energy
conservation measures.
4.5   SOLID WASTE HANDLING AND DISPOSAL
Solid waste collection, transport and disposal operations on the island are a
consolidated responsibility of the City Department of Environmental Services,
Refuse Division (for domestic curbside pickup) and private haulers (for
commercial and multi-family pickup). In addition, individuals can haul their
own trash to one of six City convenience centers around O‘ahu, where solid
waste is separated and stored temporarily before being transferred to
designated sites for further processing. The collected refuse is ultimately
recycled or disposed of either in a waste incineration facility or sanitary
landfill.
The City’s Solid Waste Integrated Management Plan Update (November 2019)
outlines a comprehensive, unified approach to such vital issues as landfill and
disposal facility siting, expansion of existing services and facilities,
specialized waste disposal, waste reduction and recycling strategies. Refuse
generated by non-household sources is delivered to the H-POWER facility in
‘Ewa. There is only one active landfill for O‘ahu (Waimanalo Gulch) in the ‘Ewa
area which accepts municipal solid waste and H-POWER ash. The Waimanalo Gulch
Sanitary Landfill is operating on a limited term permit, and the City is
required to select an alternate location in anticipation of the closure of the
landfill.
In Ko‘olau Loa, the City operates a drop-off convenience center in Lā‘ie where
residents can dispose of household rubbish, green waste, and large items. The
Lā‘ie Water Reclamation Facility has a sewage sludge and green waste composting
facility. The next closest facilities are the City’s Kawailoa Refuse Transfer
Station north of Hāle‘iwa and the Kapa‘a Transfer Station in Kailua. There are
no plans to create an additional convenience center, transfer station or
landfill operation in Ko‘olau Loa.
As waste management and technological innovations occur, Ko‘olau Loa can and
should play a part in the City’s long-term efforts to establish more efficient
waste diversion and collection systems. However, it would be inappropriate to
consider the region as a potential site for future landfills for the following
reasons:
   •   the region is not expected to contribute significantly to future
increases to O‘ahu’s solid waste management demands;
   •   the region is not centrally located to service the entire island; and
   •   the region does not contain sites suitable for the processing or
disposal of solid waste on an island-wide scale.
4.5.1   POLICIES
The following policies apply to solid waste handling and disposal in Ko‘olau
Loa:
   •   Support implementation of the Solid Waste Integrated Management Plan
Update.
   •   Provide adequate resources for trash removal, clean up of illegal dumps,
and enforcement of antidumping laws.
   •   Promote recycling and other source reduction programs dedicated to
minimizing the amount of solid waste generated.
4.5.2   GUIDELINES
   •   Recycling Programs and Facilities. Expand recycling collection
facilities and services, and public outreach and education programs that
promote responsible waste management and source reduction.
   •   Green Waste Recycling. Continue recycling of regional green waste at the
Lā‘ie Convenience Center and the Lā‘ie Water Reclamation Facility composting
operation.
   •   Efficient Solid Waste Collection. Expand the use of automated refuse
collection in residential areas.
4.6   DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
The major streams that drain the valleys of Ko‘olau Loa include: Ka‘a‘awa
Stream, Makaua Stream, Kahana Stream, Punalu‘u Stream, Ma‘akua Stream, Kaluanui
Stream, Waipuhi Stream, Kaipapa‘u Stream, Lā‘ie Malo‘o Stream, Wailele Stream,
Kahawainui Stream in Kahana and Lā‘ie, Mālaekahana Stream, Kawela Stream, and
‘Ō‘io Stream. These streams originate in the Ko‘olau Range and eventually
discharge into the ocean along the Ko‘olau Loa coast. There are also many
natural gulches and drainage ways in the region, such as Koloa Gulch in Lā‘ie
and “Hospital Ditch” in Kahuku. The drainage basins vary in size, some being
long and narrow, and others including significant collection areas in the
agricultural lowlands.
Floods resulting from intense rainfall events are a significant hazard for
homes and other structures built near streams and drainage ways in almost every
ahupua‘a. Heavy rainfall at the head of the valleys, combined with debris
clogging the lowland channels, has on occasion overwhelmed the capacity of
these drainage ways. In many areas of Ko‘olau Loa, the elevated grade of
Kamehameha Highway diverts or detains the overland flow of stormwater runoff
toward the ocean. This condition can cause localized flooding of the highway
and properties abutting the highway.
Kahawainui Stream channel improvements were made in the mid-1990s, which helped
alleviate flooding problems in Lā‘ie. A federal reconnaissance study examined
options for flood control along the Wailele Stream. Construction of flood
control improvements including a berm is being considered, with the design of
the project being jointly funded by the federal government, City and County of
Honolulu, and Hawai‘i Reserves, Inc.
Drainage problems exist in Kahuku in the lowland floodplains of Ōhia, Kalaeo
Kahipa, and Mālaekahana Streams. As existing drainage facilities are inadequate
during major storm events, the runoff from mauka areas floods the campus of
Kahuku High and Intermediate School, as well as portions of the commercial area
and the Walkerville residential area. Agencies from the City, State Department
of Land and Natural Resources, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers are
coordinating their efforts in a regional drainage assessment that provides
alternative solutions. Other coastal areas in Ko‘
4.6.1   POLICIES
Policies pertaining to Ko‘olau Loa’s drainage areas are:
   •   Ensure that the maintenance and use of drainage areas are consistent
with the Ko‘olau Loa Watershed Management Plan.
   •   Improve drainage systems in the region to provide adequate protection
from flooding to protect the quality of nearshore waters.
   •   Emphasize control and minimization of non-point source pollution and the
retention of storm water on-site and in wetlands in the design of drainage
systems in accordance with existing City, State and Federal regulations while
maintaining the existing habitat capability and water quality of streams and
nearshore waters.
   •   View storm water, where appropriate, as a potential irregular source of
water for recharge of the aquifer that should be retained for absorption rather
than quickly moved to coastal waters.
   •   When drainage ways must be modified for flood control purposes, select
approaches and solutions which, to the extent possible:
      -   Improve existing habitat capability;
      -   Maintain existing rural and aesthetic qualities and enhance the
regional open space network;
      -   Avoid degradation of existing coastline and estuarine areas or
nearshore water quality;
      -   Avoid degradation of the quality of water entering nearshore waters;
and
      -   Avoid increase in the volume or rate of freshwater intrusion into
nearshore waters.
   •   Design drainage ways for flood control to accommodate a 100-year flood.
   •   Encourage abutting property owners along streams and/or drainage ways to
stabilize the banks with vegetation where erosion potential is high.
   •   Encourage coordination between public agencies and private landowners on
needed drainage improvements with community input, and develop a phased plan
for improvements.
   •   Keep drainage ways clear of debris to avoid flooding problems.
   •   Encourage the State to assess areas of Kamehameha Highway where the
roadway diverts or detains storm water runoff causing localized flooding of the
highway and abutting properties.
4.6.2   GUIDELINES
Guidelines for the maintenance and improvement of Ko‘olau Loa’s drainage
systems include:
   •   Retention and Detention. Emphasize retaining or detaining storm water
for gradual release into the ground as an alternative strategy for management
of storm water.
   •   Stream Channel Improvements. Integrate planned improvements to the
drainage system into a regional open space network by creating retention
basins, passive recreation areas and recreational access for pedestrians and
bicycles. Drainage system design should emphasize control and minimization of
non-point source pollution. Where the hardening of stream channels is
unavoidable, make the improvements in a manner which maintains and protects
natural resources and aesthetic values of the stream, and avoid degradation of
coastline and of stream and near-shore water quality, consistent with
guidelines expressed in Section 3.1.2.4.
   •   Maintenance. Regularly maintain and clean drainage ways and flood
mitigation structures of debris to ensure that they achieve the purpose for
which they were designed.
   •   Surface Runoff Improvements. Employ best management practices to
minimize runoff exiting from conservation and agricultural land uses, and other
areas that may generate sediment and debris.
   •   Floodplain Management. Any future work performed within the 100-year
floodplain will have to adhere to the requirements of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) and meet all flood-proofing requirements.
   •   Systematic Approach. Develop a comprehensive drainage master plan to
address drainage, flood protection and erosion concerns in coastal areas.
   •   Education. Conduct public outreach and education programs that explain
the potential for flooding and how the efforts of individual property owners
can minimize the effects of flooding.
4.7   SCHOOL FACILITIES
Public schools in Ko‘olau Loa are part of the State Department of Education’s
(DOE) Windward District. There are five elementary schools, and one
intermediate/high school within DOE’s Kahuku Complex: Hau‘ula Elementary,
Ka‘a‘awa Elementary, Kahuku Elementary, Lā‘ie Elementary, Sunset Elementary and
Kahuku High and Intermediate School. (Sunset Elementary School is in the North
Shore Sustainable Communities Plan area, and contributes to the enrollment of
Kahuku High and Intermediate School.) The Kahuku Public and School Library is
located on the Kahuku High and Intermediate School campus, and is a branch of
the Hawai‘i State Public Library System managed by the DOE.
The 2007-2008 enrollment capacity, and 2013-2014 projected enrollment for the
DOE schools are shown in
Table 4-4. Recent enrollment figures and projected enrollments for these
schools show that all six schools are operating below capacity, and have
additional capacity to accommodate more students. School facilities planning
must account for existing and additional demand that could be generated by
future residential developments.
Table 4-4: Public School Enrollment and Capacity, Ko‘olau Loa
School 2007-2008 Enrollment 2007-2008 Capacity 2013-2014 Projected Enrollment
Table 4-4: Public School Enrollment and Capacity, Ko‘olau Loa
School      2007-2008 Enrollment 2007-2008 Capacity 2013-2014 Projected
                                                    Enrollment
Elementary
   Sunset387                  466                381
   Ka‘a147awa               158                141
   Hau‘275                  436                248
   Lā‘609                  924                575
   Kahuku501                  587                480
Intermediate & High School
   Kahuku1,736                1,802              1,650
Source: Department of Education, Facilities and Support Services Branch,
2008.
 
Kahuku Intermediate and High School student enrollment in the 2007-2008 school
year was under the facility capacity for the same year. Likewise, DOE
projections indicate that the school’s future enrollment will be below
capacity. The existing campus (21 acres) is less than half the size of a
standard DOE high school (50 acres), and continues to experience drainage
problems due to its location within a flood plain. A master plan was completed
in June 2005 to address future campus expansion and facility improvements and
mitigate the threat of flood events. Due to changes in the ownership of
adjacent lands identified for campus expansion, the master plan is no longer
viable.
Any new housing development in Lā‘ie or Kahuku would have to consider the
potential impact that the residential growth could have on Lā‘ie Elementary
School, Kahuku Elementary School, and Kahuku Intermediate and High School. For
any future housing developments, the developer will need to work closely with
the DOE to ensure that adequate school facilities would be in place to meet
additional demand generated.
4.7.1   POLICIES
Policies relating to school facilities are:
   •   Provide and maintain quality school facilities that serve the needs of
the community.
   •   Integrate school facilities with other community uses.
   •   Support facility and drainage improvements at Kahuku High and
Intermediate School.
4.7.2   GUIDELINES
The following guidelines should be followed in planning and operating schools
in Ko‘olau Loa.
   •   Adequate Facilities. Confirm the adequacy of school facilities before
approving new residential development. Approve new residential developments
only after the State DOE confirms that adequate school facilities, either at
existing schools or new sites, will be available when the development is
occupied.
   •   Shared Facilities. Coordinate the development and use of athletic
facilities such as playgrounds, playfields and courts, swimming pools, and
gymnasiums with the DOE where the joint use of such facilities would maximize
utilization and reduce duplication of functions without compromising the
schools’ athletic programs.
   •   Hurricane Shelters. Promote facility design and construction that allows
for school buildings to be used as public hurricane shelters.
   •   Safe and Efficient Access. Support efforts to develop safe and efficient
access to schools, emphasizing the importance of secondary routes and pathways
other than Kamehameha Highway.
   •   School Impact Fees. Support the DOE’s requests for school impact fees
from developers of residential projects to ensure that adequate school
facilities are in place at the time new residential units are occupied.
   •   Kahuku Intermediate and High School. Support resolution of the flooding
issues that affect the Kahuku Intermediate and High School campus.
   •   Library Facilities. Support the development of a regional library for
Ko‘olau Loa.
4.8   CIVIC AND PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES
The City and County of Honolulu Customer Services Department operates a number
of Satellite City Halls island-wide. These facilities offer many government
services for residents, including bus pass sales, bicycle and vehicle
registrations, and driver’s license renewals. There are no permanent Satellite
City Hall facilities in Ko‘olau Loa. The closest facilities are in Kāne‘ohe and
Wahiawā, and the City has no plans to build a permanent facility in Ko‘olau
Loa. In the event that the City is able to establish a permanent facility,
Hau‘ula and Lā‘ie should be considered as appropriate locations.
Police Protection. The Honolulu Police Department (HPD) services Ko‘olau Loa
out of the Kahuku Police Substation. Currently, 27 staff and officers (over
three watches) are assigned to the area from Ka‘a‘awa to Waiale‘e Stream.
Fire Protection. The Honolulu Fire Department (HFD) operates fire stations in
Ka‘a‘awa, Hau‘ula and Kahuku. The Ka‘a‘awa Fire Station #21 is equipped with a
five-person engine company, an inflatable rescue boat, and two bays that could
accommodate an ambulance or other equipment. The Hau‘ula Station #15 is
equipped with a five-person engine company and a one-person tanker truck. The
Kahuku Station #13 is equipped with a five-person engine. The HFD has
previously proposed a new fire station in Kawela as a long-range project, if
and when additional growth in the area justifies construction of a new
facility. HFD is also planning the relocation of the Hau‘ula Fire Station out
of the flood area. HFD has no other plans for new stations in Ko‘olau Loa nor
do they anticipate increasing personnel at either of the existing stations.
Emergency Services. Emergency care for the region is provided by the Kahuku
Medical Center (KMC). The KMC is a non-profit, civic and public safety facility
which provides emergency services and a physician base for primary medical
services to the Ko‘olau Loa community. The KMC is affiliated with Hawai‘i
Health Systems Corporation, a public benefit corporation of the State of Hawai‘
Civil Defense. Ko‘olau Loa is susceptible to natural hazards such as flooding,
tsunami, tropical storms, hurricanes and high surf conditions. In the event of
these hazardous conditions, residents need to evacuate to shelter facilities.
There are three hurricane emergency shelter facilities in the Ko‘olau Loa area,
located at Brigham Young University-Hawai‘i, Kahuku Elementary, and Kahuku
High/Intermediate School (Department of Emergency Management, August 2009).
Outside of Ko‘olau Loa, the closest emergency shelters on the Windward coast
are located at Waiahole Elementary School and Kahalu‘u Elementary School in
Ko‘olau Poko. Flooding is the most common and recurring hazard, and there are
other shelters designated for flooding and other disasters requiring
evacuation. Under heavy, continuous rain and flooding conditions, Department of
Emergency Management (DEM) plans are in place to evacuate endangered residents
as required, and include additional evacuation options in the event of other
emergencies.
As of 2009, there are 13 outdoor warning sirens within Ko‘olau Loa, including
eight sirens which have been upgraded to new solar-powered public address
capable sirens and one new siren installed at Punalu‘u. The remaining four will
be upgraded as funds become available from the State. There are other areas
that need siren coverage which are currently covered by emergency response
vehicle public address systems. These areas will be provided with sirens in the
future by either the State or new project developers, as appropriate.
4.8.1   POLICIES
The following pertains to civic and public safety facilities:
   •   Support adequate staffing and facilities to ensure effective and
efficient delivery of basic governmental service, emergency and primary medical
services, and protection of public safety.
   •   Promote an integrated approach to public safety which will enable
police, fire, ocean safety, civil defense, and emergency medical efforts to
share resources and information, as appropriate.
   •   Provide emergency shelters in Ko‘olau Loa.
4.8.2   GUIDELINES
   •   Satellite City Hall. Consider the establishment of a permanent Satellite
City Hall in Ko‘olau Loa at Hau‘ula or Lā‘ie, either of which could serve as a
gathering place for activities and services.
   •   Better Utilization of Facilities. Support the planning and programming
of public facilities to create maximum usage flexibility. In addition,
encourage interagency coordination in better utilization of existing facilities
to provide a more integrated approach to delivering services in the region.
Examples could include using school facilities as emergency shelters, requiring
that all new public buildings serve a secondary function as an emergency
shelter, and establishing satellite city halls as multi-purpose facilities with
expanded hours and services for area residents.
   •   Maintain Police and Fire/Ambulance Stations. The only anticipated need
for new locations for either police or fire stations is the planned relocation
of the Hau‘ula Fire Station outside of the flood plain. Accommodate any other
necessary improvements through renovation or minor expansion of existing
facilities for fire/ambulance and police protection.
   •   Adequate Police and Fire/Ambulance Protection. Provide adequate staffing
and facilities for fire/ambulance and police protection.
   •   Emergency and Primary Medical Services. Support adequate staffing and
facilities to ensure the continued operation and maintenance of Kahuku Medical
Center and the Ko‘olau Loa Community Health and Wellness Center. Allow for the
possible development of other health related facilities that will support the
continued viability of the existing facilities.
   •   Creation of Safe Environments. Promote the creation of safe, crime-
deterrent public and private environments by encouraging the use of crime-
preventive principles in the planning and design of communities, open spaces,
circulation networks, and buildings.
   •   Outdoor Warning Sirens. Install outdoor warning sirens as needed to
provide advance warning of impending disaster events for the people residing
and working in Ko‘olau Loa communities.
4.9   OTHER COMMUNITY FACILITIES
Antennas have been around as long as we have had radio and television services.
Antennas associated with communication purposes have grown tremendously since
the introduction of mobile communication devices in the early 1980s. While the
telecommunication industry has provided more convenient communication
capabilities for individuals, it has also increased public agencies’ ability to
provide faster and more efficient response to those in need, particularly
during times of emergency.
While the benefits of the telecommunications industry cannot be disputed,
communities have opposed new antennas due to aesthetic impacts, especially
related to public views and neighborhood character. Their visibility has
increased, particularly where antennas are mounted on free-standing towers.
The public has also raised concerns about the environmental effects of
electromagnetic field exposure associated with radio transmission, as evidenced
by the presence of antennas. However, the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) is responsible for evaluating the human environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions, assuming that the provider is in compliance with the
Commissions radio frequency rules.
4.9.1   POLICIES
The following are policies governing the utilization of antennas.
   •   Encourage co-location of antennas; towers should host the facilities of
more than one service provider to minimize their proliferation and reduce
visual impacts.
   •   Mount antennas onto existing buildings or structures so that public
scenic views and open spaces will not be negatively affected. However, except
for the occupant’s personal use, antennas on single-family dwelling roofs in
residential districts are not appropriate.
   •   Use “stealth” technology (e.g., towers disguised as trees) especially on
free-standing antenna towers in order to blend in with the surrounding
environment and minimize visual impacts.
5.   IMPLEMENTATION
Implementation of the City’s Development and Sustainable Communities Plans is a
challenge for the City’s planners, engineers, and other technical and policy-
level personnel, as well as elected officials who determine the allocation of
City resources. The plans seek to implement a vision for the future by
providing wider guidance for decisions and actions related to land use, public
facilities, and infrastructure as well as for zoning matters. As a result, many
of their provisions reflect the consultations which occurred throughout the
planning process with pertinent implementing agencies and community
representatives. It should be noted that implementation will depend on each
department’s priorities and availability of resources.
Many municipal jurisdictions throughout the United States have instituted
comprehensive planning programs that emphasize a proactive community-based
planning and implementation process. These local governments seek to establish
a strong link between planning policies and guidelines, and specific
organization, funding, and actions needed to implement a variety of public and
private projects and programs. The following sections of this Chapter are
intended to strengthen the linkage to implementation to realize the vision of
the future presented in this Plan.
Implementation of the Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan will be
accomplished by:
   •   Initiating zoning map and development code amendments to achieve
consistency with the policies and guidelines of the Sustainable Communities
Plan;
   •   Guiding public investment in infrastructure through Functional Plans and
Special Area Plans which support the vision of the Sustainable Communities
Plan;
   •   Reviewing zoning and other development applications based on how well
they support the vision for Ko‘olau Loa;
   •   Incorporating Sustainable Communities Plan priorities through the Public
Infrastructure Map and the City’s annual budget process; and
   •   Conducting a review of the vision, policies, guidelines, and capital
improvement program (CIP) priority investments of the Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable
Communities Plan every five years and recommending revisions as necessary.
Chapter 5 is organized under the following headings:
SECTION
5.1   PUBLIC FACILITY INVESTMENT PRIORITIES
5.2   DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES
5.3   SPECIAL AREA PLANS
5.4   FUNCTIONAL PLANNING
5.5   REVIEW OF ZONING AND OTHER DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS
5.6   FIVE-YEAR SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN REVIEW
5.7   IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
5.1   PUBLIC FACILITY INVESTMENT PRIORITIES
The vision for Ko‘olau Loa requires the cooperation of both public and private
agencies in planning, financing, and constructing infrastructure. The City must
take an active role in working with the State, private landowners, and the
community in planning infrastructure improvements. The priority public facility
investments for Ko‘olau Loa include drainage improvements in Kahuku, Lā‘ie,
Punalu‘u and Ka‘a‘awa; highway safety improvements along Kamehameha Highway;
and full development of regional and neighborhood parks in the region.
5.2   DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES
Projects to receive priority in the approval process are those which:
   •   Involve publicly funded improvements that are consistent with the
Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan vision, policies and guidelines;
   •   Involve applications for zoning and other regulatory approvals which are
consistent with the Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan vision, policies
and guidelines; and
   •   Are located on vacant usable parcels within the Community Growth
Boundary as shown on the Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan Land Use Map
in Appendix A.
5.3   SPECIAL AREA PLANS
For areas requiring particular attention, Special Area Plans provide more
detailed policies and guidelines than the Sustainable Communities Plans. The
form and content of Special Area Plans depend on what characteristics and
issues need to be addressed in greater detail in planning and guiding
development or use of the Special Area.
Special Area Plans can be used to guide land use development and infrastructure
investment in special districts, redevelopment districts, or resource areas.
Plans for special districts provide guidance for development and infrastructure
investment in areas with distinct historic or design character or significant
visual and scenic resources. Plans for redevelopment districts provide
strategies for the revitalization or redevelopment of an area. Plans for
resource areas provide resource management strategies for areas with particular
natural or cultural resource values.
5.4   FUNCTIONAL PLANNING
Functional planning is the process through which various City agencies
determine needs, assign priorities, establish timing and phasing, and propose
financing for projects within their areas of responsibility that will further
the implementation of the vision articulated in the Sustainable Communities
Plan. This process may take a variety of forms, depending upon the missions of
the various agencies involved, as well as upon requirements imposed from
outside the City structure, such as federal requirements for wastewater
management planning. Typically, functional planning occurs as a continuous or
iterative activity within each agency.
The functional planning process involves annual reviews of existing functional
planning documents and programs by the City agencies responsible for developing
and maintaining infrastructure and public facilities or for provision of City
services. As a result of these reviews, the agencies then update, if required,
existing plans or prepare new long-range functional planning documents that
address facilities and service system needs. Updates of functional planning
documents are also conducted to assure that agency plans will serve to further
implement the Sustainable Communities Plans as well as to provide adequate
opportunity for coordination of plans and programs among the various agencies.
The number and types of functional planning documents will vary from agency to
agency, as will the emphases and contents of those documents. A typical agency
may develop a set of core documents such as:
   •   A resource-constrained long-range capital improvement program. A
“resource-constrained” program is one which identifies the fiscal resources
that can be reasonably expected to be available to finance the improvements.
   •   A long-range financing plan, with identification of necessary new
revenue measures or opportunities.
   •   A development schedule with top priority to areas designated for
earliest development.
   •   Service and facility design standards, including level of service
guidelines for determining adequacy.
Other documents may also be developed as part of an agency’s functional
planning activities, such as master plans for provision of services to a
specific region of the island. In some cases, functional planning activities
will be undertaken in cooperation with agencies outside the City structure,
such as transportation planning activities that are conducted in association
with the O‘ahu Metropolitan Planning Organization.
Functional planning is intended to be a proactive public involvement process
which provides public access to information about infrastructure and public
facility needs assessments, alternatives evaluation, and financing. Outreach
activities should involve the Neighborhood Boards, community organizations,
landowners, and other parties who may be significantly affected by the public
facilities and infrastructure projects or programs to be developed.
The functional planning process should be characterized by opportunities for
early and continuing public involvement, timely public notice, public access to
information used in the evaluation of priorities, and the opportunity for the
public to suggest alternatives and to express preferences. The functional
planning process provides the technical background for the Capital Improvements
Program and related public policy proposals which are subject to review and
approval by the City Council.
5.5   REVIEW OF ZONING AND OTHER DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS
A primary way in which the vision for the Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable Communities
Plan will guide land use is through the review of applications for zone change
and other development approvals. Approval for development projects should be
based on the extent to which the project supports the vision, policies and
guidelines of the Sustainable Communities Plan.
Projects which do not involve “significant” zone changes will be shared with
the community and reviewed by the Department of Planning and Permitting for
consistency with the vision, policies, and guidelines of the Ko‘olau Loa
Sustainable Communities Plan during the zone change application process.
Projects which meet the criteria of a “significant” zone change are required to
prepare an environmental assessment or environmental impact statement following
the provisions of Hawai‘i Revised Statutes, Chapter 343. The criteria to
establish a zone change as “significant” in need of HRS, Chapter 343
environmental review is defined in the Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan
adopting ordinance.
5.5.1   ADEQUATE FACILITIES REQUIREMENT
All projects requesting zone changes will be reviewed to determine if adequate
public facilities and infrastructure are or will be available to meet the needs
created as a result of the development. Level of Service Guidelines to define
adequate public facilities and infrastructure requirements are established as
part of the Capital Improvements Program process.
In order to guide development and growth in an orderly manner as required by
the City’s General Plan, zoning and other development applications for new
developments should be approved only if the responsible City and State agencies
confirm that adequate public facilities and utilities will be available at the
time of occupancy, or if conditions the functional agency indicates are
necessary to assure adequacy are otherwise sufficiently addressed.
The Department of Planning and Permitting will review the project for
consistency with the Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan vision, and
summarize any individual agency’s findings regarding public facilities and
utilities adequacy which are raised as part of the Environmental Assessment or
Environmental Impact Statement (EA/EIS) process. The Department will address
these findings and any additional agency comments submitted as part of the
agency review of the zone change application and recommend conditions that
should be included in the Unilateral Agreement or Development Agreement to
insure adequacy of facilities.
5.6   FIVE-YEAR SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN REVIEW
The Department of Planning and Permitting shall conduct a comprehensive review
of the Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan and report its findings and
recommended revisions to the Planning Commission and the City Council five
years after adoption and every five years thereafter. It is intended that the
Community Growth Boundary will remain fixed through the 2035 planning horizon.
5.6.1   ADOPTION OF THE SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN AND EXISTING LAND USE
APPROVALS
This Sustainable Communities Plan will go into effect upon adoption by
ordinance. Land use approvals granted under existing zoning, Unilateral
Agreements, and approved Urban Design Plans will remain in force and guide
entitlement decisions until any new zoning action to further implement the
vision and policies of the Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan is
initiated. If an EA/EIS was accepted in the course of a Sustainable Communities
Plan land use approval for a project, it should be acceptable to meet the
requirement for an initial project EA/EIS when zone change applications are
submitted for subsequent phases of the project, unless the project scope and
land uses are being significantly changed from that described in the initial
EA/EIS.
5.7   IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
This section provides a summary of the specific physical improvements and
actions identified in Chapters 3 and 4 of this Plan to help organize and
facilitate plan implementation.
Table 5-1 Implementation Matrix presents the implementing actions, the related
plans, regulatory code or action, and the public or private entities
responsible for implementing the action. The purpose of the table is to
identify the improvements and actions that are needed to realize the long-term
future vision of Ko‘olau Loa, and help coordinate and organize roles and
responsibilities of agencies and stakeholders. It is not an exhaustive or
complete list of actions, and is intended to be a supporting tool for DPP and
the community. The table is organized by land use category, with the categories
listed according to the order of Chapters 3 and 4.
   •   The first column of the table – Policies and Guidelines – is comprised
of the guideline statements for each land use category. Policy statements are
used if the land use category does not include guidelines (e.g., Electrical
Systems).
   •   The second column – Program – relates each statement to a specific
regulatory code, functional plan or other action. The term “project review”
indicates the review of discretionary land use approvals, such as State land
use, County zoning and County special management area use permits. In some
instances, To Be Determined (TBD) was used to indicate that the related code/
plan/action was not clear. TBD actions are intended to be identified and
developed by the agencies responsible for implementation.
   •   The third column – Agency – identifies the public and/or private
entities responsible for implementing the policy or guideline. Although many of
the implementing actions fall under DPP’s jurisdiction, some actions are the
responsibility of other Federal, State or City departments or public agencies,
while a few have been assigned to private entities or individual landowners.
   •   The fourth column identifies the role of the agencies involved in
implementation. The three categories identified include implementation,
regulation or advocacy.
Table 5-1: Implementation Matrix
Policies and/or Guidelines Program Agency Role
Table 5-1: Implementation Matrix
Policies and/or Guidelines                                                          Program                                                   Agency                                          Role
Open Space and Natural Environment – Mountain Areas and Trails
1.   Maintain, protect, and/or restore native forests in the State Conservation  - Ko‘olau Mountains Watershed Partnership Program       DLNR                                            Implementer
District.                                                                           - Conservation District Management Plan                   BWS                                             Advocate
                                                                                    - Ko‘olau Loa Watershed Management Plan
2.   Identify and protect endangered species habitats and other important        - Ko‘olau Mountains Watershed Partnership Program
ecologically sensitive areas from such threats as fire, alien species, feral        - TBD                                                     DLNR                                            Implementer
animals and human activity.
3.   Avoid the establishment of utility corridors and other uses that would distu- TBD                                                     DLNR                                            Regulator
areas with high concentrations of native or endangered species.
4.   Maintain and enhance mauka trail systems, including sufficient parking areas- Nā Ala Hele                                            DLNR                                            Implementer
and signage at trailheads.
5.   Support State efforts to seek opportunities for cooperative agreements with - Nā Ala Hele                                            DLNR                                            Implementer
private landowners to gain access to trails leading to public lands.
Open Space and Natural Environment – Shoreline Areas
                                                                                                                                              State CZM Program                               Implementer/
6.   Maintain and, where possible, enhance the physical integrity and habitat val- Coastal Zone Management Program                         DLNR                                            Regulator
of shoreline areas.                                                                 - Special Management Area and Shoreline Setback Rules     DPP                                             Regulator
                                                                                                                                                                                              Regulator
7.   Preserve rare and sensitive coastal resources including coastal strand                                                                DLNR                                            Regulator
vegetation, sand dunes, and anchialine pools. Establish buffer zones around these   - TBD                                                     DPP                                             Regulator
resources where necessary.
8.   Identify and protect endangered species habitats and other important                                                                                                                  Implementer/
ecologically sensitive areas from such threats as fire, alien species, feral        - TBD                                                     DLNR                                            Regulator
animals and inappropriate human activity.
9.    Maintain existing makai view openings along the coastal highway. Avoid                                                               DFM                                             Implementer
obstructions, such as walls and heavy landscaping which block views, except where   - Park Maintenance Program                                DLNR                                            Regulator
necessary for safety reasons. Maintain public beach parks to avoid unnecessary      - Land Use Ordinance                                      DOT                                             Implementer
landscape screening or the placement of park structures within the view corridor.   - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
Recommendations of the Coastal View Study (1987) should be incorporated.
10.   To the extent possible, acquire shallow developed beach-front lots which
would be impractical to redevelop given existing zoning standards or wave hazard    - Park Facilities Functional Plan                         DPR                                             Implementer
considerations in order to improve public access and lateral shoreline views along                                                            DFM                                             Implementer
Kamehameha Highway.
11.   Maintain and enhance public access to the shoreline and lateral access along
the coast, including the provision of parking areas. Public access should be        - Park Facilities Functional Plan                         DPR                                             Implementer
provided at approximately 1/2-mile intervals in rural areas, or at closer intervals - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
when justified by public demand, traditional use patterns, the quality of the                                                                                                                 Advocate
recreational resources, or natural barriers that impede shoreline access.
12.   Establish additional minimum setbacks for structures near the shoreline in                                                           State CZM Program                               Implementer/
erosion hazard areas, and implement other management strategies to protect unstable - Coastal Zone Management Program                         DLNR                                            Regulator
sandy beach areas that impact Kamehameha Highway along the Ka‘a‘awa, Punalu‘u - Special Management Area and Shoreline Setback Rules     DPP                                             Regulator
Hau‘ula shorelines.                                                                                                                                                                         Regulator
13.   Adopt development standards that require new structures along the shoreline- Land Use Ordinance
to incorporate structural and design elements compatible with coastal hazards such  - Building Code                                           DPP                                             Regulator
as coastal erosion, tsunami and hurricane overwash.
14.   Incorporate best available science and information from the City Climate                                                             OCCSR                                           Advocate
Change Commission when evaluating updates to land use policies and regulations      - TBD                                                     DPP                                             Implementer
relating to climate change and sea level rise                                                                                                                                                 Regulator
15.   Prohibit off-road vehicular and motorcycle use in shoreline areas, including                                                         DLNR                                            Implementer
but not limited to the placement of barriers to prevent vehicular access along the  - TBD                                                     DPP                                             Regulator
beachfront.                                                                                                                                   DPR                                             Implementer
                                                                                                                                              DLNR                                            Regulator
16.   Maintain the untamed landscape quality of the Kahuku shoreline.            - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
                                                                                    - Hawai‘i Coastal Nonpoint                              DLNR                                            Regulator
17.   Implement management practices that protect nearshore coral reefs from     Pollution Control Program                                 State CZM Program                               Regulator
damaging activities such as soil erosion, non-point source pollution, dredging, and Management Plan                                           DPP                                             Regulator
alterations to near-shore water circulation.                                        - Storm Drainage Standards                                DDC                                             Advocate
                                                                                    - Grading Ordinance
18.   Minimize the adverse effects of artificial lighting on wildlife and human
health by balancing the need of outdoor lighting for night utility, security, and   - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
desire for reasonable architectural expression with the need to conserve energy and - Project Review
protect the natural environment.
19.   Adopt outdoor night lighting standards that encourage efforts to minimize
glare and stray light, and reinforce the differences between urban and rural        - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Implementer
communities.
Open Space and Natural Environment – Wildlife Sanctuaries
20.   Respect and establish an appropriate balance between natural habitats and  - Habitat Conservation Plan                               USFWS                                           Implementer
human uses in the management of wildlife sanctuaries. Appropriate buffers between   - Land Use Ordinance                                      DLNR                                            Implementer
uses should be established wherever necessary.                                                                                                DPP                                             Regulator
21.   Retain existing Preservation zoning in the vicinity of Kahuku’s Punaho‘- Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
Marsh, Punamanō and Ki‘i Pond National Wildlife Refuges.
22.   Encourage landowners to establish additional sanctuaries in other areas                                                              USFWS                                           Implementer
within the region that provide habitats for endangered wildlife, flora and fauna.   - TBD                                                     DLNR                                            Implementer/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advcocate
Open Space and Natural Environment – Natural Gulches, Streams and Drainage Ways
23.   Preserve the aesthetic and biological values of natural gulches, streams an- Land Use Ordinance                                                                                      Regulator
drainage ways as part of the open space system. Restore and protect ecologically    - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Implementer
sensitive areas and ecosystems which should be maintained and enhanced as open      - Storm Drainage Standards                                DDC                                             Regulator/
space elements. Any activities in the vicinity of these areas need to ensure that   - Grading Ordinance                                       DLNR                                            Implementer
the open space system will not be significantly impacted or that biological values  - Ko‘olau Loa Watershed                                 BWS                                             Advocate
will not be significantly degraded.                                                 Management Plan
24.   Identify and protect endangered species habitats and other important       - TBD                                                     DLNR                                            Implementer
ecologically sensitive areas from such threats as fire, alien species, feral                                                                 DOA                                             Regulator/
animals and incompatible human activity.                                                                                                                                                      Implementer
25.   Minimize soil erosion, runoff of pesticides, fertilizers and other non-point                                                                                                         Regulator/
source contaminants into streams, wetlands and marine habitats with strategies such - Hawai‘i Coastal Non-point                             DLNR                                            Implementer
as stream setbacks, erosion control devices, integrated pest management plans, and  Pollution Control Program                                 State CZM Program                               Regulator
revegetation of disturbed areas. Incorporate erosion control measures and best      Management Plan                                           DOA                                             Implementer
management practices as recommended in the State of Hawai‘i Coastal Non-point     - Grading Ordinance                                       DOH TMDL Program                                Regulator
Pollution Control Program Management Plan, Volume I (June 1996), to prevent         - TBD                                                     DPP                                             Implementer
pollution of wetlands, streams, estuaries, and nearshore waters.
26.   Where feasible, establish setbacks along rivers, streams, and shoreline are- Ko‘olau Loa Watershed                                 DLNR                                            Regulator/
to preserve these resources and protective buffer zones around biologically         Management Plan                                           BWS                                             Implementer
sensitive areas to minimize habitat disturbance. Where possible, provide access as  - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Advocate
part of the open space network.                                                     - Project Review                                          DPR                                             Regulator
                                                                                                                                                                                              Implementer
27.   Restrict uses in these areas to conservation uses, compatible recreational
uses such as walking and bicycling, traditional and customary rights of Native                                                                DLNR                                            Regulator
Hawaiian practitioners, and controlled surface water diversion for agricultural     - Land Use Ordinance                                      LUC                                             Regulator
purposes. Avoid development in ecologically sensitive areas; if activities are      - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
allowed, minimize impacts and implement mitigative measures that will fully offset
any loss of resources.
28.   Restore, protect and maintain stream habitat values along the entire stream- Ko‘olau Loa Watershed
length, from the headwaters through the muliwai (nearshore marine zone created when Management Plan                                           DLNR                                            Regulator
freshwater streams flow into the ocean) to the marine reef system, to avoid         - Land Use Ordinance                                      BWS                                             Advocate
degradation or interruption of habitat for native organisms and to provide for the  - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
health of the entire ecosystem.                                                     - TBD
29.   To the extent possible, limit any modifications to natural gulches and
streams, except for measures necessary for flood protection. If modifications are
needed, minimize impacts on biological habitats and natural resources, complement   - Ko‘olau Loa Watershed                                 DLNR                                            Regulator
the existing rural character and aesthetic quality, and maintain existing water     Management Plan                                           BWS                                             Advocate
quality and the rate and volume of freshwater run-off into nearshore waters.        - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
Drainageway modifications may include stream-side vegetation and rip-rap boulder    - Storm Drainage Standards                                ENV                                             Implementer
lining of stream banks; channelization should be a last resort and limited to v-    - Project Review                                          DDC                                             Implementer
shaped bottom channels and/or other measures that preserve environmental habitat
qualities and capabilities to maintain a stream flow during low rainfall periods.
                                                                                    - Ko‘olau Loa Watershed                                                                                 Implementer
                                                                                    Management Plan                                           DLNR                                            Advocate
30.   Enhance, restore and preserve streams while providing public access for    - Land Use Ordinance                                      BWS                                             Regulator/
recreational and cultural purposes.                                                 - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
                                                                                    - TBD                                                     DPR                                             Implementer/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
31.   Develop an implementation schedule with input from community and public
agencies to establish permanent instream flow standards that support sound          - Instream Flow Standard
watershed management. The setting of instream flow standards should weigh the       Assessment Report                                         CWRM                                            Regulator
benefits of instream and non-instream uses of water resources, including the
economic impact of restrictions of such uses.
32.   Support the implementation of the Ko‘olau Loa Watershed Management Plan. - Ko‘olau Loa Watershed                                 BWS                                             Implementer
                                                                                    Management Plan                                           DPP                                             Advocate
Open Space and Natural Environment – Golf Courses
33.   Optimize and maintain the function of golf courses as passive drainage ways                                                          LUC                                             Regulator
to maximize their potential to serve as drainage retention areas, as well as        - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
wildlife habitats.
34.   Maintain golf course designs to provide view amenities for adjacent develop- Project Review                                          LUC                                             Regulator
areas, including public rights-of-way, parks and vista points.                                                                                DPP                                             Regulator
35.   Provide safe access through golf courses, as necessary, for regional       - Project Review                                          LUC                                             Regulator
continuity of shoreline access.                                                                                                               DPP                                             Regulator
36.   When necessary for safety reasons, use screening, landscape treatment,     - Project Review                                          LUC                                             Regulator
setbacks and modifications to the course layout rather than fencing or solid                                                                 DPP                                             Regulator
barriers.
37.   Maintain golf courses to minimize environmental impacts such as siltation, - Project Review                                          LUC                                             Regulator
pesticide and fertilizer runoff and disturbance to coastal, riparian and wetland                                                             DPP                                             Regulator
habitat.
38.   Expand the existing Kahuku public golf course in conjunction with flood    - Facility Master Plan                                    DES                                             Implementer
control measures.                                                                                                                             DDC                                             Implementer
                                                                                                                                              LUC                                             Regulator
39.   Encourage the use of nonpotable water resources for golf course irrigation.- Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
                                                                                                                                              BWS                                             Advocate
Open Space and Natural Environment - Kahuku Training Area
40.   Encourage the U.S. Army to manage its training area lands to minimize
potential adverse drainage impacts to adjacent lowland areas. Storm water runoff    - Kahuku Training Area Standard Operating Procedures      U.S. Army                                       Implementer
from the Kahuku Training Area should not be increased from existing conditions, and
long-term measures should be considered to reduce runoff.
41.   Discourage live-fire training in the area. This is consistent with the Army’s
stated position that the Kahuku Training Area will continue to be used for tactical - Kahuku Training Area Standard Operating Procedures      U.S. Army                                       Implementer
maneuver training with no live-firing of weapons.
42.   Encourage the U.S. Army to conduct training exercises in a manner that will
not significantly disturb the natural vegetation and wildlife; alter the landform
that contributes to runoff; and affect the flow of natural streams and drainage     - Kahuku Training Area Standard Operating Procedures      U.S. Army                                       Implementer
ways. For example, the Army’s current policy of restricting or prohibiting blanks                                                                                                            
and pyrotechnic use during the dry seasons to minimize any fire hazard should be
maintained as long as this area is used for training purposes.
Agriculture
43.   Discourage subdivision of Agricultural designated and zoned lands for      - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
residential uses.                                                                   - Subdivision Rules and Regulations                       DOA                                             Advocate
                                                                                    - Project Review
44.   Cluster agricultural subdivisions that include farm dwellings to avoid the - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
inefficient use of more productive agricultural lands and to reduce infrastructure  - Project Review                                          DOA                                             Advocate
costs.
45.   Maintain adequate buffers between agricultural lands and new residential
development, with consideration given to prevailing winds and the noise or airborne - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
emissions associated with the type of agricultural operation. Allow for appropriate - Project Review                                          LUC                                             Regulator
economic uses of buffer zones and if the buffer zone must remain vacant, provide    - Chapter 205A, HRS                                       DOA                                             Advocate
for it to be assessed at a lower property tax rate than productive agricultural     - Real Property Tax Law                                   TAX                                             Regulator
land.
46.   Design and locate buildings and other facilities that are accessory to an  - Land Use Ordinance                                                                                      Regulator/
agricultural operation in a way that minimizes the impact on nearby community and   - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
residential areas, and the road system.
47.   Enforce permitted uses on agricultural lands to ensure that the use is     - Land Use Ordinance                                                                                      Regulator/
contributing to meaningful and credible agricultural production on the same or      - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
nearby properties.                                                                  - Chapter 205A, HRS                                       LUC                                             Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
48.   Allow facilities necessary to support intensive cultivation of arable      - Chapter 205, HRS                                        LUC                                             Regulator
agricultural lands to be located in agricultural areas.                             - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
49.   Allow recreational or educational programs or other activities which provide
supplemental income necessary to sustain the primary agricultural activity, as long - Project Review (Special Use Permits)                    LUC                                             Regulator
as they are compatible with the character of the rural agricultural area, and are   - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
accessory to the primary agricultural use of the site.
                                                                                    - Hawai‘i Coastal Nonpoint Pollution Control Management State CZM Program                               Regulator
50.   Use best management practices and conservation procedures to reduce soil   Plan                                                      DOA                                             Implementer
erosion, siltation, and nonpoint source runoff.                                     - Windward O‘ahu Soil and Water Conservation District   DOH TMDL Program                                Regulator
                                                                                                                                              Hawai‘i Association of Conservation Districts Advocate
51.   Expand the use of alternative and renewable water resources for agricultura- Ko‘olau Loa Watershed Management Plan                 BWS                                             Advocate
use, as appropriate.
52.   Support conservation initiatives of the Windward O‘ahu Soil and Water
Conservation District and encourage farmers to apply for, maintain and implement    - Windward O‘ahu Soil and Water Conservation District   Hawai‘i Association of Conservation Districts Advocate
conservation plans.
53.   Establish economic and tax incentives to provide for long-term agricultural- TBD                                                     DOA                                             Advocate
leases.                                                                                                                                       TAX                                             Regulator
                                                                                                                                              DOA                                             Advocate
54.   Identify and protect Important Agricultural Lands in accordance with Act 18- IAL, Act 183 (2005)                                     TAX                                             Advocate
(2005).                                                                                                                                       DPP                                             Implementer
                                                                                                                                              private entities                                Implementer
55.   Encourage governmental agencies and landowners to upgrade and maintain                                                               DOA                                             Advocate
adequate agricultural infrastructure networks, including roadways and irrigation    - TBD                                                     BWS                                             Advocate
systems.
Parks and Recreation
56.   Continue coordination efforts between the City DPR and the State DOE to co-
locate neighborhood or community parks with elementary or intermediate schools.                                                               DOE                                             Implementer
Facilities should be designed and operated to achieve efficiencies and reduce       - School Master Plan                                      DPR                                             Implementer
duplication in the development and use of athletic, recreation, meeting and parking - Park Master Plan                                        DDC                                             Implementer
facilities, wherever possible, either by dedication, or upon agreements between the - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
developer, DOE, and DPR. Co-located parks should be ready for public use upon                                                                                                                 Advocate
opening.
                                                                                    - Park Facilities Functional Plan                         DPR                                             Implementer
57.   Where feasible, site community and neighborhood parks at the center of     - Park Master Plan                                        DDC                                             Implementer
neighborhoods to maximize accessibility.                                            - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
58.   Provide for accessible pathways from surrounding streets to facilitate     - Park Facilities Functional Plan                         DPR                                             Implementer
pedestrian and bicycle access to parks in master plans for development of new parks - Park Master Plan                                        DDC                                             Implementer
or redevelopment of existing parks.                                                 - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
59.   Link parks and recreational areas with the surrounding community using                                                               DOT                                             Implementer
connecting roadways, bikeways, walkways and landscape features or architectural     - Bicycle Master Plan                                     DTS                                             Implementer
design.                                                                             - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
60.   Develop a new community park in Lā‘ie with a community center facility. - Park Facilities Functional Plan                         DPR                                             Implementer
                                                                                    - Park Master Plan                                        DDC                                             Implementer
61.   Expand the Hau‘ula Community Park to include a multi-purpose recreational- Park Facilities Functional Plan                         DPR                                             Implementer
facility.                                                                           - Park Master Plan                                        DDC                                             Implementer
62.   Provide neighborhood parks in Ka‘a‘awa, Punalu‘u, and Kahuku (Adams F- Park Facilities Functional Plan                         DPR                                             Implementer
serve the residential population of these communities.                              - Park Master Plan                                        DDC                                             Implementer
63.   Expand Kahuku District Park to support the development of a multi-purpose  - Park Facilities Functional Plan                         DPR                                             Implementer
recreational building and swimming pool complex.                                    - Park Master Plan                                        DDC                                             Implementer
64.   Acquire and/or improve additional shoreline areas for public recreational  - Park Facilities Functional Plan                         DPR                                             Implementer
uses, including adjacent areas at Kaluanui and Lā‘ie Beach Park.
65.   Encourage continued public access and use of Hukilau Beach Park to provide - TBD                                                     DPR                                             Advocate
beach-goers a safer alternative than other nearby public beaches.                                                                             Hawai‘i Reserves                              Implementer
66.   Establish community gardens to expand gardening opportunities for area     - Community Recreational                                  DPR                                             Implementer
residents.                                                                          Gardening Program
67.   Establish management strategies that minimize overcrowding and prevent the - Parks Rules and Regulations                             DPR                                             Implementer
negative consequences of overuse.                                                                                                                                                              
68.   Locate bus stops or loading areas at principal entries and adjacent to     - Bus Facility and Systems Plans                          DTS                                             Implementer
convenient pedestrian access to main activity areas within the park.                - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
69.   Use generous landscaping or other appropriate visual screens to minimize th- Park Master Plan                                        DPR                                             Implementer
visibility of perimeter fencing and maintenance facilities from surrounding areas.  - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
70.   Provide landscaping along major roadways to serve as linear open space     - Park Master Plan                                        DPR                                             Implementer
features and create an inviting environment for walking, jogging and biking.        - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
71.   Incorporate natural features of the site and native landscaping materials  - Park Master Plan                                        DPR                                             Implementer
when designing park improvements.                                                   - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
Historic and Cultural Resources
72.   Implement in situ preservation and appropriate protection measures for sites
that have high preservation value because of their good condition or unique,        - Chapter 6E HRS                                                                                          Regulator/
historic, cultural and archaeological features, and for which the State Historic    - TBD                                                     DLNR                                            Advocate
Preservation Officer has recommended such treatment in conjunction with the
community.
73.   Consider the particular qualities of a site and its relationship to its
physical surroundings when determining the appropriate treatment. Determine the
following on a site-by-site basis in consultation with the SHPO, O‘ahu Island                                                                                                               Regulator/
Burial Council, local Hawaiian cultural organizations, and the owner of the land on - Chapter 6E HRS                                          DLNR                                            Advocate
which the site is located, and the community: (1) appropriate preservation methods;                                                           DPP                                             Regulator/
(2) appropriate delineation of site boundaries and setbacks; (3) appropriate                                                                                                                  Advocate
restrictions on uses and development of adjacent lands; and (4) appropriateness of
public access and interpretation.
74.   Include sight lines and view planes that are significant to the original                                                             DLNR                                            Implementer
purpose and value of the site in any restrictions placed on adjacent uses and       - TBD                                                     DPP                                             Regulator/
development.                                                                                                                                                                                  Advocate
Residential Communities – Rural
75.   Use rural development standards to establish building height limits and lot- Land Use Ordinance                                                                                      Implementer/
coverages, roadway and setback widths, infrastructure requirements, and             - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
architectural design guidelines.
76.   Encourage alternative development layouts that promote residential clusteri- Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator/
and open space preservation.                                                        - Project Review                                                                                          Advocate
77.   Ensure compatibility between uses in rural areas and adjacent agricultural - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator/
lands, natural resources, views and cultural features.                              - Project Review                                                                                          Advocate
Residential Communities – Rural Residential
78.   Use rural development standards to determine appropriate scale and character,
limit building heights and lot coverages, reduce current requirements for the       - Land Use Ordinance                                                                                      Implementer/
paving width of residential streets and infrastructure systems, and encourage       - Subdivision Rules and Regulations                       DPP                                             Regulator
appropriate architectural design guidelines and ample native, natural landscaping   - Project Review
forms.
79.   Housing development generally should not be sited on areas where the slope
exceeds 20 percent. Where this does occur, housing should be developed to avoid     - Land Use Ordinance                                                                                      Regulator/
adverse visual impacts, potential slope stability problems and increased runoff.    - Subdivision Rules and Regulations                       DPP                                             Advocate
Soils engineering and view studies may be necessary to determine the appropriate    - Project Review
density and site design for such locations.
80.   Building scale, roof form, and the quality of materials for infill and new
development, as well as future modifications to existing homes, should be generally
compatible with the predominant form and character of existing homes on adjacent
properties and with the neighborhood as a whole. Building heights generally should  - Land Use Ordinance                                                                                      Regulator/
not exceed two stories, but may vary according to required flood elevation,         - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
protection of natural features, slope, and roof form. Modification of zoning
standards for residential development, such as provisions for building scale or
spacing, roadway widths, or sidewalks, and/or changes in existing zoning district
categories, may be necessary to promote rural character.
81.   Sites on level terrain with fewer development constraints may have overall
site densities approaching the higher end of the range for Rural Residential use.   - Land Use Ordinance                                                                                      Regulator/
To achieve higher density while providing an attractive living environment,         - Subdivision Rules and Regulations                       DPP                                             Advocate
optional design or rural development standards for clusters and planned unit        - Project Review
developments should be promoted in lieu of conventional subdivision provisions.
82.   Avoid monotonous rows of garages and driveways along neighborhood street   - Land Use Ordinance                                                                                      Regulator/
frontages by employing features such as varied building setbacks and shared         - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
driveways.
83.   Use plantation architectural features such as pitched roofs with varied
forms, exterior colors and finishes, building orientation, floor plans and          - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator/
architectural details to provide visual interest and individual identity and        - Project Review                                                                                          Advocate
accentuate the rural setting.
84.   Support affordable housing initiatives in areas designated for new housing - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator/
development.                                                                        - Project Review                                                                                          Advocate
Residential Communities – Low Density Apartment
85.   Limit building heights to four stories with a maximum height of 60 feet,
including roof form, but may vary according to the required flood elevation, steep  - Land Use Ordinance
slope of the site, or the desire to protect important natural features. Gabled or   - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
similar roof forms should be used to reflect a primarily rural residential design
character.
86.   Employ building form and orientation, location of entries and landscape    - Land Use Ordinance                                                                                      Regulator/
screening, etc., to maintain the existing residential scale and provide greater     - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
privacy and individual identity for housing units.
87.   Ensure compatibility of building scale, roof form and the quality of       - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator/
materials with those of adjacent low-density residential areas.                     - Project Review                                                                                          Advocate
Residential Communities – Special Needs Housing
88.   In general, apply Low Density Apartment building height and density        - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
guidelines to special needs housing sites, as described in Section 3.5.2.4.         - Project Review
89.   Special needs housing, as an exception to standard density situations, may
have densities up to 30 units per acre if it consists primarily of smaller dwelling - Land Use Ordinance
units with residential scale and character. Special needs housing may have          - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
congregate living facilities, and is for individuals who, for the most part, do not
rely on or require personal automobiles for travel.
                                                                                                                                                                                              Regulator
90.   Whenever possible, locate special needs housing close to public transit,   - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Implementer/
community services and commercial activities.                                       - Project Review                                          HPHA                                            Advocate
                                                                                    - Housing Development Programs                            private entities                                Implementer/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
91.   Require proposals for special needs housing to be permitted subject to
community and agency review to maintain flexibility in the location of special      - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
needs housing and promote flexible site design that preserves natural features and  - Project Review
scenic elements.
92.   Allow heights above 40 feet, subject to community and agency review, only
when warranted due to the required flood elevation, steep slope of the site, or the - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
desire to protect important natural features. Gabled or similar roof forms should   - Project Review
be used to reflect a primarily rural residential design character.
93.   Ensure compatibility of building scale, roof form, and materials with      - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator/
adjacent residential uses.                                                          - Project Review                                                                                          Advocate
Commercial Areas – General
94.   Utilize building forms and details which reflect the region’s rural chara- Land Use Ordinance                                                                                      Regulator/
and incorporate the style and any desirable distinctive features of buildings in    - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
the community in which they are located.
95.   Encourage the use of building façades, sloped roofs, and breaks in the roo- Land Use Ordinance                                                                                      Regulator/
line to reduce the apparent scale of large roof plates in commercial buildings with - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
multiple storefronts.
96.   Avoid blank façades on portions of buildings visible from the street. Prov- Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator/
articulation through the use of building materials, finishes and fenestration.      - Project Review                                                                                          Advocate
97.   Reflect a more residential scale and character in the portions of commercia- Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator/
buildings that are adjacent to or readily visible from residential areas.           - Project Review                                                                                          Advocate
98.   Limit commercial buildings to a maximum 50,000 square feet of retail space,- Land Use Ordinance                                                                                      Regulator/
and a 40-foot height limit, including roof form. In general, buildings should       - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
maintain a low-rise, rural scale.
99.   Avoid the use of large, continuous buildings in new commercial developments.
Commercial buildings adjacent to residential areas should be designed to recognize  - Land Use Ordinance                                                                                      Regulator/
the balance between commercial needs and residential concerns. In general, the      - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
physical composition of height, size, and massing of commercial buildings in these
locations should be compatible with adjacent residential development.
100.   Provide for the general visibility from Kamehameha Highway of buildings   - Land Use Ordinance                                                                                      Regulator/
within commercial centers, and employ adequate and appropriately designed signage   - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
at entries.
101.   Provide access to parking and loading areas primarily from Kamehameha                                                                                                               Regulator/
Highway for the shopping areas in Kahuku and Lā‘ie, and exclusively for the Rural- Land Use Ordinance                                      DOT                                             Advocate
Community Commercial Centers (Hau‘ula and Ka‘a‘awa) and country store         - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
establishments that front the highway. Alternative access should be considered when                                                           private entities                                Advocate
appropriate and feasible.                                                                                                                                                                     Implementer
                                                                                                                                              DOT                                             Implementer
102.   Employ site design practices and provide facilities which promote         - Capital Improvement Program                             DTS                                             Implementer
pedestrian, bicycle and public transit access.                                      - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
103.   Improve bus stops in front of commercial centers, including pull-out bus                                                            DTS                                             Implementer/
stop lanes and shelters for waiting passengers.                                     - Capital Improvement Program                             private entities                                Advocate
                                                                                                                                                                                              Implementer
104.   Provide racks for bicycle parking at all commercial centers and locate them                                                                                                         Regulator/
where they are secure and visible from entry points or other heavy circulation      - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
areas.
105.   Emphasize that existing commercial space should be occupied before the    - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
development of new commercial properties is considered.                             - Zone Change                                                                                             Advocate
106.   Use existing commercial space and the planned future expansion of the                                                                                                               Regulator/
existing Lā‘ie rural regional commercial center to accommodate future commercial - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
needs.
107.   Plant a landscape screen consisting of trees and hedges along streets     - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
fronting parking lots.                                                              - Project Review
108.   Provide shade trees throughout parking lots.                              - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
                                                                                    - Project Review
109.   Visually screen service areas from public and residential areas.          - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
                                                                                    - Project Review
110.   Require indirect illumination for signage visible from residential areas. - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
                                                                                    - Project Review
Commercial Areas – Kahuku Country Town
111.   Incorporate architectural themes and details in new buildings and building                                                                                                          Regulator/
renovations which reflect the traditional built forms and cultural heritage of      - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
Kahuku and other plantation communities in Hawai‘i.
112.   Promote the development of two-story as well as one-story buildings to                                                                                                              Regulator/
accommodate and encourage the desired mix of uses. The sugar mill theme should be   - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
continued.
113.   Keep buildings relatively small in size and distinctive in character, and - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
avoid the development of long “shopping center”-type structures.                                                                                                                          Advocate
114.   Group buildings and related public spaces in a way which fosters a                                                                                                                  Regulator/
pedestrian orientation and encourages travel on foot between different              - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
establishments.
Commercial Areas – Lā‘ie Rural Regional Commercial Center
115.   Employ architectural design strategies, forms, and details in new building
design which reduce the sense of building mass of the center. Incorporate           - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
architectural forms and details in future renovations of existing buildings which                                                                                                             Advocate
visually reduce their apparent size.
116.   Incorporate architectural themes and details in new buildings and building- Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
renovations which are appropriate to the region’s rural character.                                                                                                                          Advocate
117.   Maintain the existing center’s low-rise building scale consistent with t- Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
character of surrounding residential development.                                                                                                                                             Advocate
118.   To the extent possible, site new buildings in a manner which emphasizes a
pedestrian orientation and encourages travel on foot between new and existing                                                                                                                 Regulator/
establishments. Future renovation, redevelopment or expansion of the Rural Regional - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
Commercial Center should take or create opportunities to implement a primarily
pedestrian-oriented, village-like setting, in contrast to its current linear form.
Commercial Areas – Hau‘ula and Ka‘a‘awa Rural Community Commercial Center
119.   Encourage and support new building construction, existing building                                                                                                                  Regulator/
renovation or site redevelopment in a manner which complements and conveys the      - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
surrounding area’s rural character.
120.   Utilize landscaping within the parking lot and along the center’s highwa- Land Use Ordinance                                                                                      Regulator/
frontage in order to soften its appearance and improve its compatibility with the   - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
community’s rural character.
Commercial Areas – Country Stores
121.   Encourage renovations to existing establishments which maintain or, where                                                                                                           Regulator/
appropriate, improve upon the traditional stand-alone “country store” architectu- Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
style found in Hawai‘i’s rural communities.
122.   Require the architectural character of any redeveloped buildings to be                                                                                                              Regulator/
harmonious with adjacent developments and setting in form, material, finishes and   - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
color.
123.   Retain the existing stand-alone, small-scale, limited setback, one-story  - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator/
height building form in the redevelopment of any existing establishments.           - Project Review                                                                                          Advocate
Business/Light Industrial Areas
124.   Minimize the visibility of large building volumes and tall building or    - Land Use Ordinance
machinery elements from residential areas, commercial and civic districts, resort   - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
areas, and parks through careful site planning and use of ample landscaping.
125.   Locate and buffer operations that discharge air or water pollutants, even
when treated, in areas where they would impose the least potential harm on the
natural environment, in case the treatment process fails to perform adequately.     - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
Uses that generate high noise levels should be located and operated in a way that
will keep noise to an acceptable level in existing and planned residential areas.
126.   Provide mostly small lots within the Lā‘ie Industrial Park to accommoda- Subdivision Rules and Regulations                       DPP                                             Regulator
small business service uses.                                                        - Project Review
127.   No buildings should be primarily used for offices or business services.   - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
128.   Building heights should convey the area’s rural character and generally - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
exceed 40 feet.                                                                     - Project Review
129.   Buildings should maintain a low-rise, rural character and be compatible with                                                                                                        Regulator/
surrounding land uses which include agricultural lands, open space, and residential - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
areas.
130.   Employ building coverage that is appropriate to the rural environment and - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
minimize visibility of structures with careful site planning and ample landscaping.                                                                                                           Advocate
131.   Minimize the visibility of parking, storage, industrial equipment and     - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
operations areas from the street by planting a landscape screen.                                                                                                                              Advocate
132.   Encourage the use of native plants in landscaping.                        - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
Technology Park
133.   The character of the technology park should be relatively low in scale and
visibility. The form of the structures should be modeled on campus-like business
parks, but the architectural style should be in keeping with and blend into the
rural character of the technology park’s setting and adjacent uses. Buildings     - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
should not be visible from off-site scenic viewpoints looking mauka, and the site
should be carefully planned and ample landscaping used so the development is
integrated into its surroundings.
134.   The technology park is primarily intended for emerging and technology-
oriented industries and support services. Uses that should not be permitted in the
technology park include uses that: produce noise and noxious emissions; uses        - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
connected with agricultural production and processing; large-scale retailing/       - Project Review
wholesaling commercial operations; dwelling units or overnight accommodations of
any kind.
135.   Uses are intended to be emerging and technology-oriented industries,      - Land Use Ordinance
including but not limited to telecommunications, business education, and research   - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
and development facilities.
136.   Building heights should convey the area’s rural character and generally - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
exceed 40 feet.                                                                     - Project Review
137.   Buildings should maintain a low-rise, rural character and be compatible with                                                                                                        Regulator/
surrounding land uses which include agricultural lands, open space, and residential - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
areas.
138.   Employ building coverage that is appropriate to the rural environment; avo- Land Use Ordinance                                                                                      Regulator/
use of large, continuous buildings; and minimize visibility of structures with      - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
careful site planning and ample landscaping.
139.   Soften the visual impacts of parking, storage, industrial equipment and   - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
operations areas from the street by planting a landscape screen.                                                                                                                              Advocate
140.   Encourage the use of native trees and plant materials in landscaping.     - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
Visitor Facilities – Turtle Bay Resort and Coastline
141.   Plans to expand the resort should be confined to the resort owner’s
agreement commitments, with surrounding areas to be preserved for open space and    - Conservation Easement, Subdivision Rules and
low impact recreation. No further approvals resulting in an expansion of the        Regulations, Project Review                               DPP                                             Regulator
existing resort beyond what is consistent with the already granted land use
approvals should be granted.
142.   Preserve and enhance public access to the shoreline through the creation of                                                         DPR                                             Implementer
two new major shoreline parks. Public access through the main resort should also be - Project Review, Park Creation/Maintenance               DLNR                                            Implementer
retained with public parking provided.
143.   Preserve and enhance existing features of topography, landscape and views - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
unique to the area.                                                                                                                                                                           Advocate
144.   Site and landscape buildings in a manner that protects and emphasizes the - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
dramatic coastal views.
                                                                                    - Chapter 6E, HRS                                         DLNR                                            Regulator
145.   Protect cultural resources and practices within the area.                 - TBD                                                     DPP                                             Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
Visitor Facilities – Polynesian Cultural Center
146.   Design and construction of new facilities or renovations should be
consistent with existing architectural character or appropriate Polynesian themes                                                                                                             Regulator/
expressed in the existing Center. PCC should continue to improve its overall design - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
character and outward appearance as a Polynesian attraction, with emphasis toward
tropical landscaping.
147.   The architectural character of new facilities should respect the region’- Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
rural features.                                                                                                                                                                               Advocate
148.   Expansion areas should be low-rise in character and set back from the                                                                                                               Regulator/
roadway and adjacent uses. The architectural character of new facilities should     - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
respect the region’s rural features.
149.   Impacts to Kamehameha Highway traffic flow should be minimized by focusing                                                          DOT                                             Regulator
traffic through existing intersections without creating new driveway connections to - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
the highway.                                                                                                                                                                                  Advocate
150.   Portions of the Center adjacent to residential areas should be organized and                                                                                                        Regulator/
designed to relate compatibly in scale, materials, character, color, and function   - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
with existing residential structures and activity.
151.   Where functionally practical and visually appropriate, use breaks in roof - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
lines to reduce scale and apparent building mass.                                                                                                                                             Advocate
152.   Place any new parking and service areas behind the buildings or otherwise - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
visually screen them from streets and residential areas.                                                                                                                                      Advocate
153.   Maintain and enhance view channels of the shoreline from Kamehameha Highwa- Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
154.   Include a landscape screen of trees and hedges in setbacks from street    - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
frontages and property lines.                                                                                                                                                                 Advocate
155.   Plant and maintain shade trees throughout parking lots.                   - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator/
                                                                                    - Project Review                                                                                          Advocate
156.   Use native plants and landscaping materials that reflect PCC’s Polynesia- Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
themes and complement the region’s rural character.                                                                                                                                         Advocate
157.   Provide a public pedestrian easement to the shoreline.                    - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
Visitor Facilities - Visitor Accommodations in Lā‘ie
158.   Maintain a rural character in any design or expansion. Any expansion is                                                                                                             Regulator/
envisioned to blend into the surrounding community in form and materials and        - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
provide a feel of kama‘aina simplicity and elegance.
159.   Any redevelopment on the site should enhance the surrounding community by - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
incorporating appropriate size, orientation and materials.                                                                                                                                    Advocate
160.   Lā‘ie Inn expansion or redevelopment should respect flooding constraint- Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
cultural sensitivity of the site.                                                                                                                                                             Advocate
Visitor Facilities – Eco- and Agricultural-Tourism Operations
161.   Such uses should be low impact, appropriate to sound management of affected
resources, compatible with other existing uses in the area, and reflective of       - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
community values.
162.   Eco- and agricultural-tourism uses should be compatible with the natural
environment and adjacent uses. Activities should not significantly or negatively    - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
alter the natural state of the environment in which they take place or impact other
uses.
163.   Facilities used for the assembly of participants and parking of vehicles
should be low-rise and small in scale. They should also be sufficiently set back    - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
from public roadways and adjacent properties, and screened with landscaping, so
that they are not visible from these locations.
164.   Eco-and agricultural-tourism operations should be reasonably accessible fr- Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
Kamehameha Highway and should not adversely impact traffic on local streets.
165.   Visually screen parking areas from roadways, streets and residential areas- Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
166.   Encourage the use of native plants in landscaping.                        - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
167.   Use only low-level or indirect lighting which meets safety and security   - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
requirements.
168.   Ensure compatibility between the type, size, design, placement, and color - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
signage and the context of adjacent uses and the area’s rural character.                                                                                                                    Advocate
Institutional Uses - Health and Wellness Facilities
169.   Health and wellness facilities should be low-density, residential-scale                                                                                                             Regulator/
buildings. The visibility of buildings or outdoor activities should be minimized    - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
through site planning and landscaping.
170.   Facilities should be sited so that the intensity of uses and hours of
operation are compatible with adjacent uses. The built environment should avoid                                                                                                               Regulator/
adverse impacts on natural resources. To retain a sense of place, facilities should - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
incorporate natural features and landscape materials that are indigenous to the
area.
171.   Facilities should be easily accessible from a collector street or major
roadway while minimizing negative impacts on residential streets. Sufficient on-    - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
site parking should be provided.
172.   Maintain a rural character in the height, size, and massing of buildings i- Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
order to be compatible with adjacent residential or commercial uses.                                                                                                                          Advocate
173.   Minimize the visibility of parking areas from the street by planting a    - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
landscape screen along street frontages.                                                                                                                                                      Advocate
174.   Encourage the use of native plants in landscaping.                        - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
Institutional Uses – Brigham Young University – Hawai‘i
175.   Encourage the University to maintain its strong community-orientation and
continue to serve the Ko‘olau Loa region as a center of education and multi-      - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
cultural exchange, as well as support community activities and services and provide
adult educational opportunities.
176.   The design of new facilities should be environmentally sensitive and
compatible with architectural character and culture of the existing campus and      - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
adjacent residential areas.
Transportation Systems         
177.   Provide improved services and facilities for express buses, such as more  - Bus Service Improvement Plan                            DTS                                             Implementer
frequent, larger-capacity and more comfortable vehicles and park-and-ride           - Capital Improvement Program                             OTS                                             Implementer
facilities.
178.   Locate public bus stops to be convenient and accessible to residential are- Bus Facility and Systems Plans
and hubs of community activity. Use architectural design elements that complement   - Project Review                                          DTS                                             Implementer
the natural setting and generously shelter passengers.
179.   Promote the use of transportation demand management strategies, including                                                                                                           Implementer/
measures such as ridesharing (car and vanpooling), improved bus service and routes, - TBD                                                     DOT                                             Advocate
non-vehicular travel modes (both motorized and non-motorized modes), and modified                                                             DTS                                             Implementer/
work hours, as well as work-from-home options to reduce commutes.                                                                                                                             Advocate
180.   Provide safety improvements along Kamehameha Highway.                     - O‘ahu Transportation Improvement Program              OMPO                                            Advocate
                                                                                    - Capital Improvement Program                             DOT                                             Implementer
181.   Identify and establish an emergency/secondary access route to provide for                                                           DOT                                             Implementer
the safe and efficient evacuation of residents and the movement of emergency        - TBD                                                     DTS                                             Implementer
response personnel (e.g., fire, police, ambulance) in the event that Kamehameha     - Capital Improvement Program                             DEM                                             Implementer
Highway is impassable due to natural disasters or other emergency incidents.
182.   Work with the responsible State and City agencies and private landowners to                                                         DOT                                             Implementer
develop a regional pedestrian/bikeway system linking parks, schools and commercial  - Bicycle Master Plan                                     DTS                                             Implementer
areas with residential communities.
183.   Modify right-of-way design in selected areas, particularly along principal
pedestrian routes and street crossings, and near bus stops to improve pedestrian    - Subdivision Street Standards                            DOT                                             Advocate
and bicyclist safety and enhance the users’ experience – e.g., change travelway - Project Review                                          DTS                                             Advocate
widths, pavement widths or texture, introduce signage and more generous landscape                                                             DPP                                             Regulator
planting.
184.   Provide convenient pedestrian paths within commercial and other high-     - Project Review                                          DOT                                             Implementer
activity areas to encourage people to walk short distances for multi-purpose trips  - Capital Improvement Program                             DTS                                             Implementer
instead of moving the vehicle to another parking facility.                                                                                    DPP                                             Regulator
185.   Implement traffic calming measures appropriate for residential areas to
reduce speeding in excess of posted limits and discourage use of local streets for                                                            DOT                                             Implementer
bypass or shortcut, thereby sustaining overall safety and enjoyment for pedestrians - Project Review                                          DTS                                             Implementer
and bicyclists. The community and the City will work together in identifying        - Capital Improvement Program                             DPP                                             Regulator
streets where there are speeding or cut-through traffic concerns to develop viable
mitigative measures.
186.   Design off-street parking facilities more efficiently to encourage joint u- Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
of parking and less pavement area dedicated to parking.                             - Project Review
187.   Provide safe pedestrian walkways on bridges.                              - Capital Improvement Program                             DOT                                             Implementer
188.   Establish rural streetscape design elements and development standards within
residential areas consistent with the rural character of the region. Allow for
rural elements that reduce the amount of impervious surfaces, such as minimum       - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
pavement widths to support traffic demand and emergency vehicle access, shared      - Subdivision Rules and Regulations
driveways, reduced parking requirements, more landscaping and grassed swales in
place of curbs and gutters.
Water Systems
189.   State and private well development projects should be coordinated and made- Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
consistent with the Ko‘olau Loa Watershed Management Plan.                                                                                  BWS                                             Implementer
190.   Conserve the use of potable water by implementing the following measures, as
feasible and appropriate: (1) low flush toilets, flow constrictors and other water                                                                                                            Regulator/
conserving devices in commercial and residential developments as required by        - Uniform Plumbing Code                                   DPP                                             Advocate
ordinance; (2) indigenous, drought-tolerant plant material and drip irrigation      - Project Review                                          BWS                                             Advocate
systems in landscaped areas, and use drip irrigation systems; and (3) the use of                                                              ENV                                             Implementer
recycled water for the irrigation of golf courses and other landscaped areas where
this would not adversely affect potable groundwater supply.
191.   Future water development should not adversely impact stream flow or       - Ko‘olau Loa Watershed Management Plan                 CWRM                                            Implementer
nearshore water quality.                                                            - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
                                                                                                                                              BWS                                             Advocate
Wastewater Treatment
192.   As feasible and appropriate, beneficially use reclaimed water for         - Ko‘olau Loa Watershed Management Plan                 BWS                                             Advocate
agriculture and landscaping irrigation, as well as other non-potable water uses.    - Wastewater Management Plan                              ENV                                             Implementer
193.   Upgrade the Kahuku WWTP to allow for re-use of the treated effluent for   - Wastewater Management Plan                              ENV                                             Implementer
irrigation purposes.
194.   Identify appropriate areas and technologies for future wastewater facilities
that maintain the rural character and are proportionate to future population        - Wastewater Management Plan                              ENV                                             Implementer
projections.
195.   Establish and maintain a sufficient separation between wastewater treatmen- Wastewater Management Plan
plants and any nearby urban uses to avoid significant adverse odor impacts, and     - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
provide sufficient screening which substantially block views of such plants from    - Project Review                                          ENV                                             Advocate
developed areas, parks and public rights-of-way.
196.   Discourage new residential, commercial, resort, or school uses in close   - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator/
proximity to wastewater treatment plants where odors are present.                                                                                                                             Advocate
Electrical Systems
197.   Provide adequate and reliable electrical service.                         - Utilities Plan                                          HECO                                            Implementer
198.   Locate and design system elements such as renewable energy facilities (e.g.,                                                        HECO                                            Implementer
wind and solar), electrical sub-stations, communication sites, and transmission     - Utilities Plan                                          Telecommunication                               Implementer
lines, including consideration of underground transmission lines, to avoid or       - Project Review                                          service providers                               Regulator/
mitigate visual impacts on scenic and natural resources, as well as public safety                                                             DPP                                             Advocate
considerations.
199.   Discourage the use and installation of overhead utility lines and poles.                                                            HECO                                            Implementer
Strong consideration should be given to placing replacement and new transmission    - Utilities Undergrounding Plan                           Telecommunication service providers             Implementer
lines underground to enhance view planes, increase highway safety and improve                                                                 DPP                                             Regulator/
utility service.                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
                                                                                    - State Energy Plan                                       DBEDT                                           Advocate
200.   Encourage the development and use of renewable energy sources and energy  - Utilities Plan                                          HECO                                            Implementer
conservation measures.                                                              - Uniform Building Code                                   DPP                                             Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
Solid Waste Handling and Disposal
201.   Expand recycling collection facilities and services, and public outreach a- Solid Waste Management Plan                             ENV                                             Implementer
education programs that promote responsible waste management and source reduction.
202.   Continue recycling of regional green waste at the Lā‘ie Convenience Cen- Solid Waste Management Plan                             ENV                                             Implementer
and the Lā‘ie Water Reclamation Facility composting operation.
203.   Expand the use of automated refuse collection in residential areas.       - Solid Waste Management Plan                             ENV                                             Implementer
204.   Emphasize retaining or detaining storm water for gradual release into the - Storm Drainage Standards                                DPP                                             Regulator
ground as an alternative strategy for management of storm water.                    - Project Review
Drainage Systems
205.   Integrate planned improvements to the drainage system into a regional open
space network by creating retention basins, passive recreation areas and
recreational access for pedestrians and bicycles. Drainage system design should                                                               DPP                                             Regulator
emphasize control and minimization of non-point source pollution. Where the         - Storm Drainage Standards                                DDC                                             Implementer
hardening of stream channels is unavoidable, make the improvements in a manner      - Project Review                                          DFM                                             Implementer
which maintains and protects natural resources and aesthetic values of the stream,
and avoid degradation of coastline and of stream and near-shore water quality,
consistent with guidelines expressed in Section 3.1.2.4.
206.   Regularly maintain and clean drainage ways and flood mitigation structures- Facility Maintenance Plan                               DFM                                             Implementer
of debris to ensure that they achieve the purpose for which they were designed.                                                               private entities                                Implementer
207.   Employ best management practices to minimize runoff exiting from                                                                    DLNR                                            Regulator/
conservation and agricultural land uses and other areas that may generate sediment  - Storm Drainage Standards                                DOA                                             Advocate
and debris.                                                                                                                                   ENV                                             Advocate
                                                                                                                                                                                              Regulator
208.   Any future work performed within the 100-year floodplain will have to adhe- Grading Ordinance
to the requirements of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and meet all  - Subdivision Rules                                       DPP                                             Regulator
flood-proofing requirements.
209.   Develop a comprehensive drainage master plan to address drainage, flood   - TBD                                                     DLNR                                            Advocate
protection and erosion concerns in coastal areas.                                                                                             ENV                                             Implementer
210.   Conduct public outreach and education programs that explain the potential                                                           DOH                                             Implementer
for flooding and how the efforts of individual property owners can minimize the     - Hazard Mitigation Plan                                  DEM                                             Implementer
effects of flooding.
School Facilities
211.   Confirm the adequacy of school facilities before approving new residential                                                          LUC                                             Regulator
development. Approve new residential developments only after the State DOE confirms - Project Review                                          DOE                                             Advocate
that adequate school facilities, either at existing schools or new sites, will be                                                             DPP                                             Regulator
available when the development is occupied.
212.   Coordinate the development and use of athletic facilities such as                                                                   DOE                                             Implementer
playgrounds, playfields and courts, swimming pools, and gymnasiums with the DOE     - School Master Plan                                      DPR                                             Implementer
where the joint use of such facilities would maximize utilization and reduce        - Park Master Plan                                        DDC                                             Advocate
duplication of functions without compromising the schools’ athletic programs.
                                                                                                                                              DOE                                             Implementer
213.   Promote facility design and construction that allows for school buildings - School Master Plan                                      DAGS                                            Implementer
be used as public hurricane shelters.                                               - Project Review                                          DPR                                             Implementer
                                                                                                                                              DEM                                             Advocate
                                                                                                                                              DPP                                             Advocate
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
                                                                                                                                              DOE                                             Implementer/
214.   Support efforts to develop safe and efficient access to schools, emphasizi- School Master Plan                                      DOT                                             Advocate
the importance of secondary routes and pathways other than Kamehameha Highway.      - Project Review                                          DTS                                             Implementer/
                                                                                                                                              DPP                                             Advocate
                                                                                                                                                                                              Regulator
215.   Support the DOE’s requests for school impact fees from developers of                                                                                                              Regulator/
residential projects to ensure that adequate school facilities are in place at the  - Project Review                                          LUC                                             Advocate
time new residential units are occupied.                                            - Zone Change                                             DPP                                             Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advocate
216.   Support resolution of the flooding issues that affect the Kahuku          - TBD                                                     DOE                                             Implementer
Intermediate and High School campus.
217.   Support the development of a regional library for Ko‘olau Loa.          - TBD                                                     DOE                                             Implementer
                                                                                                                                              DAGS                                            Implementer
Civic and Public Safety Facilities
218.   Consider the establishment of a permanent Satellite City Hall in Ko‘olau Loa
at Hau‘ula or Lā‘ie, either of which could serve as a gathering place for      - Operating Budget                                        CSD                                             Implementer
activities and services.
219.   Support the planning and programming of public facilities to create maximum
usage flexibility. In addition, encourage interagency coordination in better
utilization of existing facilities to provide a more integrated approach to         - Facility Master Plans                                   All City Agencies                               Implementer
delivering services in the region. Examples could include using school facilities   - Capital Improvement Program
as emergency shelters, requiring that all new public buildings serve a secondary
function as an emergency shelter.
220.   The only anticipated need for new locations for either police or fire                                                               HFD                                             Implementer
stations is the planned relocation of the Hau‘ula Fire Station outside of the floo- Capital Improvement Program                             DES                                             Implementer
plain. Accommodate any other necessary improvements through renovation or minor                                                               HPD                                             Implementer
expansion of existing facilities for fire/ambulance and police protection.
221.   Provide adequate staffing and facilities for fire/ambulance and police                                                              HFD                                             Implementer
protection.                                                                         - Operating Budget                                        DES                                             Implementer
                                                                                                                                              HPD                                             Implementer
222.   Support adequate staffing and facilities to ensure the continued operation                                                                                                          Implementer/
and maintenance of Kahuku Medical Center and the Ko‘olau Loa Community Health and - Capital Improvement Program                             DOH                                             Advocate
Wellness Center. Allow for the possible development of other health related         - Operating Budget                                        Private entities                                Implementer
facilities that will support the continued viability of the existing facilities.
223.   Promote the creation of safe, crime-deterrent public and private          - Uniform Building Code                                                                                   Regulator/
environments by encouraging the use of crime-preventive principles in the planning  - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Advocate
and design of communities, open spaces, circulation networks, and buildings.
224.   Install outdoor warning sirens as needed to provide advance warning of                                                              State Civil Defense                             Implementer
impending disaster events for the people residing and working in Ko‘olau Loa      - Capital Improvement Program                             DEM                                             Implementer
communities.
Other Community Facilities
225.   Encourage co-location of antennas; towers should host the facilities of mo- Land Use Ordinance
than one service provider to minimize their proliferation and reduce visual         - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
impacts.
226.   Mount antennas onto existing buildings or structures so that public scenic
views and open spaces will not be negatively affected. However, except for the      - Land Use Ordinance                                      DPP                                             Regulator
occupant’s personal use, antennas on single-family dwelling roofs in residential  - Project Review
districts are not appropriate.
227.   Use “stealth” technology (e.g., towers disguised as trees) especially - Land Use Ordinance
freestanding antenna towers in order to blend in with the surrounding environment   - Project Review                                          DPP                                             Regulator
and minimize visual impacts.
 
APPENDIX A: OPEN SPACE, LAND USE, AND PUBLIC FACILITIES MAPS
The Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan includes three color maps:
   •   Open Space Map
   •   Land Use Map
   •   Public Facilities Map
These maps illustrate the long-range vision of the future of the area and the
major land use, open space, and public facility policies that are articulated
in the plan. In examining them the reader should keep in mind that:
   •   These maps are general and conceptual.
   •   They are illustrative of the plan’s policy statements, presented in the
text of this report.
These policy statements, which appear in the preceding chapters, are considered
to be the most important elements of the Plan. The maps are considered
illustrations of the policies. However, it is recognized that the maps may be
more accessible and more helpful in assisting the reader to comprehend the
geographical context of the Plan’s written policies and guidelines. This
section of the Plan, therefore, presents a brief explanation of the contents of
each of these maps.
Elements common to each of the three maps include an organizing boundary and
four land use designations: “Preservation,” “Agriculture,” “Parks,” and
“Military.” They are presented below. Common information particular to each map
is presented under each map topic.
The maps which follow display a Community Growth Boundary. These maps are not
parcel-specific, but illustrate generalized categories or group of land uses
within the region.
Because they are not parcel-specific, the lines depicted by the Community
Growth Boundary and land use designations do not indicate precise or abrupt
demarcations. Rather, the geographic extent or actual magnitude of permissible
or appropriate uses depicted within these areas should be evaluated and
determined in concert with relevant sections of the plan’s text and specific
site characteristics. The extent or magnitude of land uses depicted within a
boundary may be limited by actual onsite or adjacent conditions such as slope
or other topographic constraints, soil type, existing drainage ways, flood or
rockfall hazard, or the presence of natural or cultural resources. Conversely,
the actual appropriate extent of uses prescribed by a specific boundary may
extend beyond the indicated boundary by virtue of appropriate physical
characteristics, compatibility with adjacent land uses, and physical
accessibility, including access to the site from existing roads. In such cases
the physical extent of those uses would be defined by actual site constraints
similar to those which would constrain uses within those boundaries.
COMMUNITY GROWTH BOUNDARY
The Community Growth Boundary defines, protects, and contains the intended
extent of the “built-up” or “settled” areas of rural communities. Its purposes
are to provide adequate lands to support established communities, to protect
such communities from more intense forms of development, and to preserve lands
outside the boundary for agriculture or other resource or open space values.
Areas within this boundary characteristically consist of relatively small,
dispersed residential communities and towns. In Ko‘olau Loa, the Community
Growth Boundary includes the built areas of Kahuku, Lā‘ie, Hau‘ula, Punalu‘u,
Kahana, and Ka‘a‘awa.
At the area of Turtle Bay Resort, from west to east, the Community Growth
Boundary generally follows Kamehameha Highway, encompassing the existing
dwellings on the west side of Kawela Bay. Thereafter, it follows Kamehameha
Highway towards the east, encompassing the Turtle Bay Resort, and then north to
the shoreline. The boundary circumscribes the town of Kahuku and includes
vacant areas for expansion of residential and industrial uses. On the mauka
side of Kamehameha Highway, the boundary includes the Lā‘ie Corporation Yard
and Convenience Center. Thereafter, it extends south, including the town of
Lā‘ie and the Brigham Young University-Hawai‘i and vacant areas to support the
expansion of Brigham Young University-Hawai‘i and the Polynesian Cultural
Center. Thereafter, the boundary heads east to the shoreline at La‘ie Beach
Park and includes the Lā‘ie Town residential area makai of Kamehameha Highway.
Thereafter, the boundary circumscribes the rural communities of Hau‘ula,
Punalu‘u, Kahana, and Ka‘a‘awa.
PRESERVATION
Preservation lands include those lands not valued primarily for agriculture,
but which form an important part of a region’s open space fabric. They possess
natural, cultural, or scenic resource values, and include important wildlife
habitat, cultural sites, significant landforms, views, or hazard areas. The
Preservation land use designation may include golf courses and cemeteries not
located within the Community Growth Boundary, provided they are predominantly
free of roofed structures. Preservation lands include the following types of
land:
   •   Land necessary for protecting watersheds, water resources and water
supplies.
   •   Lands necessary for the conservation, preservation and enhancement of
sites with scenic, historic, archaeological or ecologic significance.
   •   Lands necessary for providing and preserving park lands, wilderness and
beach reserves, and for conserving natural ecosystems of endemic plants, fish
and wildlife, for forestry, and other related activities to these uses.
   •   Lands having an elevation below the maximum inland line of the zone of
wave action, and marine waters, fish ponds and tide pools of O‘ahu unless
otherwise designated on the land use map.
   •   All offshore and outlying islands of O‘ahu unless otherwise classified.
   •   Lands with topography, soils, climate or other related environmental
factors that may not be normally adaptable or presently needed for urban, rural
or agricultural use.
   •   Lands with general slopes of 20 percent or more which provide for open
space amenities and/or scenic values.
   •   Lands susceptible to floods and soil erosion, lands undergoing major
erosion damage and requiring corrective attention by the State or Federal
Government, and lands necessary to the protection of the health, safety and
welfare of the public by reason of soil instability or the lands’
susceptibility to landslides and/or inundation by tsunami and flooding.
   •   Lands used for national, state or city parks.
   •   Lands used for golf courses and cemeteries, provided they are not
located within the Community Growth Boundary and are predominantly free of
roofed structures.
   •   Lands suitable for growing of commercial timber, grazing, hunting, and
recreation uses, including facilities accessory to such uses when said
facilities are compatible with the natural physical environment.
AGRICULTURE
Lands with agricultural value by virtue of current agricultural use or high
value for future agricultural use, including those areas identified as “Prime,”
“Unique,” or “Other” Important lands on the Agricultural Lands of Importance to
the State of Hawai‘i (ALISH) maps. Agricultural areas include lands suitable
for crop growing, grazing and livestock raising, flower cultivation, nurseries,
orchards, aquaculture, or similar activities.
PARKS AND GOLF COURSES
Public and private parks and recreational facilities, including beach parks,
playgrounds, playfields, district parks, botanical gardens, and golf courses.
MILITARY
Lands for military and military support purposes, excluding military-owned
lands that are leased or licensed to others on a full-time basis for non-
military uses.
A.1 OPEN SPACE MAP
The Open Space Map is intended to illustrate the region’s major open space
patterns and resources as outlined in Chapter 3. It highlights major open space
elements and resources, including agricultural and preservation lands, major
recreational facilities, important “panoramic” views, natural stream corridors
and drainage ways, and important boundaries.
Ahupua‘a boundaries, based on the traditional ahupua‘a method of land
organization, have been adopted for use and displayed in the plan as a method
of organizing land uses and enhancing community definition within the region.
A.2 LAND USE MAP
This map illustrates the desired long-range land use pattern for the Ko‘olau
Loa region. It supports the Plan’s vision and policies. The map includes the
following terms:
Rural Residential
Single-family homes in country settings on medium-sized to large lots, on which
rural development standards are employed and provisions for pedestrian
circulation, landscaping, and open space are emphasized. Rural Residential also
contains minor pockets of existing apartments in Punalu‘u and Turtle Bay, and
additional apartments for faculty and student housing on the Brigham Young
University-Hawai‘i campus to support its planned expansion.
Country Town
A small-scale, low-rise, mixed-use center of commerce and community activity in
rural character and setting in which principal establishments are oriented on
the street. Land use mixtures may include retail, office, and dining
establishments, compatible service businesses and light industry, and
residential uses. Commercial activity is concentrated along street frontages in
typically “Main Street” settings.
Rural Regional Commercial Center
A consolidated cluster of small-scale, low-rise retail, office, and dining
establishments that serve the immediate and nearby communities. Its primary
visual appearance is rural, pedestrian circulation and amenities are emphasized
throughout the complex, and structures are compatible in scale and form with
adjacent residential areas. While supermarkets are encouraged, “big box” retail
is not.
Rural Community Commercial Center
A small cluster of small-scale, low-rise commercial and service businesses
which serve primarily the immediate community. Its primary visual appearance is
rural. Buildings are generally compatible in scale and form with adjacent
residential areas.
Resort
Principally full-service or specialty hotels and apartments, with accessory or
supporting uses which enhance the viability of the principal use.
Visitor Facilities
Entertainment-oriented visitor attractions with no overnight accommodations.
Technology Park
Intended for light technology and science-oriented industries and businesses in
a campus-like setting. Development intensity is low, while open space and
landscaping are the predominant visual and physical elements.
Industrial
Facilities for processing, construction, manufacturing, transportation,
wholesaling, storage, or similar economic activities, and supporting facilities
which directly enhance their viability.
Institutional
Facilities for public use or benefit, including schools, churches, hospitals,
group living establishments, utilities and infrastructure production or support
facilities, civic, public, and social services facilities, and government
facilities.
A.3 PUBLIC FACILITIES MAP
The Public Facilities Map illustrates the major infrastructure needed to
implement the vision for the Ko‘olau Loa. It shows the location of existing
facilities and conceptual location for some of the future required
infrastructure facilities.
It is not meant to be amended between revisions of the Plan and should not be
confused with the Public Infrastructure Map (PIM) used in the Capital
Improvement Program budget process. Major public facilities which are to be
funded through the City Capital Improvement Program budget appropriation must
be shown on the PIM. The PIM is not part of the Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable
Communities Plan, and is adopted and amended by resolution.
Projects which are not listed in the Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan
or not shown on the Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan maps can still be
added to the PIM by Council resolution if the Council finds them to be
consistent with the vision and policies of the Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable
Communities Plan.
   Open Space Map 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9469.png]
 
   Land Use Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9467.png]
 
   Public Facilities Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9465.png]
 
ARTICLE 8: NORTH SHORE
Sections
   
24-8.1   Definitions
   
24-8.2   Applicability and intent
   
24-8.3   Adoption of the North Shore sustainable communities plan
   
24-8.4   Existing zoning and subdivision ordinances, approvals, and
applications
   
24-8.5   Consistency
   
24-8.6   Review of development and other applications
   
24-8.7   Zoning change applications
   
24-8.8   Annual capital improvement program review
   
24-8.9   Five-year review
   
24-8.10   Authority
   
24-8.11   Severability
   
24-8.12   Conflicting provisions
§ 24-8.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Charter. The Revised Charter of the City and County of Honolulu 1973, as
amended.
City. The City and County of Honolulu.
Council. The city council of the City and County of Honolulu.
County. The City and County of Honolulu.
Department or Department of Planning and Permitting. The department of planning
and permitting of the City and County of Honolulu.
Development. Any public improvement project, or any public or private project
requiring a zoning map amendment.
Development Plan or Sustainable Communities Plan. A plan document for a given
geographic area which consists of conceptual schemes for implementing and
accomplishing the development objectives and policies of the general plan for
the several parts of the City and County of Honolulu.
Director. The director of planning and permitting.
Environmental Assessment or EA. A written evaluation prepared in compliance
with the environmental council’s procedural rules implementing HRS Chapter 343
to determine whether an action may have a significant environmental effect.
Environmental Impact Statement or EIS. An informational document prepared in
compliance with the environmental council’s procedural rules implementing HRS
Chapter 343; and which discloses the environmental effects of a proposed
action, effects of a proposed action on the economic and social welfare of the
community and State, effects of the economic activities arising out of the
proposed action, measures proposed to minimize adverse effects, and
alternatives to the action and their environmental effects.
Finding of No Significant Impact or FONSI. A determination based on an
environmental assessment that the subject action will not have a significant
effect and, therefore, will not require the preparation of an environmental
impact statement.
Functional Plan. The public facility and infrastructure plans prepared by
public agencies to further implement the vision, policies and guidelines set
forth in the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan.
General Plan. The general plan of the City and County of Honolulu as defined by
Charter § 6-1508.
Hawaii Revised Statutes or HRS. Hawaii Revised Statutes, as amended.
Planning Commission. The planning commission of the City and County of
Honolulu.
Project Master Plan. A conceptual plan that covers all phases of a development
project. The project master plan also describes how the project conforms to the
vision for the North Shore, and the relevant policies and guidelines for the
site, the surrounding lands, and the region.
Revised Ordinances of Honolulu or ROH. Revised Ordinances of Honolulu, as
amended.
Significant Zone Change. A zone change which involves at least one of the
following:
(1)   Changes in zoning of 10 or more acres of land to any zoning district or
combination of zoning districts, excluding preservation or agricultural zoning
districts;
(2)   Any change in zoning of more than five acres to an apartment, resort,
commercial, industrial or mixed use zoning district; or
(3)   Any development which would have a major social, environmental, or policy
impact, or major cumulative impacts due to a series of applications in the same
area.
Special Area. A designated area within the North Shore Sustainable Communities
Plan area that requires more detailed planning efforts beyond what is contained
in the North Shore Sustainable Communities.
Special Area Plan. A plan for a special area.
Unilateral Agreement. A conditional zoning agreement made pursuant to §
21-2.80 or any predecessor provision that imposes conditions on a landowner or
developer’s use of the property at the time of the enactment of an ordinance
for a zoning change.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.1) (Ord. 11-3)
§ 24-8.2 Applicability and intent.
(a)   The North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan area extends from Kaena
Point to Waialee Gulch near Kawela Bay, and from the shoreline to the slopes of
the northerly ends of Waianae and Koolau mountain ranges.
(b)   It is the intent of the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan to
provide a guide for orderly and coordinated public and private sector
development in a manner that is consistent with applicable general plan
provisions, including the designation of North Shore as a rural area where
growth will be managed so that “an undesirable spreading of development is
prevented.”
(c)   This article and the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan are not
regulatory. Rather, they are established with the explicit intent of providing
a coherent vision to guide resource protection and land use within North Shore.
This article shall guide any development for North Shore, public investment in
infrastructure, zoning and other regulatory procedures, and the preparation of
the city’s annual capital improvement program budget.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.2) (Ord. 11-3)
§ 24-8.3 Adoption of the North Shore sustainable communities plan.
(a)   This article is adopted pursuant to Charter § 6-1509 and provides a self-
contained sustainable communities plan document for North Shore. Upon enactment
of this article, all proposed developments will be evaluated against how well
they fulfill the vision for North Shore enunciated in the North Shore
Sustainable Communities Plan and how closely they meet the policies and
guidelines selected to implement that vision.
(b)   The plan entitled “North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan,” attached as
Exhibit A is adopted by reference and made a part of
Chapter 24, Article 8, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu.
(c)   
Chapter 24, Article 1, entitled “Development Plan Common Provisions,” in its
entirety is no longer applicable to the North Shore Sustainable Communities
Plan area. The North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan, as adopted by
reference by this ordinance, supersedes any and all common provisions
previously applicable to the North Shore area.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.3) (Ord. 11-3)
§ 24-8.4 Existing zoning and subdivision ordinances, approvals, and
applications.
(a)   All existing subdivisions and zoning approved before May 3, 2011* shall
continue to remain in effect following the enactment of this ordinance.
(b)   Subdivision and zoning ordinances applicable to the North Shore
Sustainable Communities Plan area enacted before May 3, 2011* shall continue to
regulate the use of land within demarcated zones of the North Shore Sustainable
Communities Plan area until such time as the subdivision and zoning ordinances
may be amended to be consistent with the North Shore Sustainable Communities
Plan.
(c)   Notwithstanding adoption of the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan,
applications for subdivision actions and land use permits accepted by the
department for processing before May 3, 2011* shall continue to be subject only
to applicable ordinances and rules in effect when the application is accepted
for processing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.4) (Ord. 11-3)
Editor’s note:
   * “May 3, 2011” is substituted for “the effective date of this ordinance.”
§ 24-8.5 Consistency.
(a)   The performance of prescribed powers, duties, and functions by all city
agencies shall conform to and implement the policies and provisions of this
article and the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan. Pursuant to Charter §
6-1511.3, public improvement projects and subdivision and zoning ordinances
shall be consistent with the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan, as
adopted.
(b)   Any questions of interpretation regarding the consistency of a proposed
development with the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan and the
objectives and policies of the general plan shall ultimately be resolved by the
council.
(c)   In determining whether a proposed development is consistent with the
North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan, the responsible agency shall
primarily take into consideration the extent to which the development is
consistent with the vision, policies, and guidelines set forth in the North
Shore Sustainable Communities Plan.
(d)   Whenever there is a question regarding consistency between existing
subdivision or zoning ordinances, including any unilateral agreements, and the
North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan, the existing subdivision or zoning
ordinances shall prevail until such time as they may be amended to be
consistent with the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.5) (Ord. 11-3)
§ 24-8.6 Review of development and other applications.
   The review of applications for zone changes and other development approvals
will be guided by the vision of the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan.
Decisions on all proposed developments shall be based on the extent to which
the project enabled by the development approval supports the policies and
guidelines of the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan.
   The director may review other applications for improvements to land to help
the responsible agency determine whether a proposed improvement supports the
policies and guidelines of the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.6) (Ord. 11-3)
§ 24-8.7 Zoning change applications.
(a)   All zone change applications relating to land in the North Shore
Sustainable Communities Plan area will be reviewed by the department for
consistency with the general plan, the North Shore Sustainable Communities
Plan, and any applicable special area plan.
(1)   The director will recommend either approval, approval with changes, or
denial. The director’s written review of the application shall become part of
the zone change report which will be sent to the planning commission and the
city council.
(2)   A project master plan shall be a part of an EA or EIS for any project
involving 10 acres or more of land. The director shall review the project
master plan for its consistency with the North Shore Sustainable Communities
Plan.
(3)   Any development or phase of a development already covered by a project
master plan which has been fully reviewed under the provisions of this article
shall not require a new project master plan, provided the director determines
that the proposed zone change is generally consistent with the existing project
master plan for the affected area.
(4)   If a final EIS has already been accepted for a development, including one
accepted before May 3, 2011,* then a subsequent project master plan shall not
be required for the development.
(b)   Projects which involve a significant zone change shall be required to
submit an environmental assessment to the department of planning and permitting
before an application for a zone change being accepted. Any development or
phase of a development which has already been assessed under the National
Environmental Policy Act, HRS Chapter 343, ROH
Chapter 25, or this article, and for which a FONSI has been filed or a required
EIS has been accepted, shall not be subject to further EA or EIS requirements
under this chapter.
(c)   The environmental assessment will be reviewed by the department. Based on
review of the environmental assessment, the director will determine whether an
environmental impact statement will be required or whether a FONSI may be
issued.
(d)   If an environmental impact statement is required, the environmental
impact statement must be accepted by the director before a zone change
application shall be initiated.
(e)   Zone changes shall be processed in accordance with this section, Section
5.5 of the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan, and
Chapter 21.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.7) (Added by Ord. 11-3)
Editor’s note:
   * “May 3, 2011” is substituted for “the effective date of this ordinance.”
§ 24-8.8 Annual capital improvement program review.
   Annually, the director shall work jointly with the director of budget and
fiscal services and the city agencies to review all projects in the city’s
capital improvement program and budget for compliance and consistency with the
general plan, the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan and other
development plans, any applicable special area plan provisions, and the
appropriate functional plans. The director of planning and permitting will
prepare a written report of findings to be submitted to the council in
accordance with Charter § 6-1503.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.8) (Ord. 11-3)
§ 24-8.9 Five-year review.
(a)   The department of planning and permitting shall conduct a comprehensive
review of the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan, adopted by reference in
§
24-8.3(b), every five years after the plan’s adoption and shall report its
findings and recommended revisions to the council.
(b)   The North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan will be evaluated to assess
the appropriateness of the plan’s regional vision, policies, and guidelines,
and implementing actions, as well as its consistency with the general plan.
(c)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the processing
of a revision to the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan in the event
either the biennial report of the director of planning and permitting or
council recommends consideration of such a revision, pursuant to the Charter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.9) (Ord. 11-3)
§ 24-8.10 Authority.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed as an abridgement or delegation
of the responsibility of the director, or of the inherent legislative power of
the city council, to review or revise the North Shore Sustainable Communities
Plan pursuant to the Charter and the above procedures.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.10) (Ord. 11-3)
§ 24-8.11 Severability.
   If this article or the application thereof to any person or property or
circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this article which can be given effect without
the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this
article are declared to be severable.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.11) (Ord. 11-3)
§ 24-8.12 Conflicting provisions.
   This article shall prevail should there be any conflict with any other
provisions under
Chapter 24.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.12) (Ord. 11-3)
NORTH SHORE SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8615.png]
LIST OF ACRONYMS
ALISH   Agricultural Lands of Importance to the State of Hawai‘i
BFS   Department of Budget and Fiscal Services
BMPs   Best Management Practices
BWS   Honolulu Board of Water Supply
CIP   Capital Improvement Program
City OED   City Office of Economic Development
CLP   Coastal Lands Program
COEMAP   Coastal Erosion Management Plan
CWRM   Commission on Water Resource Management
CZM   Coastal Zone Management
DBEDT   State Department of Business, Economic Development and Tourism
DCS   Department of Customer Services
DDC   Department of Design and Construction
DEM   Department of Emergency Management
DES   Department of Emergency Services
DFM   Department of Facility Maintenance
DLNR   State Department of Land and Natural Resources
DOA   State Department of Agriculture
DOE   State Department of Education
DOH   State Department of Health
DOT   State Department of Transportation
DPP   Department of Planning and Permitting
DPR   Department of Parks and Recreation
DTS   Department of Transportation Services
EA / EIS   environmental assessment / environmental impact statement
ENV   Department of Environmental Services
FCC   Federal Communications Commission
FEMA   Federal Emergency Management Agency
FONSI   Finding of No Significant Impact
HAR   Hawai‘i Administrative Rules
HBMP   Hawai‘i Beach Management Plan
HECO   Hawaiian Electric Company
HFD   Honolulu Fire Department
HPD   Honolulu Police Department
HPHA   Hawai‘i Public Housing Authority
HRS   Hawai‘i Revised Statutes
IAL   Important Agricultural Lands (Act 183, 2005)
LUC   Land Use Commission
LUO   Land Use Ordinance
mgd   million gallons per day
OMPO   O‘ahu Metropolitan Planning Organization
OTS   O‘ahu Transit Services
OWMP   O‘ahu Water Management Plan
PIM   Public Infrastructure Map
PUC   Public Utilities Commission
ROH   Revised Ordinances of Honolulu
STIP   State Transportation Improvement Program
Tax Dept.   State Department of Taxation
TBD   To Be Determined
TMDL   Total Maximum Daily Load
UH   University of Hawai‘i
USACE   U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
WMP   Watershed Management Plan
WO SWCD   West O‘ahu Soil and Water Conservation District
PREFACE
The North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan has been prepared in accordance
with the Charter-prescribed requirements for development plans, and is to be
accorded force and effect as such for all Charter- and ordinance- prescribed
purposes. It is one of eight community-oriented plans intended to help guide
public policy, investment, and decision-making over the next 25 years. Each of
these plans addresses one of eight planning regions on O‘ahu, responding to
specific conditions and community values of each region.
Two of the planning regions, ‘Ewa and the Primary Urban Center, are areas where
major growth in population and economic activity will be directed over the next
25 years and beyond. The plans for these regions are entitled “Development
Plans,” to indicate their role as the policy guides for development decisions
and actions needed to support that growth.
The remaining six planning regions, including North Shore, are envisioned to
remain relatively stable. The plans for these regions are entitled “Sustainable
Communities Plans” and are focused on serving as policy guidelines in support
of that goal. The vision statements and supporting provisions for these plans
are oriented toward maintaining and enhancing each region’s ability to sustain
its suburban or rural character and lifestyle.
There has been a recent surge in widespread community discussions, actions and
laws adopted to address sustainability. In 2005, the State Legislature convened
a statewide group to draft a Hawai‘i 2050 Plan, with the primary purpose to
provide policy recommendations for creating a sustainable Hawai‘i. In 2007, the
State established a policy framework and requirements to reduce Hawai‘i’s
greenhouse gas emissions to or below the 1990 levels by the year 2020 (Act 234,
2007). Public service announcements dealing with conserving water and
electricity abound. The concept of buildings that are designed, built and
occupied with environmental considerations at the forefront largely did not
exist when the original Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans
were first adopted. This setting raises the question about the role of such
plans. Are they the City’s version of a sustainability plan? The answer is that
they are the land development portion of a larger blueprint for sustainability.
As discussed below, the General Plan sets long-term goals for the City and
County of Honolulu, across 11 major elements. Perhaps its most substantive
chapter deals with population, and hence land development distribution. It sets
the growth management strategy for O‘ahu. The Development Plans and Sustainable
Communities Plans provide more detail on this land management strategy,
assuring that how we use the land now, and in the future, responds to the three
major elements of a Sustainable Place: economic health, social equity, and
environmental protection. The issues addressed either directly or indirectly by
these regional plans certainly overlap with other planning responsibilities of
other departments, such as water delivery and consumption, crime reduction,
increasing public health, and developing responsive transportation systems.
Collectively, these efforts comprise the strategy of developing a sustainable
future for O‘ahu.
P.1   THE SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN PROCESS
This document is the culmination of a planning effort led by the City and
County of Honolulu’s Department of Planning and Permitting. This effort
comprised a process that encouraged and enabled significant involvement from
the region’s neighborhood boards, community associations, business leaders,
religious and cultural organizations, private landowners, institutions and
numerous individuals. In its final form, this plan will have incorporated input
received from the Planning Advisory Committee, three community-wide meetings,
and a number of meetings with community leaders and representatives of
government agencies.
P.2   HONOLULU LAND USE PLANNING AND MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
The City and County of Honolulu guides and directs land use and growth through
a three-tier system of objectives, policies, planning principles, guidelines
and regulations. The General Plan forms the first tier of this system. First
adopted by resolution in 1977, the General Plan is a relatively brief document,
consisting primarily of brief statements of objectives and policies. It has
been amended several times, but the basic objectives and policies set forth in
the 1977 Plan remain intact.
The second tier of the system is formed by the Development Plans and
Sustainable Communities Plans, which are adopted and revised by ordinance.
These plans address eight geographic regions of the island, including the
Primary Urban Center, East Honolulu, Central O‘ahu, ‘Ewa, Wai‘anae, North
Shore, Ko‘olau Loa and Ko‘olau Poko.
The third tier of the system is composed of the implementing ordinances,
including the Land Use Ordinance (Honolulu’s zoning code) and the City’s
Capital Improvement Program. Mandated by the City Charter, these ordinances
constitute the principal means for implementing the City’s plans. These
ordinances are required to be consistent with the General Plan, the Development
and Sustainable Communities Plans, and each other.
In addition to these three Charter-mandated tiers, the Development Plans and
Sustainable Communities Plans are supplemented by two planning mechanisms that
are not required by the Charter, including the functional planning process and
special area planning. Functional planning activities, some of which are
mandated by state or federal regulations, provide long-range guidance for the
development of public facilities such as water, wastewater disposal, and
transportation. Special area plans are intended to give specific guidance for
neighborhoods, communities or specialized resources.
P.3   AUTHORITY OF THE DEVELOPMENT PLANS AND SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLANS
The authority for the Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans
(herein referred to as “Development Plans” for simplicity) is derived from the
City Charter, which mandates preparation of a General Plan and Development
Plans to guide “the development and improvement of the city.” Together with the
General Plan, the Development Plans provide policy guidance for the land use
and budgetary actions of the City. This is the authority the originally adopted
Development Plans carried, and it remains unchanged.
The Charter provides that “public improvement projects and subdivision and
zoning ordinances shall be consistent with the development plan for that area.”
Although the Development Plans are not themselves regulatory, they “regulate
the regulators.” They are policy tools and are to be used, in conjunction with
the programs and budgets of the City, to accomplish the objectives of the City
and as guides for the decisions made in the private sector.
P.4   1992 CHARTER AMENDMENT TO REVISE THE DEVELOPMENT PLANS
In 1992 the City Charter Commission recommended, and the voters of Honolulu
adopted, amendments to the City Charter. Chief among its findings, the Charter
Commission concluded that the Development Plans were overly detailed and had
created processes that duplicated the zoning process. To eliminate this
unnecessary duplication, the 1992 Charter amendments changed the definition of
Development Plans from “relatively detailed plans” to “conceptual schemes.”
The 1992 Charter amendments established that the purpose of the Development
Plans is to provide:
   ·   “priorities ... (for the) coordination of major development activities”;
and
   ·   sufficient description of the “desired urban character and the
significant natural, scenic and cultural resources ... to serve as a policy
guide for more detailed zoning maps and regulations and public and private
sector investment decisions.”
In response to the 1992 Charter amendments, the Planning Department launched a
thorough review of the Development Plans. The goal of that review was the
revision of all eight of the Development Plans to bring them into conformance
with the Charter-mandated conceptual orientation. The revised plan presented in
this document conforms to that mandate.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
For many O‘ahu residents and visitors, the North Shore represents “the
country,” where people go to find a laid-back island setting reminiscent of
O‘ahu’s plantation days. In contrast to urban Honolulu’s metropolitan setting,
the North Shore is known for its colorful scenery and unspoiled natural beauty,
including world-famous surf, scenic shoreline and white sand beaches,
picturesque valleys and coastal pali, and vast, open expanses of agricultural
lands set against dramatic mountain backdrops. Hale‘iwa and Waialua, the
region’s two rural towns, still feature a country atmosphere with low-density
residential structures and low-rise buildings housing retail establishments,
restaurants, and surf shops. As Honolulu and its suburban areas continue to
grow and become increasingly urbanized, it has become more important to
maintain the North Shore as an essential haven and respite from the urbanized
areas of O‘ahu.
This plan is organized in five chapters and an appendix, as follows:
   ·   Chapter 1: North Shore’s Role in O‘ahu’s Development Pattern defines the
region’s role and identity within the overall framework of islandwide planning
and land use management.
   ·   Chapter 2: The Vision for North Shore’s Future summarizes the
community’s vision for the future of the region, and describes important
elements of that vision.
   ·   Chapter 3: Land Use Policies and Guidelines is the Plan’s policy core.
It provides policy guidance for the region’s various land use elements.
   ·   Chapter 4: Public Facilities and Infrastructure Policies and Guidelines
outlines policies and guidelines to support the land use policies of Chapter 3.
   ·   Chapter 5: Implementation addresses needs for carrying out provisions
outlined by the Plan.
The key recommendations contained in each chapter are summarized in the
following section:
E.1   CHAPTER 1: NORTH SHORE’S ROLE IN O‘AHU’S DEVELOPMENT PATTERN
Chapter 1 provides an overview of the relationship between O‘ahu’s General
Plan, and the County’s development plans and sustainable communities plans, and
provides specific context for the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan
within this land use paradigm. Consistent with the directed growth policies of
the City’s General Plan, the role of the North Shore is to maintain the rural
character, agricultural lands, open space, natural environment, recreational
resources and scenic beauty of O‘ahu’s northern coast. In line with the General
Plan’s policies to preserve the open space and country atmosphere of the rural
areas, growth is limited to “infill” areas within or adjacent to built-up areas
to accommodate existing and future housing and employment needs.
E.2   CHAPTER 2: THE VISION FOR THE NORTH SHORE’S FUTURE
This chapter presents the overarching concepts and goals of the North Shore
Sustainable Communities Plan. It includes the Vision Statement for the long-
range future of the region, and the Key Vision Elements that the policies and
guidelines in this Plan are based upon.
The North Shore’s Vision Statement focuses on retaining the unique qualities
that have defined the region’s attractiveness to residents and visitors alike;
scenic open spaces, coastal resources, and the community’s cultural and
plantation heritage. A stable and diverse agriculture industry, which includes
crop production, agricultural processing, and other support facilities, will
play a key role in the region’s economy and in protecting the region’s
agricultural lands and open space setting. Hale‘iwa and Waialua remain the
North Shore’s principal commercial and civic centers while retaining their
historic and “country town” character. The region will remain “country,” with
wide open space, vistas, and rural communities. Growth will be limited to
Hale‘iwa and Waialua.
E.3   CHAPTER 3: LAND USE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
Chapter 3 presents policies and guidelines for the principal types of land uses
on the North Shore. The Vision for the North Shore’s future described in
Chapter 2 is to be implemented through the application of these policies and
guidelines. A summary of the major policies related to each land use type is
below:
E.3.1   Open Space and Natural Environment
Emphasis for the policies and guidelines for Open Space and the Natural
Environment is placed on an integrated approach to resource management that
underscores the Native Hawaiian concept of “ahupua‘a”. Consistent with this
approach, preservation and protection of valued natural features, sensitive
lands, agricultural lands and recreational areas are highlighted.
E.3.2   Agriculture
The policies and guidelines related to Agriculture recognize the importance of
protecting productive agricultural land; encourage the development of regional
support facilities and infrastructure; and emphasize the importance of
prohibiting improper use and subdivision of agricultural land.
E.3.3   Parks and Recreation
Policies and guidelines for Parks and Recreation stress the protection and
expansion of recreational resources; the provision of integrated pedestrian and
bicycle facilities; the compatibility of recreational resources and activities
within the surrounding environment; and connecting expenditures for
recreational resources to actual usage of the facilities.
E.3.4   Historic and Cultural Resources
The North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan emphasizes the importance of
historic and cultural resources as an integral fabric of the North Shore
community and underscores the need to properly identify these resources and
protect them from development so they can be preserved for future generations.
E.3.5   Residential Communities
The policies and guidelines related to Residential Communities clarify the
importance of maintaining the Community Growth Boundary and directing the
development of new housing units to areas in and around Hale‘iwa and Waialua. A
mix of housing units is desired to meet the needs of all North Shore residents,
in a manner consistent with rural design and principles of sustainability.
E.3.6   Commercial Areas
Guidance for Commercial Areas is focused on respecting rural design guidelines
to maintain rural character, including appropriate scale. Importance is also
placed on limiting new commercial development to areas within existing
commercial districts.
E.3.7   Industrial Areas
The importance of Industrial Areas that are compatible with the character of
the North Shore is a primary focus of the North Shore Sustainable Communities
Plan. The policies and guidelines emphasize that industrial areas should
support regional lifestyles while maintaining environmental balance, and
providing economic opportunities as well as goods and services for area
residents. Preservation of the former Waialua Mill site is also important.
E.3.8   Visitor Accommodations
The policies and guidelines for Visitor Accommodations emphasize the importance
of a rural lifestyle on the North Shore, and the desire to avoid impacts on
residents associated with both increased and illegal visitor units. Provisions
are supported that would allow small-scale visitor accommodations in Hale‘iwa
with appropriate regulatory review and approval. No new resort zoning is
supported for the North Shore.
E.3.9   Institutional Uses
Policies and guidelines related to Institutional Uses support convenient public
services consistent with the rural character of the region, which make
efficient use of available land.
E.3.10   Military
Policies and guidelines in this section provide for the maintenance of military
installations, and encourage these areas to be maintained in a consistent
manner with applicable general policies for residential, industrial,
commercial, and other related uses.
E.4   CHAPTER 4: PUBLIC FACILITIES AND INFRASTRUCTURE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
This chapter presents the policies and guidelines related to public facilities
and infrastructure systems in the North Shore. General policies related to each
facility type are summarized below:
E.4.1   Transportation Systems
Transportation Systems are a key element of the North Shore Sustainable
Communities Plan and emphasize a variety of policies and guidelines, including:
retaining Kamehameha and Farrington Highways as two-lane thoroughfares;
improving mobility and connectivity for area residents; supporting multi-modal
systems to reduce automobile dependency; and ensuring that existing roadways
can accommodate development prior to construction.
E.4.2   Water Systems
This section of Chapter 4 provides an overview of the protection and regulation
of water resources at the State and County levels, including the preparation of
regional watershed management plans for O‘ahu by the Board of Water Supply.
Policies and guidelines emphasize the importance of responsible management of
water resources; the need for useful water conservation measures (including
recycling); the relationship between the health of the agricultural economy and
the availability of adequate irrigation sources; and the protection of all
water sources from pollutants.
E.4.3   Wastewater Treatment
Policies and guidelines for Wastewater Treatment call for the provision of
adequate public and private wastewater treatment facilities and improvements to
the existing wastewater management services to protect the North Shore’s water
resources and the health of the community, and support for alternative
wastewater technologies that reflect the community’s values and rural
character.
E.4.4   Electrical Systems
Policies and guidelines for Electrical Systems emphasize the importance of
adequate and reliable electric service, the need for visually compatible
facilities, and support for the use of renewable energy sources and
conservation measures.
E.4.5   Solid Waste Handling and Disposal
The section on Solid Waste Handling and Disposal focuses on providing adequate
resources for trash removal, cleanup of illegal dumps, and enforcement of
antidumping laws, in addition to stressing the continued importance of
recycling and other source reduction programs dedicated to minimizing the
amount of solid waste generated.
E.4.6   Drainage Systems
Policies and guidelines for Drainage Systems call for improvements to mitigate
storm runoff and to provide adequate protection from flooding, with an emphasis
on low-impact design strategies that minimize nonpoint source pollution and
support the retention of stormwater on-site and in wetlands.
E.4.7   School Facilities
Language in this section calls for the provision and maintenance of school
facilities that serve the needs of the community, and a desire to integrate
school facilities with other community uses.
E.4.8   Public Safety Facilities
Policies and guidelines for Public Safety Facilities promote an integrated
approach to public safety, which enables police, fire, ocean safety, civil
defense, and emergency medical efforts to share resources and information, as
appropriate, and adequate staffing and facilities to ensure effective and
efficient delivery of basic government services and protection of public
safety.
E.5   CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION
This chapter discusses the various measures that support implementation of this
Plan, including the regulatory mechanisms, physical improvements, and other
actions that are needed to realize the Plan’s vision. Section 5.7 presents an
Implementation Matrix to help organize and facilitate plan implementation. The
Implementation Matrix, which is based on the policies and guidelines presented
in Chapters 3 and 4, identifies the specific actions, corresponding plans and/
or codes, and public and private entities responsible for implementation.
E.6   APPENDIX A
The appendix contains three color maps that illustrate some of the plan’s
textual provisions. These maps are intended to be conceptual illustrations of
the text, and should be considered secondary to the policies and guidelines
articulated in the text.
1.   NORTH SHORE’S ROLE IN O‘AHU’S DEVELOPMENT PATTERN
The North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan area extends from Ka‘ena Point in
the west to Waiale‘e Gulch near Kawela Bay in the east, with O‘ahu’s shoreline
defining the northern edge and Helemano and the slopes of the Wai‘anae and
Ko‘olau Mountain Ranges to the south. The region consists mostly of
agricultural lands and open space, which surround the country towns of Hale‘iwa
and Waialua and the rural residential communities of Mokulē‘ia, Kawailoa, and
Sunset/Pūpūkea.
A number of distinguishing characteristics help define the North Shore’s role
within the City and County of Honolulu. In contrast to urban Honolulu’s
metropolitan setting, the North Shore is known for its colorful scenery and
unspoiled natural beauty, including world-famous surf, scenic shoreline and
white sand beaches, picturesque valleys and coastal pali, and vast, open
expanses of agricultural lands set against dramatic mountain backdrops. For
many O‘ahu residents and visitors, the North Shore represents “the country,”
where people go to find a laid-back island setting reminiscent of O‘ahu’s
plantation days. The North Shore’s Native Hawaiian heritage, cultural
diversity, and plantation past are reflected in its small rural communities,
and its agricultural landscapes and open space resources. Hale‘iwa and Waialua,
the region’s two rural towns, still feature a country atmosphere with low-
density residential structures and low-rise buildings housing retail
establishments, restaurants, and surf shops. For many, the North Shore is a
place for rest and recreation that offers opportunities to enjoy the country
atmosphere, numerous white sand beaches, and mountain areas. As Honolulu and
its suburban areas continue to grow and become increasingly urbanized, it has
become more important to maintain the North Shore as an essential haven and
respite from the urbanized areas of O‘ahu.
The General Plan directs growth to the Primary Urban Center, Central O‘ahu, and
‘Ewa regions of O‘ahu and limits growth in the urban fringe and rural areas
(Exhibit 1.1). It designates the North Shore as a rural area where physical
growth and development will be managed so that “an undesirable spreading of
development is prevented,” and “population densities are consistent with the
character of development and environmental qualities desired for the area”
(General Plan of the City and County of Honolulu, page 15). The General Plan
also specifies that agricultural lands along the Windward, North Shore, and
Wai‘anae coasts are to be maintained for diversified agriculture.
In this context, the role of the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan is to
maintain the rural character, agricultural lands, open space, natural
environment, recreational resources, and scenic beauty of O‘ahu’s northern
coast, in contrast to more urbanized areas of O‘ahu such as the Primary Urban
Center, East Honolulu, Central O‘ahu, and ‘Ewa. In line with the General Plan’s
policies to preserve the open space and country atmosphere of the rural areas,
the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan limits growth to “infill” areas
within or adjacent to built-up areas to accommodate existing and future housing
and employment needs, and strives to maintain the region’s population at 1.7
percent of the island-wide population for the year 20251.
_________________________
1 General Plan for the City and County of Honolulu, Section I: Population
Objective C Policy 4 (Amended, Resolution 02-205, CD1) seeks a 2025
distribution of O'ahu’s residential population as follows:
Distribution of Residential Population
LOCATION % SHARE OF 2025 ISLANDWIDE POPULATION
Distribution of Residential Population
LOCATION             % SHARE OF 2025 ISLANDWIDE POPULATION
Primary Urban Center 46.0%
‘Ewa               13.0%
Central O‘ahu      17.0%
East Honolulu        5.3%
Ko‘olau Poko       11.6%
Ko‘olau Loa        1.4%
North Shore          1.7%
Wai‘anae           4.0%
TOTAL                100.0%
 
This plan reaffirms the North Shore’s role as a rural area by establishing the
following policies for future land use in the North Shore Sustainable
Communities Plan area:
   ·   Maintain the region’s rural character by promoting diversified
agriculture, preserving scenic open space, and retaining the small-town,
country atmosphere of the region’s typically low-rise, low-density communities.
   ·   Preserve agricultural lands for current and future agricultural uses and
support the diversified agriculture industry.
   ·   Protect and preserve the natural environment and natural resources and
features, including: mountain, forest and watershed areas; marshes, rivers, and
streams; shoreline areas, fishponds, and bays; and reefs and offshore islands.
   ·   Preserve scenic views of the mountains, coastal pali and shoreline areas
including mauka and makai views seen from near shore waters and heavily
traveled areas such as Kamehameha Highway, Farrington Highway and Kaukonahua
Road.
   ·   Protect cultural, historical, and archaeological resources by promoting
the interpretive and educational use of these sites, buildings, and artifacts.
   ·   Manage and sustain ocean and nearshore resources to assure their long-
term availability.
   ·   Enhance opportunities for a wide range of recreational activities by
providing community-based as well as natural resource-based parks, and by
securing convenient public access, including public right-of-ways, bikeways,
and pedestrian walkways to beaches and inland recreation areas.
   ·   Facilitate the country lifestyle by establishing rural design guidelines
emphasizing open space, landscaping, and the scenic qualities of an area, so
that new development will be in keeping with the desired rural character of the
region.
   ·   Support businesses which serve the agricultural, educational, health,
and tourist industries and the local population, and provide employment for
North Shore residents consistent with the low-key rural atmosphere of the North
Shore.
   ·   Provide sufficient lands adjacent to built areas of Hale‘iwa and Waialua
for housing that is compatible with the region’s rural character and affordable
to area residents, without exceeding the General Plan’s population guidelines
for the region and remaining in line with General Plan policies to maintain the
North Shore as a rural area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8617.png]
Exhibit 1.1: General Plan Designations
2.   THE VISION FOR THE NORTH SHORE’S FUTURE
This chapter presents the vision for North Shore’s future and describes the key
elements of this vision. Based on community input and the General Plan’s
policies for the region, the Vision provides the basis for the Sustainable
Communities Plan’s policies and guidelines, which, in turn, will direct future
land use decisions and natural resource management policies and programs on the
North Shore.
The Vision for the North Shore extends to the year 2035, during which time the
North Shore is projected to experience very little growth. The region will
remain “country,” with wide open spaces, agricultural lands and rural
communities defining the regional landscape, and growth limited to Hale‘iwa and
Waialua Towns. Based on the General Plan’s population distribution policy, the
North Shore’s population is projected to account for 1.7 percent of the island-
wide population in 2025.
Following World War II and the resultant tourism boom on O‘ahu, the North Shore
has experienced a steady increase in population. In 1970, the North Shore’s
population was about 9,200 people, accounting for an estimated 1.4 percent of
O‘ahu’s total population. By 2000, the North Shore’s population doubled to
nearly 18,400 people, accounting for about 2.0 percent of the island-wide
population. Projections from the City’s department of planning and permitting
(DPP) indicate an estimated 19,517 persons residing in the region in the year
2035. 2  Assuming that the region’s population growth rate will continue at the
same pace over the next 25 years, DPP projections indicate that there would be
about 1,800 more people in the region by 2035 (based on the projected 2010
residential population of 17,724). At more than 1.8 percent of the 2035
projected island-wide population of 1,038,317 residents, the North Shore’s 2035
projected residential population would be slightly more than the General Plan’s
population distribution policy for the North Shore (1.7 percent of the island-
wide population). Although the projected regional population growth seems
relatively minor when compared with the projected 2035 island-wide population
(20,430 and 1,113,620 persons, respectively), many North Shore residents feel
that the additional population growth – when compared to the North Shore’s
current population – is substantial, and also largely inconsistent with the
existing rural character and the community’s future vision.
2.1   VISION STATEMENT
The vision statement for the North Shore describes the desired future
conditions in the year 2035 and beyond. This section is written in the present
tense, from the perspective of the year 2035 looking back into the past.
“The North Shore in the year 2035 retains the unique qualities that have long
defined its attractiveness to residents and visitors alike. Scenic open spaces
are protected and maintained, coastal resources are enhanced, and the region’s
Native Hawaiian heritage, cultural diversity, and plantation past have been
carried forward in the revitalization of its communities.
Agriculture is a major contributor to the North Shore’s economy, providing a
multitude of jobs and economic opportunities for area residents. A varied quilt
work of crops and forest products defines vast tracts of agricultural lands.
All of O‘ahu’s residents enjoy the agricultural products grown on the North
Shore, and value the North Shore’s ability to provide food for the island’s
population and reduce O‘ahu’s dependency on imported foods. Coastal waters,
beaches, and parks are linked by walkways and bicycle routes creating an ideal
backdrop to host a rich array of recreational pursuits. Mountain areas provide
safe havens for native plants and wildlife as well as wilderness settings for
appropriate backcountry recreation.
Hale‘iwa and Waialua are the region’s principal commercial and civic centers,
and small pockets of rural residential areas remain clustered around Mokulē‘ia,
Kawailoa, and Sunset/Pūpūkea. Residents are proud of their close-knit
communities and the many local families in their communities that have a
history of multigenerational ties to the North Shore.
The growth of a stable and diverse agriculture industry has ensured the long-
term protection of the North Shore’s agricultural lands and open space setting
and supported an array of flourishing agricultural enterprises, including crop
production, agricultural processing and other support industries, farmers’
markets and agricultural specialty outlets. Along with the continued success of
the visitor and recreational industries, the growth of the agriculture industry
has resulted in further needs for conventional commercial and industrial
services, and an increase in cottage industries.
To maintain the region’s rural character, these new activities are centered at
Hale‘iwa and Waialua. Hale‘iwa continues to be the North Shore’s regional
commercial center, hosting a variety of specialty outlets, dining
establishments, professional and business services, and water sport
enterprises, along with low-key, small-scale, country-style visitor
accommodations. Waialua is a renewed center for agricultural activity, boasting
a revitalized town center for resident-focused commercial services and a
resource center for technology education within its schools. While some of the
needed new affordable housing has been located in Hale‘iwa, most new
residential neighborhoods are located at Waialua.
Both towns retain their historic character and rural charm, while serving as
the main employment centers for the region. Similarly, all new residential
neighborhoods and their supporting parks, playgrounds, and public services have
been developed to standards which reflect their rural settings. In these ways,
the North Shore of O‘ahu, long an attraction for Hawai‘i residents and visitors
alike, has emerged in the year 2035 as a thriving model rural community that
successfully preserves its natural, cultural and historical heritage, links its
past with the future, and blends “Old Hawai‘i” with the 21st century.”
2.2   KEY ELEMENTS OF THE VISION
Each of the key elements of the vision is described in Sections 2.2.1 through
2.2.10.
2.2.1   Maintain the Community Growth Boundary to Protect Agricultural, Open
Space, and Natural Resources
The North Shore is characterized by vast tracts of agricultural lands, open
spaces, and natural and cultural resources. To protect these resources from
development, the Community Growth Boundary was established to guide development
and preserve open space and agricultural areas. It has remained fixed since it
was first established in 2000, and no new development has occurred outside the
Community Growth Boundary. The Community Growth Boundary has served as a
valuable tool to guide resource management, future development or redevelopment
within existing zoning designations or future zoning designations, and other
standards or guidelines that have been developed in response to plan
provisions, other established entitlements, or in accordance with pertinent
policy and character described in this plan.
The Community Growth Boundary defines, protects, and contains communities in
areas which the General Plan designates “rural” and which exhibit the physical
characteristics of rural lifestyles. The boundary provides adequate lands for
facilities needed to support established communities, and protects such
communities from more intense land uses and patterns of development associated
with more urban areas. The Community Growth Boundary also preserves areas
outside the boundary for agriculture or other resource or open space values.
Where appropriate, the area within this boundary also contains open space
elements considered essential to the character of the rural community being
defined. Open space elements within the Community Growth Boundary may include
lands designated “Park,” “Agriculture,” “Preservation,” or areas with
development-related hazards such as steep slopes or unstable soils.
Rural communities defined by this boundary consist of residential communities
and towns that are smaller, more dispersed, and less intensively developed than
those in O‘ahu’s urban or urban fringe areas. Development character is
generally low density, low rise, small scale, and reflective of a “country”
setting. Within residential areas, the landscaping and front yards which
provide the foregrounds to their respective residences are the principal visual
elements. In commercial areas, the pedestrian environment and associated
amenities predominate, and storefronts are typically found on both sides of the
street. Commercial buildings are oriented principally toward the street, relate
readily to the human scale, and are organized to encourage interaction between
the public and private domains.
As shown on Exhibit 2.1, the Community Growth Boundary on the North Shore
conceptually defines the limits of residential, commercial, industrial, or
other similar uses. As no proposals for these types of uses can be considered
outside the Community Growth Boundary, this boundary also prevents the
encroachment of development onto agricultural lands and open space resources.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8619.png]
Exhibit 2.1: Community Growth Boundary
Areas outside the Community Growth Boundary include agricultural lands as well
as preservation lands with important open space, scenic, or natural resource
values. Uses such as commercial and industrial development, public and private
schools, and residential subdivisions with no bona fide agricultural activities
are not permitted in these areas. Permissible land uses outside the Community
Growth Boundary include agriculture and limited low- intensity types of outdoor
recreational uses where appropriate, such as on nonagricultural lands or
agricultural lands that are not suitable for intensive cultivation, provided
they do not diminish the agricultural potential of these sites or jeopardize
the open space, natural, and scenic character of these resources. Other
permitted uses outside the Community Growth Boundary include environmental and
educational programs and facilities that are resource compatible, such as a
high technology learning center that uses existing facilities at Camp Mokulē‘ia
and Camp Erdman in Mokulē‘ia.
Rural communities within the Community Growth Boundary include concentrations
of residential, commercial, and industrial uses, as well as the network of
roads, parks, and open spaces, which define their edges or give them character.
Relative to the State Land Use District boundaries, the Community Growth
Boundary generally circumscribes built-up sections of Mokulē‘ia, Waialua,
Hale‘iwa, Kawailoa, and Sunset Beach that are within the State Urban District.
It also includes portions of the State Agricultural District in Sunset Hills
and Pūpūkea that are zoned Country, as well as portions of the State
Agricultural District makai of the highway in Hale‘iwa and Waialua that are
designated and zoned for agricultural use. However, except for limited “infill”
areas in Hale‘iwa and Waialua Towns that are contiguous to lands designated for
residential and commercial use, agricultural lands within the Community Growth
Boundary continue to remain in the State Agricultural District and continue to
be designated and zoned as Agriculture, so as to maintain the agricultural uses
or open space value within the Community Growth Boundary, or both.
Within this boundary, open space continues to define communities, and
significant natural resources (such as streams, natural drainageways, wetlands,
and fishponds) are protected. New development within the Community Growth
Boundary has been limited to infill low-density, low-rise development
contiguous to existing built areas, to promote a compact form of development
with lower development costs and more efficient utilization of existing
infrastructure systems. The infill areas within the Community Growth Boundary
have had ample capacity to accommodate residential, commercial, and industrial
needs to the year 2035.
2.2.2   Promote a Diversified Agricultural Industry
A healthy agricultural industry continues to generate economic opportunities
that are appropriate to the region’s open space and rural qualities. In
addition to using the Community Growth Boundary to ensure long-range protection
for agricultural lands, land use policies and guidelines are in place to
protect agricultural lands from encroachment by incompatible uses and to
encourage long-term investments in productive agricultural uses on those lands.
Economic incentives to support the industry, including tax or other incentives
or measures to maintain productive agricultural lands, facilitate conversion
from plantation crops to diversified agriculture, and promote long-term leases
or sale of lands for farming, have been enhanced and strengthened.
Industrial and commercial activities which support or service agricultural
production are creating further economic opportunities. To promote the cost-
efficient use of existing infrastructure and prevent urbanization of
agricultural lands, major agricultural support facilities have been
consolidated in designated areas that are accessible to existing
infrastructure. In addition, visitor-based activities that are accessory to
agricultural operations are providing additional revenue-generating sources to
supplement farm incomes. Qualified uses which meet specific criteria outlined
in Section 3.2 are being allowed on a permit basis.
Agricultural support facilities at the former Waialua Mill site have been
expanded into the area makai of the Mill, and the area is the primary
agricultural support area for the region. A secondary agricultural support area
in Kawailoa near the Alluvion Nursery provides localized support for adjacent
agricultural activities based in Kawailoa.
2.2.3   Enhance the Region’s Recreational and Educational Potential
The North Shore is known for its numerous beach parks, world famous surf spots,
and abundant mauka and makai resources. Recreational resources along the
shoreline are preserved and enhanced, and access to the shoreline has been
expanded. Facility improvements such as bathrooms, showers, and parking have
been completed, and beach parks were expanded to meet island-wide demands on
these resources. Maintenance and improvements to existing beach parks,
additional access to the shoreline, and acquisition of beach right-of-ways
continue to be a priority.
Access to the mauka areas has been expanded for appropriate forms of
recreational opportunities that do not compromise significant environmental
resources or important agricultural activities. Above Mokulē‘ia, Hale‘iwa, and
Pūpūkea, mauka access has been expanded for hiking, camping, hunting, and
horseback riding and other resource-compatible forms of recreation within the
context of sound resource management.
Low-impact, resource-sensitive environmental, educational, and cultural
interpretive programs are being accommodated at Ka‘ena Point and in the mauka
areas of Mokulē‘ia, Hale‘iwa, Waimea, and Pūpūkea. While promoting expanded
access and recreational opportunities to coastal and mauka resources, the value
of the resources remains protected from overuse. A high technology learning
center is operating at Mokulē‘ia, and a resource center for technology training
and long-distance learning serves Waialua schools.
More community-based parks for area residents with better maintenance and
amenities to support the community’s recreational needs are being provided. As
new housing areas were developed in Waialua, Pu‘uiki Park was acquired to serve
as a community-based park for area residents. In Hale‘iwa, the Hale‘iwa Beach
Park Mauka (commonly known as the Hale‘iwa Regional Park) provides facilities
for both active and passive recreational pursuits. In addition, an integrated
system of pedestrian paths and bikeways links the parks, schools, and town
centers in Waialua and Hale‘iwa.
2.2.4   Promote Hale‘iwa and Waialua Towns as “Country Towns”
Hale‘iwa and Waialua Towns are the main commercial districts on the North
Shore, each with different functions and distinct characteristics. The historic
Hale‘iwa Town with its “main street” ambience is the region’s main commercial
attraction for residents and visitors, while Waialua Town is a plantation town
that primarily services the residents of Waialua and Mokulē‘ia.
To maintain their rural “small town” character and to promote compact town
development, the cores of both towns are designated as “country towns.” While
the built environment within each town’s core reflects the town’s distinct
historic character and the region’s rural landscape, both towns are celebrated
for the unique mix of commercial, residential, and compatible industrial uses
(such as small product or clothing manufacturing and assembly).
Hale‘iwa. Hale‘iwa Town features a diverse mix of shops and restaurants,
professional and service businesses, enterprises with art and recreational
themes, and specialty outlets featuring regional products. Entry features into
the town, landscaping, pedestrian walkways, and off-street parking behind
buildings have spawned the town’s revitalization, and new developments are
concentrated along Kamehameha Highway. The Hale‘iwa Special District Design
Guidelines remain in force to ensure that all new development is compatible
with existing built areas and the rural character of the region.
Small-scale visitor accommodations located within the Hale‘iwa Country Town
District provide overnight facilities for visitors wishing to vacation on the
North Shore. These small-scale visitor accommodations are one alternative to
address community concerns about the illegal use of private homes as short-term
vacation rentals. Short-term vacation rentals and the additional pressures such
use places on surrounding residences have been addressed. Locational and
performance criteria addressing the different types of visitor accommodations
have been established and are actively enforced.
Waialua. Waialua Town is the quiet heart of the North Shore’s residential and
farming community, featuring the region’s primary agricultural support area and
a vibrant core with basic retail and commercial services and light industrial
uses that support the local community. Although agricultural and light
industrial businesses are the major employers in Waialua, the town’s proximity
to Ka‘ena Point and the recreational opportunities in the area attracted
recreational and environmental education activities to the area, including high
technology and education industries that partner with area schools. Such
partnerships have enhanced the quality of education and, along with the
establishment of a private high school in the area, have created professional-
level jobs for area residents. In addition, Waialua’s central location and
proximity to the schools and parks is ideal for locating civic and community
services such as job training programs for the youth and support services for
the elderly. To preserve its plantation heritage and rural character, design
guidelines appropriate to Waialua Town are established.
The core of Waialua Town is centered around Goodale Avenue and Kealohanui
Street. As envisioned in the Waialua Town Master Plan (2005), revitalization of
the town’s core has created a landscaped, pedestrian-oriented mall anchored by
the Waialua Bandstand and the revitalized Waialua Mill site, an expanded
farmers market, and community and commercial uses. Appropriate forms of small-
scale, low-intensity tourist activities, such as tours of nearby agricultural
farms and processing facilities and recreational resources are helping to
further revitalize the town’s commercial center by attracting more people
there.
2.2.5   Support Waialua as the North Shore’s Industrial Center
The Waialua Mill site has been reinforced as the industrial center for the
region. In addition to industrial uses that support the agriculture industry,
general industrial uses such as boat and car repair, surfboard manufacturing
and repair, manufacturing of crafts and island products, and, warehousing are
thriving. Development of the former Mill and expansion makai of the Mill site
has encouraged more commercial activity and enhanced the physical connection
between the Mill and Waialua’s town core.
2.2.6   Direct New Housing to Areas Contiguous to Hale‘iwa and Waialua Towns
and Use Rural Design Guidelines for Rural Residential Development
New residential development is located within designated areas adjoining
Hale‘iwa and Waialua Towns, with additional “infill” on or contiguous to
existing lots in previously developed residential areas. New housing consists
of a range of housing types and prices, including affordable housing that is
allowing local residents to stay in the area. Attached and multi-family housing
forms which were not traditionally associated with the rural setting have been
developed, and the higher densities have supported the development of
affordable housing. In Waialua, new housing has replaced the former mill camp
once located between the Mill and Pu‘uiki Road, and expanded into the area
mauka of the mill camp between Pu‘uiki Road and Goodale Avenue. In Hale‘iwa,
infill residential expansion has occurred north of Pa‘ala‘a Road on lands
outside the flood plain.
Rural design guidelines and development standards have been adopted to ensure
compatibility with the region’s rural character and surrounding open space.
Rural models such as the plantation community at Poamoho Camp, which is
characterized by clusters of single-story dwellings with landscaping, narrow
streets, and common parks and open spaces within the neighborhood, were used as
examples to follow.
In addition to guidelines to limit building heights and lot coverage in order
to maximize open space and landscaping, low-impact development principles that
promote sustainable building design and alternative development options that
allow for site design flexibility, creative site utilization, and open space
preservation were adopted. Rural streetscape design that minimizes pavement
surfaces and allows for grassed swales in place of sidewalks with curbs and
gutters, as opposed to more urban and suburban models, is considered
appropriate. Where feasible and appropriate, existing plantation homes were
rehabilitated in a manner which allows them to be affordable to existing
residents.
2.2.7   Provide Adequate and Appropriately-Sized Public Infrastructure,
Facilities, and Services
Public agencies and private developers work together to provide adequate
infrastructure and needed public facilities and services. Considering the large
number of nonresidents that visit the North Shore and partake in the region’s
assets, additional resources to upgrade and adequately maintain existing
infrastructure systems and public facilities are being provided. Infrastructure
does not detract from scenic amenities, recreational opportunities, open space,
or other amenities.
Adequate, environmentally sensitive wastewater treatment systems that minimally
impact groundwater and ocean resources and are consistent with the North
Shore’s rural character have replaced outdated and ineffective wastewater
systems.
The quality of the North Shore’s ground, surface, and nearshore waters is vital
for ensuring public health, providing outdoor recreation, sustaining the
integrity of ecological systems, and maintaining general environmental quality.
In addition to drainage system improvements to mitigate storm runoff and
regional flood hazards, adequate infrastructure for drainage systems has been
established and is being maintained to ensure continuous runoff and protect the
quality of coastal waters. Agricultural uses are implementing Best Management
Practices (BMPs), including those recommended in the State Coastal Nonpoint
Pollution Control Program, to minimize soil erosion.
An adequate circulation network that allows for efficient and safe travel
supports all modes of transportation. Traffic on Kamehameha Highway between the
heart of Hale‘iwa Town and Waimea Bay flows freely since safety and operational
deficiencies along the aged highway system were corrected. Kamehameha Highway
remains a two- lane highway; no additional through lanes have been constructed,
although improvements to reduce traffic impediments (for example, bicycle/
pedestrian facilities to encourage the use of alternatives modes of
transportation, dedicated storage/stacking turn lanes to minimize bottlenecks
affecting emergency vehicle response time, turnouts and facility improvements
to reduce the number of cars parked along the highway) have been completed. The
provision of secondary/emergency access into and out of the region is also
available. The transportation system encourages reduced automobile dependency,
and includes an integrated network of bus routes, and pedestrian paths and
bikeways that link the various residential communities, parks, schools, and the
town centers of Hale‘iwa and Waialua.
Other priority needs that have been addressed include retention of the public
library in Waialua, maintenance of existing parks in the region, and adequate
staffing and resources to ensure quality public safety services and protection
from natural hazards. Use of proven renewable energy and energy conservation
measures, including the use of solar energy systems and sustainable building
technologies, is encouraged.
2.2.8   Preserve and Protect Cultural and Historic Resources
Preserving significant plantation era and other historic features such as at
Hale‘iwa Town, Waialua Town, the Waialua Mill, and other sites, as well as
protecting Native Hawaiian cultural and archaeological sites, has been
important in retaining the area’s unique identity and country character.
Historic site restoration and interpretive programs are integrated into the
development of parks and shorelines and mountain access systems, to help
enhance appreciation of these resources.
The North Shore has a wealth of historic and cultural resources signifying its
rich history of land use that extends back to the precontact Native Hawaiian
era. Native Hawaiians were the first known inhabitants of the region, arriving
around 1100 A.D. and settling in villages built along valley floors, streams,
and shoreline areas. With an abundance of marine life, fertile soils, natural
springs, and forest resources, the lands around Waialua and Kaiaka Bay are
believed to have supported between 6,000 to 8,000 people prior to Western
contact in the late 1700s. The concentration of archaeological and cultural
sites remaining in the region indicates that the moku of Waialua was viewed as
an important area to invoke and sustain mana (the spiritual force and energy
that was integral to the religious, social, and political well-being of the
Native Hawaiian society.) 3
Following the arrival of Western missionaries and the introduction of Western
ideals in the early 1800s, there was a drastic reduction in the population of
Native Hawaiians and their traditional land use practices. Like other places on
O‘ahu, Western entrepreneurs assumed control of large tracts of land for
plantation agriculture purposes. With the establishment of the North Shore’s
first sugar cane plantation in 1865, plantation agriculture dominated the North
Shore’s economy for more than 100 years until the closure of the Waialua Sugar
Mill in 1996. Most of the North Shore’s present-day landscape – including the
region’s physical layout and formation of its towns and neighborhoods, its
building forms and landmarks, sense of place, and demographic composition and
social fabric of the community– have been influenced by the plantation and its
distinctive lifestyle.
2.2.9   Adapt the Ahupua‘a Concept as a Framework for Land Use and Natural
Resource Management
Traditional Hawaiian life was based on the ahupua‘a system of land management.
An ahupua‘a, or land division, was typically wedge-shaped and extended from the
top of the mountain into the outer edge of the ocean reef. Defined by the
natural geographic formations such as mountain ridges, gulches and streams,
ahupua‘a were complete ecological and economic production systems that provided
all the resources to sustain the community living within the ahupua‘a. Fish and
marine resources were harvested from the ocean, kalo (taro) and ‘uala (sweet
potato) were raised in the lowlands, and upland areas provided trees and other
forest products.
The mokupuni, or island, of O‘ahu is made up of six moku, or districts. There
are two moku in the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan area – the entire
moku of Waialua and a portion of Ko‘olau Loa. Waialua, the northwestern moku,
extends from Ka‘ena Point in the west to Kapaeloa at Waimea in the east.
Ko‘olau Loa is the northeastern moku that stretches from Waimea Bay to
Ka‘a‘awa. The eighteen ahupua‘a in the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan
area include: Ka‘ena, Keālia, Kawaihāpai, Kikahi, Auku‘u, Mokulēi’a, Kamananui,
Pa‘ala‘a, Kawailoa, Lauhulu, Kuikuiloloa, Punanue, Kāpaeloa, Waimea, Pūpūkea,
Paumalū, Kaunala and a portion of Waiale‘e. While the communities in the
various ahupua‘a may be diverse, they share a common desire to preserve the
natural, cultural, and historical heritage of the region.
The ahupua‘a concept is a holistic approach to land management that recognizes
the connections between land- based and marine-based natural resources and the
dependent relationships between ecological functions. Resources were managed
for the collective good of all living within the ahupua‘a, based on the
principle that activities in one part of the ahupua‘a affected all other parts
(for example, inappropriate management of forestry and agricultural uses in the
upland areas can negatively affect the quality of streams and coastal waters).
Adapted to the context of today’s community needs and technology, the ahupua‘a
concept provides useful principles for guiding the use and management of the
North Shore’s resources. The application of these traditional values to current
land use activities and environmental regulatory and management practices
promotes effective management of the North Shore’s natural resources and deters
land-based activities which contribute to their degradation. In keeping with
this approach, the planning and implementation of land use decisions and land-
based actions considers related effects on coastal waters and the nearshore
environment. Moreover, all development and infrastructure improvement decisions
recognize that the changes to one segment of the community will have
consequences that extend beyond that particular action. Utilizing this
approach, a relatively minor project involving a small segment of land or a
short stretch of roadway could have significant implications on other parts of
the community when the various systems that make up the community are
considered as a whole. On a broader scale, there is a need to recognize the
connection between the North Shore and its neighboring regions (i.e., Central
O‘ahu, Ko‘olauloa and Wai‘anae), and the many ways that events and activities
occurring in one region may affect the others.
2.2.10   Integrate Principles of Sustainability into Decision-Making Processes
Change is inevitable. It is a fact of life that cannot be ignored. Change in
small, rural communities – whether good or bad, big or small – is especially
evident and often times controversial. By nature of its population size and
scale of development, rural communities tend to be more sensitive to change,
and residents of rural areas tend to be more directly affected by the actions
of others. While change can be difficult, it is necessary because an inability
to adapt to changing conditions can lead to stagnation and failure.
A community that successfully manages change will flourish and prosper in the
future. For the North Shore, this means ensuring that planned growth and
development respects and adheres to the principles of sustainability. 4
The North Shore’s principles of sustainability have promoted the long-term
health of the land and community resources for both current and future
generations of residents:
   ·   Protect the environment, natural resources, existing flora and fauna,
and where appropriate, open spaces and view planes.
   ·   Use resources so they are not depleted, permanently damaged or
destroyed.
   ·   Avoid pollution and exceeding the limits of existing infrastructure
systems.
   ·   Respect the cultural, social, and physical resources that shape
residents’ sense of community and rural quality of life.
   ·   Honor the process of change. Make no decisions without first
understanding the effects such change will have on the land and community
resources.
   ·   Strive for balance between economic prosperity, social and community
well-being, and environmental stewardship. Adopt a multidisciplinary approach
acknowledging the importance of our community capital in land use and
infrastructure planning decisions.
3.   LAND USE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
The vision for the North Shore described in Chapter 2 will be implemented
through the application of the land use policies and guidelines presented in
Chapters 3 and 4.
The region’s character is typified by pockets of low-rise, small-scale rural
centers and residential communities surrounded by large expanses of
agricultural lands, open space, and scenic view planes. To ensure that this
regional landscape is maintained, proposed land use policies need to reflect an
island-wide regional growth policy, resource protection, and community desires
to maintain the region’s rural setting and unique physical and lifestyle
character. These policies focus on the preservation of agricultural lands and
open space while directing limited growth toward Hale‘iwa and Waialua.
Proposed land use policies are intended to outline future actions and agency
decision-making once the Plan is adopted. Policies are broad statements of
intent that express the City’s overall philosophy toward particular land uses.
Guidelines provide more specific guidance to public agencies and private
entities in terms of planning, design and implementation of projects and
programs in the various land use categories.
It is intended that existing current uses and structures that are legal but are
not consistent with the Sustainable Communities Plan policy would be recognized
as existing uses and allowed to remain at their locations in their current
purpose, character, and level of use. Future proposed land use changes at those
locations, however, would have to conform with the policies of the adopted
Sustainable Communities Plan.
Chapter 3 is organized under the following headings:
SECTION
   3.1   OPEN SPACE AND NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
   3.2   AGRICULTURE
   3.3   PARKS AND RECREATION
   3.4   HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
   3.5   RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITIES
   3.6   COMMERCIAL AREAS
   3.7   INDUSTRIAL AREAS
   3.8   VISITOR ACCOMMODATIONS
   3.9   INSTITUTIONAL USES
   3.10   MILITARY
3.1   OPEN SPACE AND NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
Open space preservation is a key element of the vision for the North Shore. The
natural landscape (the Ko‘olau and Wai‘anae Mountain Ranges, coastal pali,
gulches, and shoreline areas) and man-made elements (agricultural fields and
parks) are key open space resources that define the North Shore Sustainable
Communities Plan area. Preservation of these resources is essential in
maintaining the rural character of the North Shore.
The vast majority of the open space elements in the region are designated as
Preservation, Agriculture, and Park on the North Shore Sustainable Communities
Plan Land Use Map. Of the estimated 77,000 acres of land within the North Shore
Sustainable Communities Plan area, approximately 97 percent is in open space
uses, including 53 percent designated as Preservation, 41 percent as
Agriculture, and 3 percent as Park (see Open Space Map and Land Use Map in
Appendix A). Areas designated as Preservation include lands with significant
environmental resources, including watersheds; sites with scenic, historic,
cultural, archaeological or ecological significance; and areas with natural
ecosystems of endemic plants, fish and wildlife. They may also include lands
that may be impacted by natural hazards such as tsunami-prone or flood hazard
areas, or steep slopes (see Exhibit 3.1: Environmental Resources/
Characteristics).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8621.png]
Exhibit 3.1: Environmental Resources/Characteristics
The City and County of Honolulu Land Use Ordinance (LUO) and accompanying
zoning maps (Chapter 21, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu) prescribe the
allowable uses of land for the City and County of Honolulu. The LUO identifies
the various zoning districts, the uses allowed within each zoning district, and
the applicable development standards within each district.
Table 3-1  presents the acreage within each zoning district. More than 90
percent of the land within the North Shore region is zoned for either
preservation or agricultural use, with approximately 55 percent zoned either
AG-1 Restricted Agricultural or AG-2 General Agricultural District and about 41
percent zoned either P-1 Restricted Preservation or P-2 General Preservation
District.
Table 3-1: City and County of Honolulu Zoning Districts, 1998 and 2007
District 1998 Acreage 2007 Acreage Acreage Change
Table 3-1: City and County of Honolulu Zoning Districts, 1998 and 2007
District                          1998 Acreage 2007 Acreage Acreage Change
R-10 Residential                  10.1         10.1         0
R-7.5 Residential                 89.0         89.0         0
R-5 Residential                   674.5        656.1        -18.4
A-1 Low Density Apt               15.8         15.8         0
A-2 Medium Density Apt            3.7          3.7          0
B-1 Neighborhood Business         30.4         31.1         +0.7
B-2 Community Business            10.4         10.4         0
I-1 Limited Industrial            1.8          1.8          0
I-2 General Industrial            28.9         28.9         0
I-3 Waterfront Industrial         12.0         12.0         0
AG-1 Restricted AG                29,156.9     29,128.1     -28.8
AG-2 General AG                   12,560.9     13,590.6     +1029.7
Country District                  1,924.3      1,152.6      -771.7
P-1 Restricted Preservation       29,307.1     29,307.1     0
P-2 General Preservation          2,816.8      2,605.5      -211.3
F-1 Military/Federal Preservation 349.6        349.6        0
SOURCE: Department of Planning and Permitting. “1998 Land Use File” and
“Zone Changes Approved Between 1998 to 2007.” September 2008.
The public acquisition of approximately 1,100 acres at Pūpūkea-Paumalū in 2007
exemplifies the community’s commitment to open space preservation. Since the
late 1980s when the Obayashi Corporation introduced plans for the proposed Lihi
Lani subdivision 5 , the North Shore community has consistently opposed the
proposed residential development. As a result of residents’ determination to
protect the land from future development, the community – with the support of
the Trust for Public Land Hawai‘i and the cooperation of the landowner – was
able to successfully organize the purchase of the property from the Obayashi
Corporation. Today, after almost twenty years of community lobbying, the
property is held by the State and City and County of Honolulu for open space
and natural area preservation and future park use. To further ensure the long-
term preservation of the land for agriculture and open space and prevent any
future development, the property was also rezoned to the AG-2 General
Agricultural District.
3.1.1   Policies
The following are policies for the preservation of open space and the natural
environment:
   ·   Promote integrated resource management principles that support the
Native Hawaiian concept of ahupua‘a.
   ·   Protect and enhance significant natural features and ecologically
sensitive lands, including mountain areas, shoreline areas, wetlands,
fishponds, natural gulches, streams, and drainageways. Provide protective
buffer zones and setbacks around biologically sensitive areas to minimize
habitat disturbance.
   ·   Ensure State and County land use designations are consistent with the
desired long-term use of the land. Important watershed areas should be
classified to the State Conservation District and zoned P-1 Restricted
Preservation District.
   ·   Protect forested areas and promote expansion of these areas through
reforestation to ensure the long-term preservation of native species, watershed
protection, and aesthetic enhancement. Possible candidate sites that may be
eligible for future Natural Area Reserves should be protected, including the
Central Ko‘olau Mountains, Upper Makaleha adjacent to Pahole Natural Area
Reserve, and areas adjacent to Ka‘ena Point.
   ·   Ensure the long-range protection and continuation of agricultural uses
on agricultural lands.
   ·   Protect recreational areas that contribute to the North Shore’s open
space quality, including the ocean and its resources, the shoreline and
mountain areas, park spaces, and other quasi-public recreational facilities.
   ·   Protect and preserve views of scenic resources, including the Wai‘anae
and Ko‘olau Mountain Ranges, coastal pali, the coastline, and the Pacific
Ocean.
   ·   Limit visual impacts from utility installations. Ensure that permitted
utility installations are developed and/or managed in ways that maintain or
enhance the natural, cultural, and scenic resource qualities of the surrounding
landscape.
   ·   Maintain open space around existing communities by locating new
developments within or next to existing developments within the Community
Growth Boundary. Encourage compact development patterns and balance the
development of desired or necessary land uses such as affordable housing and
public facilities such as schools with the need to preserve open space.
   ·   Promote cooperative interagency and/or public-private partnerships in
the long-term protection and management of natural resources.
   ·   Establish adequate shoreline setbacks that consider shoreline changes
resulting from erosion hazards and rising sea levels using data such as the
annual average erosion rate from the University of Hawai‘i shoreline erosion
studies.
   ·   Base governmental expenditures for natural resources management and
protection, including shoreline maintenance and improvements, on actual site
usage (including visitors) rather than on resident population ratios or land
values.
   ·   Improve and enhance access to mountain and shoreline recreational areas
by obtaining use of Federal and State lands and waters and acquiring available
excess lands.
   ·   Establish permanent instream flow standards for perennial streams that
weigh the benefits of instream and non-instream uses of water resources,
including the economic impact of restrictions of such uses.
   ·   Allow outdoor lighting at the minimum level necessary for public safety,
security and community aesthetics consistent with the goals of energy
conservation and environmental protection.
3.1.2   Guidelines
This section provides a brief description of the regional open space resources
on the North Shore (see Exhibit 3.1 Environmental Resources/Characteristics),
followed by guidelines to carry out the policies related to each open space
element.
3.1.2.1   MOUNTAIN AREAS
Mountain areas within the North Shore include segments of both the Ko‘olau and
Wai‘anae Mountain Ranges. Mountain areas are designated as Preservation on the
Open Space Map. While most of the mountain areas are in the State Land Use
Conservation District, some acreage along the foothills of the Wai‘anae
Mountain Range is in the State Land Use Agricultural District and zoned AG-
2 General Agricultural District. These lands should be rezoned to P-2 General
Preservation District as most of them have slopes of 30 percent or more and
some contain endemic plants; but they should remain in the State Land Use
Agricultural District, so as to allow for some agricultural uses that are
permitted on P-2 lands, such as forestry and livestock grazing, where
appropriate, which would help to contain the threats of brushfire on the
mountain slopes.
Within the State Land Use Conservation District are several significant
environmental resources, including forest reserves and natural area reserves
managed by the State department of land and natural resources (DLNR).
 
Table 3-2: State DLNR Forest Reserves and Natural Area Reserves
Forest Reserves                Natural Area Reserves
Kuaokalā Forest Reserve       Pahole Natural Area Reserve
Mokulē‘ia Forest Reserve    Mount Ka‘ala Natural Area Reserve
Pūpūkea-Paumalū Forest ReserKa‘ena Natural Area Reserve
 
The Forest Reserve System 6  is comprised of important mauka lands containing
watershed areas, where rainfall that is intercepted by trees and other
vegetation percolates slowly through the soil to recharge aquifers and streams.
Forest reserves also serve as wildlife refuges and recreational areas, with
most of the forest reserve areas open to the public for certain recreational
uses, such as hiking, camping, gathering, and seasonal hunting. Some forest
reserve areas are considered closed watershed areas, which means that the
public is prohibited from entering without a permit. These areas are important
resources for protecting watersheds, aesthetic beauty, wildlife habitats,
undisturbed ecosystems, and rare native species, while providing forestry use
and public recreation.
The Natural Area Reserve System 7  was established by the State to protect and
preserve representative examples of the Island’s unique native ecosystems and
geological formations. They require active management to counteract damage from
nonnative feral animals (i.e., pigs, goats, deer and cattle, dogs, cats, and
rats), noxious weeds, and human disturbance. Permanent funding and staffing are
needed to continue careful management of these areas. Access to the mountain
areas is available via public hiking trails managed and maintained by the State
DLNR Na Ala Hele Program. The Kuaokalā Trail, the Mokulē‘ia Trail, and the
Kealia Trail form a network that passes through the Mokulē‘ia Forest Reserve
and the Pahole Natural Area Reserve. In Pūpūkea, the Kaunala Trail passes
through the Paumalū Forest Reserve. A number of trails are on private lands and
permission is needed for access to these private trails.
Mountainous land forms also include coastal pali which occur mauka of many of
the North Shore’s shoreline areas. Their scenic characteristics should be
protected and preserved for general public enjoyment.
Guidelines pertaining to mountain areas are as follows:
   ·   Maintain, protect, and restore native forests and ecosystems within the
State Conservation District and lands designated Preservation on the North
Shore Sustainable Communities Plan Land Use Map. Ensure the protection of State
conservation lands, especially those on the Ka‘ena coastline and Mokulē‘ia
foothills.
   ·   Reclassify important watershed areas which are designated but unused
State Agricultural or Urban Districts to the State Conservation or City
Preservation Districts.
   ·   Identify and protect endangered species habitats, native ecosystems, and
other important ecologically sensitive areas, including the natural area
reserves and forest reserves, from such threats as fire, alien species, feral
animals, and human activity.
   ·   Identify mountain areas within the AG-2 General Agricultural District
that are suitable for rezoning to P-2 General Preservation District.
   ·   Avoid the establishment of utility corridors and other uses that would
disturb areas with high concentrations of native species.
   ·   Encourage coordination of natural resource protection and management
efforts between the State DLNR and private landowners, as well as with the U.S.
Military, especially where the Kahuku and Kawailoa Training Areas overlap with
environmentally sensitive areas.
   ·   Acquire and maintain public access easements to trailheads and public
campgrounds, including parking and signage at trailheads, where appropriate.
Such access should be required, as appropriate, for any new development.
   ·   Support State efforts to seek opportunities for cooperative agreements
with private landowners to gain access to trails leading to public lands.
   ·   Implement recommendations in the State’s Na Ala Hele Program Plan to
maintain and enhance mauka trail systems.
   ·   Identify historic trails and old government roads of cultural and
recreational value to the public.
3.1.2.2   SHORELINE AREAS
The North Shore’s shoreline extends for over 27 miles between Ka‘ena Point and
Waiale‘e. This world-renowned shoreline, together with its nearshore resources,
provides residents and visitors with significant active and passive
recreational opportunities, and is a key element in defining the region’s rural
character and lifestyle. In addition to their recreational and cultural value,
shoreline areas are critical to the health of the coastal marine ecosystem and
provide significant scenic value.
The North Shore shoreline varies from the rugged rocky coastline at Ka‘ena
Point to the popular sandy beach at Sunset Beach. Portions of the shoreline,
including notable sections of Mokulē‘ia, Kawailoa, and Sunset Point, have
experienced beach narrowing or loss as a result of natural shoreline processes
and inappropriate development and armoring along the shoreline. The City
department of parks and recreation recently completed the City Beach Parks
Erosion Study Island of O‘ahu, Hawai‘i (April 2010) to identify causes and
possible measures to address erosion problems at various City parks, including
Hale‘iwa Beach Park.
An integrated coastal erosion management system to mitigate beach erosion and
preserve coastal resources is needed. The State DLNR has developed a Coastal
Lands Program (CLP) to manage and protect beaches and coastal areas. The CLP
aims to balance preservation of marine and coastal areas with responsible
development of appropriate land uses. The CLP is involved with initiating and
developing innovative shoreline management techniques that will help the long-
term goal of beach and coastal preservation, and oversees the implementation of
technical recommendations and policies embodied in the Coastal Erosion
Management Plan (COEMAP). In an effort to develop a comprehensive strategy to
manage the conservation and restoration of Hawai‘i’s beaches, the State DLNR is
preparing the Hawai‘i Beach Management Plan (HBMP). Once completed, the HBMP
will provide a single, comprehensive document with implementation tools that
all management agencies will reference for any land use applications pertaining
to a specific coastal region.
Guidelines for shoreline areas are listed. Additional guidelines for
recreational uses in shoreline areas can be found in Section 3.3.2.3.
   ·   Preserve rare and sensitive coastal resources including coastal strand
vegetation, sand dunes, and anchialine pools. Establish buffer zones around
these areas where necessary.
   ·   Prohibit off-road vehicle, motorcycle and bicycle use in ecologically
sensitive areas, including coastal dunes and shoreline beaches. Identify and
maintain recreational areas specifically designated for such use.
   ·   Protect nearshore coral reefs and other marine life from damaging
activities such as soil erosion, nonpoint source pollution, dredging of coral
reefs, and alterations to nearshore water circulation.
   ·   Establish access where justified by public demand, traditional use
patterns, high quality recreational resources, or to circumvent barriers that
exist along the shoreline.
   ·   Improve and expand public access to the shoreline at approximately ½-
mile intervals with vehicular and bicycle parking and lateral access along the
shoreline.
   ·   Implement the recommendations of the State of Hawai‘i’s Coastal Nonpoint
Pollution Control Program and utilize best management practices in agricultural
land use and operations to avoid or minimize chemical runoff and other
“nonpoint” contaminants in shoreline areas.
   ·   Support research to determine causes of coastal erosion and identify
appropriate management strategies to avoid future erosion hazards.
   ·   Encourage interagency coordination and public/private cooperation in
developing and implementing beach management plans, with an emphasis on
nonstructural approaches.
   ·   Discourage development or activities which result in beach loss, and
encourage development practices or activities such as increased shoreline
setbacks which result in beach preservation or enhancement.
   ·   Require buildings along the shoreline to adhere to the City’s and
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) minimum building elevations and
structural guidelines. In addition, adopt development standards that require
new structures to incorporate building styles compatible with coastal hazards
such as coastal erosion, tsunami and hurricane overwash.
   ·   Discourage visual obstructions such as walls and fences along the
coastal highway to maintain and enhance existing panoramic views. Clear shrubs
and vegetation on vacant State- and County-owned properties that would maintain
views of the ocean from public roadways along the shoreline.
   ·   Implement active protection and management practices that preserve and
enhance native and other resident fish and aquatic species populations and
habitats, including nearshore coral reefs. Efforts to enhance opportunities for
commercial and recreational fishing should use management practices and
techniques that sustain fish populations and habitat quality so as to maintain
a quality aquatic environment for public enjoyment.
   ·   Place sand from channel, stream, and harbor mouth dredging projects on
local beaches in accordance with Hawai‘i Revised Statutes Chapter 205A.
3.1.2.3   WETLANDS
Wetlands are generally described as areas which are covered or saturated with
water, whose substrate is primarily characterized by undrained moist or
saturated soils and which support water-loving plants. Wetlands are important
environmental resources that can provide irreplaceable benefits including flood
protection, water quality improvements, habitat for fish and wildlife, and
opportunities for recreation, education, and research. The U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency as well as State and County agencies have responsibilities
for the protection and management of wetlands.
Table 3-3 lists the major wetland areas on the North Shore.
Table 3-3: Major Wetland Areas
Table 3-3: Major Wetland Areas
Hale‘iwa Marsh
‘Uko‘a Marsh
Loko Ea Fishpond
Kalou Marsh
Crowbar Ranch Pond
Dillingham Field Ponds
Waimea Wetland and Estuary
Hale‘iwa Lotus Fields
Waialua Beach Road Lotus Fields
 
Guidelines pertaining to wetland areas are as follows:
   ·   Preserve and maintain all North Shore wetlands and wildlife habitats.
When considering future activities/construction in the vicinity of biologically
sensitive areas such as wetlands, the preferred sequence will be to:
      -avoid ecologically sensitive areas entirely;
      -if not possible, minimize potential project impacts; and
      -if negative impacts are unavoidable, require mitigation that will offset
the loss of resources.
   ·   Support the restoration and protection of ‘Uko‘a Marsh. Protection can
be achieved through fee acquisition, land banking, cooperative agreements with
public agencies and private landowners, conservation easements, or other
strategies.
   ·   Support efforts to restore Loko Ea Fishpond as an interactive,
productive, and functioning aquaculture resource. Promote the development of a
cultural learning center providing both visitors and residents opportunities to
experience the unique environment around Loko Ea Pond and ‘Uko‘a Marsh.
Possible activities may include tours of a working aquaculture farm, as well as
cultural and environmental education programs that teach traditional and modern
aquaculture techniques and the history of the Pond and its adjacent areas.
Walkways extending north to ‘Uko‘a Pond could provide opportunities for
interpretive nature walks.
3.1.2.4   NATURAL GULCHES, STREAMS, AND DRAINAGEWAYS
The ridges and valleys of the Ko‘olau and Wai‘anae Mountain Ranges form streams
and natural drainageways, which are integral elements of the open space on the
North Shore. Several intermittent and perennial streams provide essential
habitat for Hawai‘i’s flora and fauna, and function as scenic, recreational,
and cultural resources.
To protect stream resources, major streams and stream corridors are designated
as Preservation on the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan Land Use Map.
Streams are also the primary means for carrying water from the inland areas to
the ocean and are normally capable of handling runoff from normal rainfall
amounts. During periods of intense rainfall, however, a number of these
drainageways overflow (see Section 4.6).
Sedimentation as well as chemical and biological contaminants affect stream
water (surface water) quality. Chemical and biological contaminants, as well as
untreated sewage from leaking cesspools, also affect groundwater quality. The
polluted surface and groundwater eventually reach the ocean and affect
nearshore water quality.
Table 3-4 lists the major gulches and streams on the North Shore that are
identified on the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan Land Use Map.
Table 3-4: Major Gulches and Streams
Table 3-4: Major Gulches and Streams
Hāli‘i Gulch            Anahulu River/Kawailoa Gulch
Makaleha Stream/Gulch      Waimea River
Kaukonahua Stream/Gulch    Kaiwiko‘ele Stream/Gulch
Ki‘iki‘i Stream        Kamananui Stream/Gulch
Poamoho Stream/Gulch       ‘Elehāhā Stream/ Kauwalu Gulch
North Poamoho Stream/Gulch Kalahopele Gulch
Paukauila Stream           Kalunawaika‘ala Stream/Gulch
Helemano Stream/Gulch      Pakulena Stream/Gulch
Ōpae‘ula Stream/Gulch   Kaunala Gulch
Kawailoa Gulch             Paumalū Stream/Gulch
 
Guidelines pertaining to natural gulches and drainageways are as follows:
   ·   Preserve the aesthetic and biological values of the natural gulches,
streams, and drainageways as part of the North Shore’s open space system. Where
feasible, establish wildlife habitat protective buffer zones and/or setbacks
along rivers, streams, and shoreline areas. Where possible, provide public
access to these open space and recreational resources.
   ·   Minimize soil erosion, runoff of pesticides, fertilizers, and other
nonpoint source contaminants into streams, wetlands, and marine habitats. In
addition to stream setbacks, utilize erosion control devices, integrated pest
management plans, and revegetation of disturbed areas. Incorporate erosion
control measures and best management practices, as recommended in the State
Coastal Nonpoint Pollution Control Program, to prevent pollution of wetlands,
streams, estuaries, and nearshore waters.
   ·   Limit uses in these areas to conservation uses, compatible recreational
uses such as hiking, traditional hunting, fishing, gathering, religious and
cultural practices, and controlled diversion for agricultural purposes. Avoid
development in ecologically sensitive areas; if activities are allowed,
minimize impacts and implement mitigative measures that will fully offset any
loss of resources.
   ·   Preserve and maintain the natural streams and drainageways within the
developed areas by designating them as part of the open space system. To the
extent possible, limit any modifications to natural gulches and drainageways,
unless they are necessary for flood protection, to preserve water quality and
protect aesthetic and biological resources.
   ·   If modifications are necessary, mitigate impacts on biological habitats
by using stream-side vegetation, rip-rap boulder lining of steam banks, v-
shaped bottom channels to maintain a stream flow during low rainfall periods,
and other designs to promote aeration.
   ·   Integrate planned improvements to the North Shore drainage system into
the regional open space network by emphasizing the use of retention basins and
recreational access in the design approach.
3.1.2.5   AGRICULTURAL AREAS
Preservation of agricultural areas is essential to promoting agriculture and
maintaining the scenic open space features and rural character of the region.
In addition to the Community Growth Boundary, policies and guidelines are
established to protect agricultural lands from development. Policies and
guidelines pertaining to agricultural areas are listed in Section 3.2 relating
to Agriculture.
3.1.2.6   PARKS
Parks provide important open space areas to meet the recreational needs of the
North Shore residents and island- wide visitors. While beach parks serve
island-wide needs, parks within the community meet the recreational needs of
North Shore residents. In addition to meeting recreational needs of the
residents and visitors, parks play a major role in preserving the open space
setting on the North Shore. Policies and guidelines on parks are included in
Section 3.3 relating to Parks and Recreation.
3.1.2.7   SCENIC RESOURCES AND SCENIC VIEWS
With its vast open spaces, scenic shorelines, and the backdrops of the Wai‘anae
and Ko‘olau Mountain Ranges and the coastal pali, the North Shore is blessed
with an abundance of scenic resources.
Panoramic views throughout the region are identified on the Open Space Map. The
significant scenic views that should be protected and enhanced include the
following:
   ·   Views of the Wai‘anae and Ko‘olau Mountains, the Pacific Ocean and
shoreline, Waialua, and Hale‘iwa Towns from Kamehameha Highway and Kaukonahua
Road as one enters into the North Shore.
   ·   Mauka views of the Wai‘anae Mountains from Farrington Highway,
Kaukonahua Road, Kamehameha Highway, and Weed Junction.
   ·   Stationary views from the shoreline between Ka‘ena Point and Makaleha
Beach.
   ·   Views of the Wai‘anae Mountain Range and agricultural fields from
Crozier Drive.
   ·   Makai views of Ki‘iki‘i Stream to Kaiaka Bay from Farrington Highway
near Thompson Corner.
   ·   Makai view of open space to Pu‘uiki Beach Park from Pu‘uiki Street and
cane haul road crossing.
   ·   Makai views along Hale‘iwa Road into Hale‘iwa Ali‘i Park, Hale‘iwa Boat
Harbor and Hale‘iwa Beach Park.
   ·   Stationary mauka and makai views from Kaiaka Bay Beach Park, Hale‘iwa
Ali‘i Beach Park, and Hale‘iwa Beach Park.
   ·   Views of Kaiaka Bay from Hale‘iwa Road at Paukauila Stream.
   ·   Mauka views along Kamehameha Highway of Anahulu Stream and Loko Ea Pond.
   ·   Intermittent makai views from Kamehameha Highway between Kawailoa and
Sunset Beach.
   ·   Stationary views from beach parks and access areas from Kawailoa to
Waiale‘e Beach Park.
   ·   Mauka views of the Ko‘olau Mountains and pali along Kamehameha Highway
from Hale‘iwa to Waiale‘e.
   ·   Views from the road pullover above Waimea Bay, from the shoreline at
Waimea Bay and from the coral formation at Pūpūkea Beach Park.
   ·   Mauka and makai views of Waimea Valley and Bay from the Kamehameha
Highway bridge over the Waimea River.
   ·   Lateral views from Pua‘ena Point.
   ·   Lateral views from Pūpūkea Beach Park.
   ·   Panoramic view from the area near the hairpin turn on Kawailoa Drive.
   ·   Panoramic view of the coast from Pūpūkea Heights.
   ·   View from Pu‘u o Mahuka Heiau State Monument.
   ·   Mauka views from nearshore waters.
Guidelines pertaining to scenic resources and scenic views are as follows:
   ·   Conduct planning with attention to preservation of natural open space,
protecting coastal and mauka views from public roadways, and conserving
important viewsheds.
   ·   When view reductions may come from agricultural activities which intrude
into viewplanes or otherwise degrade or diminish scenic qualities, the
protection of roadway views should be balanced with the operating requirements
of agriculture.
   ·   Evaluate the impact of land use proposals on the visual quality of the
landscape, including viewplane and open space considerations.
   ·   Site new antennas, telecommunication equipment, and alternative energy
systems in appropriate locations to minimize their impact on visual resources.
Encourage site clustering and techniques that blend the equipment into the
natural landscape.
   ·   Discourage the use and installation of overhead utility lines and poles.
Strong consideration should be given to placing replacement and new
transmission lines underground. Undergrounding utility lines will enhance
viewplanes and increase highway safety. Whenever possible, relocate or place
underground overhead utilities that significantly obstruct public views. If
unavoidable, locate any future overhead utilities on the mauka side of the
public coastal highway.
   ·   Minimize the adverse effects of artificial lighting on wildlife and
human health by balancing the need of outdoor lighting for night utility,
security, and desire for reasonable architectural expression with the need to
conserve energy and protect the natural environment.
   ·   Adopt outdoor night lighting standards that encourage efforts to
minimize glare and stray light, and reinforce the differences between urban and
rural communities.
3.1.2.8   UTILITY CORRIDORS AND GREENWAYS
Utility corridors and greenways are required to provide for a distribution
system throughout the region. Where located in settlement areas, these
corridors may provide for greenways that can serve as pedestrian or bicycle
routes, if issues of safety, liability, and maintenance can be adequately
addressed.
Guidelines pertaining to utility corridors and greenways are as follows:
   ·   Provide sufficient easement width for the major trunk lines and
transmission lines for utility systems, when their alignment is not within a
road right-of-way, to permit the growth of trees within the easement.
   ·   When overhead transmission lines are located within or adjacent to a
road right-of-way, there should be sufficient width to permit the growth of
trees adjacent to the transmission line, consistent with the applicable
operations, maintenance, and safety requirements. The purpose of the
landscaping is to divert attention from the overhead lines and, preferably,
obscure views of the overhead line from the travelway and adjacent residential
areas.
   ·   Permit the use of utility easements for pedestrian and bicycle routes.
Encourage coordination between utility companies, landowners, pertinent
agencies, and the community to ensure that safety, liability, and maintenance
issues are adequately addressed.
   ·   Encourage the use of indigenous vegetation that is slow growing and thus
minimizes the need to use herbicides for vegetation control.
   ·   Promote technologies that support alternative energy sources, including
solar, wind, and wave power. Allow community and agency review of individual
proposals to ensure compatibility and suitability.
3.1.3   Relation to Open Space Map and Land Use Map
The following areas shown on the Open Space Map and Land Use Map in Appendix A
are components of the regional open space system:
Mountain and Agricultural Areas. Mountain areas, including areas within the
State Conservation District, are designated as Preservation and are located
outside of the Community Growth Boundary. Agricultural lands outside and within
the Community Growth Boundary are shown.
Natural Gulches and Drainageways. Gulches and streams outside and within the
Community Growth Boundary are indicated for preservation to maintain proper
drainage functions.
Shoreline Areas and Parks. Shoreline parks and district parks are shown.
Neighborhood parks within the residential areas are not shown.
Panoramic views. Continuous and intermittent panoramic views are identified on
the Open Space Map. Other significant scenic views identified in Section
3.1.2.7 are not shown.
3.2   AGRICULTURE
Agricultural lands are a key component of the North Shore’s rural character.
Cultivated fields extending towards the mountains significantly contribute to
the form and character of the North Shore’s rural landscape and the visual
qualities that the region is known for. The protection of agricultural lands
and agricultural uses, together with the assurance of a thriving agriculture
industry, is essential to retaining the rural character and scenic open space
features that are so valued by North Shore residents and visitors.
Nearly 45,000 acres, or about 60 percent, of the 77,000 total acres of land
within the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan region are located within
the State Agricultural District. This includes the plateaus that extend north
from Helemano Plantation towards Mokulē‘ia and Sunset Beach, to the areas
bordering Hale‘iwa and Waialua Towns. Of the 45,000 acres, around 20,000 acres
are considered high-quality agricultural lands suitable for commercial
cultivation of crops, with the balance providing agricultural land for smaller-
scale, less-intensive forms of agriculture. In general, productive agricultural
lands include lands designated “Prime,” “Unique,” or “Other” by the State ALISH
(Agricultural Lands of Importance to the State of Hawai‘i) system, rated “A” or
“B” by the Land Study Bureau (LSB), and which have irrigation sources or other
enabling infrastructure. On the North Shore, the most productive agricultural
lands are located near or below the Wahiawā Reservoir Ditch. Most of these
lands are favorable for cultivation because they are well-drained and generally
free of stones; nearly level or gently sloping with good machine tillability;
have deep soils and adequate sunlight; served by an extensive agriculture
infrastructure network already in place (roads, irrigation, and power to drive
water pumps); and are located within reasonable trucking distance to serve
local markets and for overseas shipping. Less productive lands include lands
with steep slopes, lands at higher elevations where moisture/irrigation cannot
be controlled, and lands with lower- rated soils. These include some of the
Mokulē‘ia, Kemo‘o, and Waimea fields and fields in the foothills of the Ko‘olau
Mountain Range.
Following the decline of the corporate sugar and pineapple industries during
the 1990s, large acreages of agricultural lands that were historically
controlled by the plantations became available for other uses, creating new
opportunities for smaller-scale, entrepreneurial diversified agriculture
ventures. In contrast to the plantation days, the agriculture industry on the
North Shore is currently comprised mainly of small farms, with a few larger,
corporate farms (e.g., Pioneer Hi-Bred International). While large portions of
the agricultural land remain in the ownership of Dole Food Company and
Kamehameha Schools, most of it is now leased to a number of farmers growing a
variety of products.
Some of the crops that are being successfully grown on the North Shore include
coffee, papaya, banana, lychee, mangoes, truck crops, taro, tropical flowers,
cattle feed, and seed corn. Small-scale commercial forestry and ranching,
including free range cattle, has been initiated at the upper elevations where
intensive cultivation of crops is not feasible. Aquaculture, which contributes
to the diversification of the agricultural base and provides additional
opportunities for economic development, occurs at specific sites in Mokulē‘ia,
Hale‘iwa, and Kawailoa. Continued cleanup of the former Dillingham Quarry site
in Mokulē‘ia and further expansion of existing aquaculture operations in the
area would support the future growth of the aquaculture industry. As
diversified agriculture continues to develop and adapt to changing market
conditions, other suitable agricultural crops and uses may be introduced in the
future.
The successful development of a viable agriculture industry on the North Shore
provides residents with jobs and economic development opportunities that foster
a connection with the land. It can also increase the production of locally
grown foods and products, which may encourage greater consumption of local
agricultural products, contributing to increased self-sufficiency and a
reduction in O‘ahu’s dependency on imported foods. More importantly, it ensures
that land designated for agriculture remains in active agricultural production
and is not developed for higher value uses (such as housing and commercial
development). Like other rural communities, the North Shore has experienced a
steady increase in land values due to a growing demand by individuals seeking a
rural lifestyle. With rising land values affecting agriculture’s profitability,
many landowners have been seeking alternative development schemes that involve
higher-intensity uses and greater economic returns, making agricultural lands
increasingly vulnerable to nonagricultural development. To minimize the market
pressures to subdivide agricultural lands into large-lot, rural-style estates
where agriculture is no longer the primary land use, agricultural lands need to
be protected and dedicated for agricultural use and the economic barriers that
impede the industry’s growth need to be addressed. Appropriate incentives for
maintaining the long-term availability of important agricultural lands and
industry development should be explored, designed, and implemented as high
priority action items by pertinent agencies and parties.
Lake Wilson (located within the Central O‘ahu Sustainable Communities Plan
area) serves as the reservoir for the Wahiawā Irrigation System and is the
primary and irreplaceable source of irrigation water for the majority of the
productive agricultural lands in the North Shore area. The provision of high-
quality irrigation water from Lake Wilson greatly enhances agricultural
productivity and crop diversity.
Agricultural Support Facilities. In addition to the cultivation of products,
agricultural land uses also include the related industrial and commercial
activities that support crop production and sales. Agricultural support
activities are an essential part of the industry, and include crop storage,
processing, packing, and manufacturing of products, distribution facilities,
and agriculturally related administrative, management, marketing, and sales
facilities. These support activities are directly dependent on crop production
and need to be located on Agriculture-designated lands in close proximity to
the activity it serves.
While certain agricultural support facilities may require large structures and
base-yard operations, the overall nature of agricultural support activities
differs from typical forms of industrial and commercial uses and relates
harmoniously with adjacent agricultural uses. The consolidation of agricultural
support facilities in designated areas will promote the cost-efficient use of
existing infrastructure and prevent the urbanization of productive agricultural
lands. Potential facilities to be located within the designated support areas
may include a regional agricultural wholesale and distribution center with
processing and packing plants and warehouse spaces, a vacuum cooling plant and
refrigerated storage, a fruit fly disinfestation facility, and maintenance
facilities for farm equipment.
Agriculture-Based Tourism. Agriculture-based tourism is an alternative revenue-
generating activity that combines education about agricultural products with
recreation and the experience of interacting with the land and the grower. It
involves visiting a working farm or agricultural venture to enjoy, learn about
or participate in the operation, and may include activities such as farm tours
with retail sales of locally grown produce, hunting, fishing, horseback riding
and bicycling tours, farmers’ markets, restaurants featuring regional cuisine,
and agricultural fairs and festivals. By providing an additional revenue
source, such visitor-related activities can supplement farm incomes and
contribute to the economic viability and stability of the farm. Overnight
visitor accommodations on agricultural lands are not appropriate.
3.2.1   Policies
The following policies are applicable to agricultural lands:
   ·   Protect all productive, high-value agricultural lands, regardless of
current crop production capabilities, from uses that would undermine or
otherwise irreversibly compromise their agricultural potential and crop
production capabilities.
   ·   Promote the long-term viability of diversified agriculture on the North
Shore and ensure the continued productive use of the land.
   ·   Maintain a healthy and competitive industry that supports a range of
different types and scales of agriculture.
   ·   Ensure that agriculture is the primary use of agricultural lands.
Prohibit the improper use of agricultural lands, including the development or
subdivision of agriculturally designated and zoned lands for residential and
other nonagricultural uses, unless accessory to agricultural use. Do not allow
token farming (i.e., “fake farms”) or ranching as a ruse to exploit
agricultural land.
   ·   Maintain the current agricultural land use and zoning designation of
agricultural lands within the Community Growth Boundary that are in the State
Agricultural District and zoned for agriculture, except for limited “infill”
areas contiguous to Hale‘iwa and Waialua Towns that are designated for future
residential.
   ·   Minimize soil erosion, pesticide, and fertilizer runoff, and other
nonpoint source contaminants that flow from agricultural lands to protect
streams, wetlands, and marine habitats.
   ·   Maintain and upgrade the existing agricultural infrastructure
(irrigation system and roads).
   ·   Encourage the development of regional agricultural support facilities at
Waialua and Kawailoa through the use of economic and tax incentives.
   ·   Develop and enforce a stringent set of criteria that define the minimum
requirements for the meaningful and credible use of agricultural land.
   ·   Encourage landowners to provide affordable long-term leases to farmers.
Incentives for landowners may include subdivisions with reduced infrastructure
requirements, expeditious processing, or other provisions that would reduce the
cost of agricultural subdivision and enable tenants to obtain financing.
   ·   Promote the development and provision of quality water resources that
support bona fide agricultural operations and activities by providing economic
incentives for farmers and landowners.
   ·   Consider alternatives to the current tax rate structure to afford tax
relief for farmers.
   ·   Plan for the future of O‘ahu’s agricultural industry and develop an
island-wide comprehensive agricultural development plan.
3.2.2   Guidelines
The following guidelines carry out the policies for agriculture.
3.2.2.1   AGRICULTURAL LANDS
   ·   Enforce permitted uses on agricultural lands to ensure that the use is
contributing to meaningful and credible agricultural production on the same or
nearby properties.
   ·   Cluster and locate dwellings near similar uses to preserve open space,
maximize the use of productive agricultural lands, and reduce infrastructure
costs, when planned as part of an agricultural activity.
   ·   Design and site buildings and other facilities that are accessory to an
agricultural operation to minimize the visual impact on nearby areas and views
from arterial and major collector roads.
   ·   Adopt development standards and permitting procedures that simplify and
streamline the permitting requirements for uses that support the growth of
agriculture, including agricultural support facilities and agriculture-based
tourism.
   ·   Maintain adequate physical buffers between agricultural land uses and
surrounding land uses.
   ·   Base any subdivision of agricultural lands on the most appropriately
sized, viable economic unit for agricultural production.
   ·   Identify and implement – as an immediate high priority action item at
the State and County levels – appropriate economic incentives designed to
promote and facilitate the growth of diversified agriculture.
   ·   Support agricultural research and development activities targeted
towards increasing operational efficiencies, economic returns, and the
effective utilization of agricultural lands and supporting infrastructure,
which enables sustainable usage of agricultural resources.
   ·   Assist residents to develop skills in agriculture and related
specialized industries so that residents can seek local employment in the area.
   ·   Support a mentor program for area teens to learn about agricultural
practices, economics, and business so that interest and commitment to
agriculture may continue on to future generations.
   ·   Support the expansion and diversification of aquaculture in the region,
including the continued cleanup of the former Dillingham Quarry site in
Mokulē‘ia and expansion of existing aquaculture operations in the area.
   ·   Identify potential sites for aquaculture or mariculture parks.
   ·   Encourage agricultural producers to develop Conservation Plans, in
conjunction with the West O‘ahu Soil and Water Conservation District, to manage
and protect natural resources.
   ·   Assist governmental agencies and landowners to upgrade and maintain
existing infrastructure networks, including roads and irrigation systems.
   ·   Improve the quality of irrigation water from Lake Wilson.
   ·   Work with the State to identify and protect Important Agricultural Lands
as defined by Act 183 (Session Laws Hawai‘i, 2005).
3.2.2.2   AGRICULTURAL SUPPORT FACILITIES
   ·   Develop agricultural support facilities in Waialua and Kawailoa.
   ·   Ensure that permitted agricultural support facilities do not adversely
affect agricultural production in the area or present health hazards or
nuisances to adjacent areas.
   ·   Require all agricultural support facilities in the region to maintain a
direct relationship to local agricultural production.
   ·   Site and design facilities to minimize development impacts and maximize
the amount of farmland preserved.
3.2.2.3   AGRICULTURE-BASED TOURISM
   ·   Allow agricultural, recreational, and educational programs, and limited
outdoor recreational or other uses if the activity is complementary to the
primary agricultural use of the land and it does not interfere with the
agricultural use of the site.
   ·   Monitor tourism-related activities conducted on agricultural lands to
ensure that such activities do not adversely impact on-site or adjacent
agricultural activities or other resources.
   ·   Provide technical and business development support for visitor-related
proposals.
   ·   Identify and develop a convenient, suitable location in or near Hale‘iwa
and/or Waialua Town to establish a farmers’ market where farmers can market
products locally.
   ·   Identify and develop a permanent site in the Sunset Beach vicinity to
promote the North Shore Country Market.
   ·   Develop an agricultural museum that includes a demonstration area
showing various crops in different stages of growth and processing.
3.2.3   Relation to Open Space Map and Public Facilities Map
Agricultural lands are located both within and outside the Community Growth
Boundary, as indicated on both maps.
The Public Facilities Map identifies two future areas for agricultural support
facilities. The site makai of the Waialua Mill up to the former cane haul road
and Goodale Avenue/Waialua Beach Road is intended to accommodate 20 to 25 acres
of agricultural support uses, and is designated as the primary agricultural
support area for the region. A secondary area of 10 to 15 acres in Kawailoa
near the Alluvion Nursery (i.e., the area mauka of Kamehameha Highway across
from Papailoa Road and Laniākea Beach Park) is intended to accommodate similar
support facilities for products cultivated in Kawailoa.
3.3   PARKS AND RECREATION
The North Shore area has an abundance of recreational resources and is known by
surfers around the world as a surfing capital. The City department of parks and
recreation (DPR) and the State DLNR, State Parks Division, maintain control of
a number of parks and recreational facilities on the North Shore. In addition,
several private and quasi-public organizations provide recreational
opportunities in the region. Recreational resources within the North Shore
Sustainable Communities Plan area are shown in Exhibit 3.2.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8623.png]
Exhibit 3.2: Recreational Resources
City and County Parks. The DPR’s Standards and Design Precepts for Future Park
Development (December 2004) is the long-range plan for park facilities on the
island of O‘ahu. Parks are classified according to two basic categories:
“island-based parks” and “community-based parks.” Island-based parks serve the
needs of the island- wide population. The DPR standard for island-wide parks is
25 acres per 1,000 de facto population. They include regional parks, beach/
shoreline parks, beach/shoreline right-of-ways, botanical gardens, golf
courses, and zoological parks. The size of the park and the facilities to be
provided are based on the character of the site, intended use, and
availability.
Existing DPR beach/shoreline parks on the North Shore are shown in
Table 3-5. Kawailoa Beach Support Park, Leftovers Beach Park, and Uppers Beach
Park, have been added to the City Park system for development for future park
use. In addition, the City maintains a number of right-of-ways which provide
access to the shoreline.
Table 3-5: City and County of Honolulu Beach Parks
Park Acreage
Table 3-5: City and County of Honolulu Beach Parks
Park                           Acreage
Mokulē‘ia Beach Park        38.5
Makaleha Beach Park            27.7
‘Āweoweo Beach Park         1.4
Kaiaka Bay Beach Park          52.8
Hale‘iwa Ali‘i Beach Park  19.3
Hale‘iwa Beach Park          15.7
Laniākea Beach Support Park   3.0
Chun’s Reef Beach Support Par3.0
Kawailoa Beach Park            0.4
Waimea Bay Beach Park          22.2
Kahawai Beach Community Park   1.5
Pūpūkea Beach Park           36.6
Banzai Rock Beach Support Park 2.3
‘Ehukai Beach Park           1.2
Sunset Beach Park              17.7
Sunset Beach Support Park      2.1
Sunset Point Beach Park        0.9
Waiale‘e Beach Park          25.7
 
Community-based parks are intended to provide for active recreation and consist
of neighborhood, community, and district parks. The DPR standard for community-
based parks is two acres per 1,000 resident population, although this may vary
according to each region’s situation. Community-based parks provide courts and
playing fields for various sports and serve a wide array of active sports
leagues. Existing community-based parks on the North Shore are Kamananui
Neighborhood Park, Sunset Beach Neighborhood Park, and Waialua District Park.
To expand active recreational opportunities in the region, two island-based
beach parks (Hale‘iwa and Pūpūkea Beach Parks) are equipped with ball fields.
There is currently a shortage of community-based parks in the North Shore
Sustainable Communities Plan area. Based on projected population for the year
2035, DPR anticipates that there will be a need for an additional community
park (average 10 acres) and two additional neighborhood parks (average 4 to 6
acres) for the North Shore. Hale‘iwa Beach Park Mauka and Pu‘uiki Park are
identified as potential community-based parks to address the shortage of these
parks on the North Shore, although Hale‘iwa Beach Park Mauka is less than 4
acres, and a portion of the property is designated as a wetland. Therefore,
development potential is limited.
Following the downzoning of the Pūpūkea-Paumalū lands (the former Lihi Lani
property), the City acquired about 25 acres of land adjoining Kamehameha
Highway for future park development. The community supports the long- term
expansion of the Sunset Beach Neighborhood Park in this area. There are no
regional parks on the North Shore.
There are no existing or planned public golf courses on the North Shore.
State Parks. The State DLNR manages three parks in the region: Ka‘ena Point
State Park, Pu‘u o Mahuka Heiau State Monument, and the Pūpūkea-Paumalū State
Park Reserve. The Ka‘ena Point State Park extends from Dillingham Airfield
around Ka‘ena Point to Mākua Valley on the west side of the Wai‘anae Range. It
is located at the end of Farrington Highway on 779 acres of land, offering
opportunities for picnicking, hiking, and shore fishing along a relatively
remote wilderness coastline. Pu‘u o Mahuka Heiau State Monument is situated on
5.7 acres overlooking Waimea Bay Beach Park off Pūpūkea Road. A low-walled,
platform-type temple with two adjoining structures, Pu‘u o Mahuka is O‘ahu’s
largest heiau. It is the reputed sacrifice site of Captain George Vancouver’s
watering party of 1793. The Pūpūkea-Paumalū State Park Reserve consists of
1,119 acres of mauka land at Sunset Beach, surrounded by the residential
communities mauka of Kamehameha Highway and along Pūpūkea Heights, Sunset Beach
Elementary School, and the Pūpūkea Boy Scout Camp, U.S. Army Kahuku Training
Area, and the Girl Scout Camp Paumalū. The property was transferred to the
State DLNR in 2007 following efforts by the North Shore Community Land Trust,
the Trust for Public Land, and other supporters to raise funds and purchase the
former Lihi Lani property. Preparation of the Pūpūkea-Paumalū Long-Range
Resources Management Plan (Public Review Draft, October 2009) is ongoing, with
a level of community support for resource protection and preservation, native
plant restoration, and recreational opportunities such as nature study, hiking,
biking, and scenic viewing.
Other State Recreational Facilities. The Hale‘iwa Boat Harbor is the only
recreational boat harbor facility in the North Shore region. The facility is
owned by the State and managed by the DLNR, Division of Boating and Ocean
Recreation. The harbor is located in Waialua Bay at the north end of Hale‘iwa
Town near the mouth of the Anahulu River. It encompasses approximately 7.4
acres of protected water, with a 600-foot-long, 120-foot-wide, 12-foot deep
entrance channel that provides access to two inner basins. A two-lane boat
launching ramp is located on the west side of the harbor. A single lane launch
ramp, loading dock, and fish hoist are located on the southeast side of the
harbor. A harbor master’s office is also on the premises. The harbor contains
107 in-water berthing spaces, 45 dry storage berths, and 13 temporary mooring
spaces. There is a demand for these spaces, with approximately 80 individuals
on the waiting list for in-water berthing and more than 50 individuals on the
dryland storage waiting list.
As the only boat launching facility on the North Shore, the harbor plays an
important role in meeting the demand for protected berthings and moorings to
facilitate recreational and commercial fishing pursuits. It also provides
facilities for trailered vessels and other marine-related recreational
activities such as equipment rentals and land- based fishing. There are no
plans to expand the harbor breakwater or increase the harbor footprint. Any
additional slips, if accommodated, would be constructed within the harbor’s
existing footprint. However, additional land in close proximity to the harbor
is needed to expand existing dryland storage facilities.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers has a project pending to dredge the Hale‘iwa
Boat Harbor. If sand dredged from the harbor is suitable, it may be used to
nourish nearby eroding beaches, such as at Hale‘iwa Beach Park.
Securing the harbor and its facilities is also a major concern. Vandalism,
trespassing, loitering, camping and illegal drinking/drugs around the harbor
and park area are issues of concern for the community. Additional resources to
increase the ability to secure the harbor, together with State and City
enforcement, should bring a stop to the unwanted, illegal activities.
Institutional and Private Facilities. The YMCA Camp Erdman, Camp Mokulē‘ia, and
Camp Homelani are private facilities, that provide educational and recreational
activities. Other quasi-public recreation facilities include the A.Wallace
Scout Reserve, Camp Kawailoa Uka, Camp Paumalū, and Camp Pūpūkea that are used
primarily as Scout Camps. The Mokulē‘ia Polo Field and Dillingham Ranch Pony
Club are also located in the North Shore area.
Waimea Valley is a 1,800-acre cultural and ecological park under the recent
ownership of the State of Hawai‘i Office of Hawaiian Affairs. Occupying the
entire ahupua‘a of Waimea, the park provides access to one of the last
undeveloped ahupua‘a on O‘ahu. Waimea Valley is known for its natural beauty
and cultural significance, featuring more than 6,000 rare species of plants and
numerous Native Hawaiian archaeological sites. Park amenities include a visitor
center, shops, restaurant and meeting space, an arboretum, botanical gardens,
educational resources, Hawaiian cultural preservation areas, and hiking trails.
The park is accessible to the public for a modest fee.
3.3.1   Policies
The following policies relate to parks and recreational resources for the North
Shore.
   ·   Provide safe, suitable sites, and facilities to meet resident and
island-wide recreational needs for a variety of recreational activities on the
North Shore.
   ·   Expand recreational opportunities by providing greater access to
recreational resources in the mountains, at the shoreline and in the ocean.
Acquire and maintain additional lands for beach park development and mauka
camping and hiking areas, as opportunities occur.
   ·   Maintain and improve existing recreational areas and facilities to
provide high quality recreational experiences for residents and visitors.
   ·   Base governmental expenditures for natural resources management and
protection, including shoreline maintenance and improvements, on actual site
usage (including visitors), rather than on resident population ratios or land
values.
   ·   Ensure that parks, recreational resources, and recreational activities
are compatible with the preservation and protection of open space, rural
character, scenic, historic and cultural resources, and environmental quality.
Wilderness and wildlife activities should be explored and promoted if
appropriate.
   ·   Provide safe and convenient access to parks and recreational resources.
   ·   Ensure that parks and recreational resources are compatible with
surrounding land uses.
3.3.2   Guidelines
The following guidelines implement the policies for the recreational resources
listed above.
3.3.2.1   COMMUNITY AND NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS AND FACILITIES
   ·   Develop Hale‘iwa Beach Park Mauka as a community-based park to expand
active recreational facilities for North Shore residents.
   ·   Acquire Pu‘uiki Park for community use.
   ·   Expand Waialua District Park by acquiring agricultural land across
Goodale Avenue.
   ·   If new residential development occurs, it should provide land for open
space and recreation purposes at a minimum of 2 acres per 1,000 residents.
Community-based parks (and associated service radius) include miniparks (1/
2 mile), neighborhood parks (1/2 mile), community parks (1 mile), and district
parks (2 miles).
   ·   Locate community and neighborhood parks which emphasize intensive uses
such as ball fields, playing courts, and community buildings in or adjacent to
the neighborhoods or communities they serve, in order to maximize
accessibility.
   ·   Provide more youth activities, programs, and facilities on the North
Shore.
3.3.2.2   MAUKA AREAS
Additional guidelines for recreational resources in mauka areas are described
in Section 3.1.2.1 pertaining to Mountain Areas. It should be noted that the
State of Hawai‘i is the main owner of these potential recreational lands and
would be the most appropriate entity to implement these guidelines.
   ·   Expand public access to the upland or mauka areas for appropriate types
of recreational activities that are low-impact, resource-sensitive, and do not
compromise significant environmental resources and important agricultural
activities. These would include nature-based activities such as picnicking,
camping, hiking, mountain biking, hunting, and the appreciation of scenic,
natural, and cultural resources.
   ·   Acquire and maintain public and/or private campgrounds and hiking trails
in the mauka areas.
   ·   Develop a system of mauka trails and paths to interconnect the major
recreational areas of the North Shore for use by nonmotorized transportation
modes, e.g., walking, biking, horseback riding.
   ·   Coordinate planned private and public actions pertaining to trails and
access. Identify historic trails and old government roads of cultural and
recreational value to the public.
3.3.2.3   BEACH PARKS AND SHORELINE AREAS
Additional guidelines for recreational uses in shoreline areas can be found in
Section 3.1.2.2 pertaining to Shoreline Areas.
   ·   Limit new developments along the shoreline to parks and other compatible
open space uses.
   ·   Improve and expand public access to the shoreline at approximately 1/2-
mile intervals in rural areas of the North Shore, or at closer intervals of not
more than 1/4 mile where justified by public demand, traditional use patterns,
the quality of the recreational resources, emergency services response time, or
to bypass natural barriers that impede public access to the shoreline.
   ·   Maintain and expand lateral access along the coast, especially in areas
with high recreational or scenic value, including the shoreline along Sunset
Beach and Kawailoa where access to popular sandy beaches and surf spots is in
demand.
   ·   Limit uses within beach parks and nearshore ocean area uses to preserve
overall environmental quality, rural character, scenic views, and open space.
   ·   Provide adequate public parking and related support facilities (such as
restrooms and showers) at popular beach parks, including lifeguard equipment
storage facilities in anticipation of increased lifeguard services needed at
those parks. Improvements are planned for North Shore beach parks at Pu‘uiki
Beach, Laniākea, Chun’s Reef, Kawailoa, Leftovers, Uppers, Kahawai, Banzai
Rock, Kaunala, and Waiale‘e.
   ·   Acquire shoreline properties as opportunities arise or obtain public use
easements and maintenance agreements with private landowners, especially lands
adjacent to existing public parks.
3.3.2.4   MAINTENANCE AND MANAGEMENT OF PARKS, RECREATION AREAS AND
RECREATIONAL RESOURCES
   ·   Provide sufficient resources – including funding and manpower – to
ensure that public facilities are adequately maintained.
   ·   Base expenditures for the maintenance and management of existing parks
and recreation areas on actual usage (including visitors), rather than on
resident population ratios.
   ·   Identify limitations on recreational resources and implement policies to
regulate and mitigate impacts to these resources.
   ·   Establish and enforce rules and regulations to mitigate conflicts among
recreational activities.
   ·   Engage public and private organizations in partnership with government
agencies to maintain recreational resources.
3.3.2.5   SITE DESIGN OF RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
   ·   Incorporate natural or cultural features of the site, or both, and use
landscape materials that are indigenous to the area, where feasible, into the
design of recreation facilities and areas.
   ·   Locate uses which generate high noise levels away from existing and
planned residential areas.
   ·   Design and site improvements and landscaping to enhance the rural
character and the aesthetic value of open space elements and natural resources.
   ·   Provide pedestrian and bicycle pathways from surrounding streets to
parks, to facilitate convenient access to the parks.
   ·   Site parks and recreational attractions intended for regional or island-
wide uses along or near regional roadways.
   ·   Minimize environmental impacts (such as siltation, pesticide, and
fertilizer runoff) of recreational facilities and activities. Expansive
recreational facilities, such as community and regional parks, should comply
with State Department of Health guidelines related to ground and nearshore
water quality.
3.3.2.6   RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES THAT SUPPORT THE NORTH SHORE’S ECONOMY
   ·   Promote recreational and specialty events such as surf meets, fishing
tournaments, bike tours, races, and other competitions that contribute to the
North Shore’s economy. Such events shall meet State and City rules for park and
ocean uses to avoid conflict with recreational uses.
   ·   Manage impacts to the recreational resource and surrounding communities
(such as noise, parking, traffic, etc.) associated with special events.
   ·   Promote instructional programs, training clinics, and other activities
that cater to the health and recreation industry, and which will not impact the
North Shore’s rural character.
   ·   Explore the potential of equestrian activities, such as trail rides and
riding adventures, as an adjunct to the area’s attractions.
   ·   Support equine activities through a variety of means, including
establishment of well-designed, safe riding trail networks linking destinations
in the rural communities and in the mauka areas that have long been used by
riders. Cooperative agreements for the development and maintenance of such
networks should be forged through public-private partnerships.
3.3.3   Relation to Open Space Map and Land Use Map
Major park sites are shown on the Open Space Map in Appendix A. While smaller
neighborhood or support parks are not mapped, they are included in Exhibit 3.2
and cited where appropriate in the text.
3.4   HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
The North Shore contains several different types of historic and cultural sites
and resources which are representative of its precontact, early history, and
plantation eras. These sites and features are valuable as historic records and
cultural resources.
Table 3-6 lists historic features that are listed on the National and State
Registers of Historic Places (also shown on Exhibit 3.1). In addition to these,
the State Historic Preservation Division’s maps and inventory of significant
historic and cultural features, as well as the inventory maintained by the
O‘ahu Island Burial Council, list additional sites which may merit protection.
These sources should be consulted for further information.
In addition to these resources, the Hale‘iwa Special District and Waialua Town
are historic and cultural resources. Policies and guidelines for these areas
are included in Section 3.6.3 on Commercial Areas.
Table 3-6: National and State Register of Historic Places
Tax Map Key Site Name Site Number Hawai‘i RegisteNational Register
Table 3-6: National and State Register of Historic Places
Tax Map Key   Site Name                      Site Number Hawai‘i National
                                                         Register  Register
5-8-01:15, 55 Kalou Fishpond                 80-01-257   1/30/81
5-9-05:68     Pu‘u o Mahuka Heiau          80-01-249   1/29/81   12/29/62
                                                                   1996NHL*
6-6-13:12     Waialua School                 80-04-1348  5/3/80    8/11/80
(Portion)     (Hale‘iwa Elementary School)
6-1-05:16     Kupopolo Heiau                 80-01-241   9/5/78    6/4/73
6-2-01:02     Hale‘iwa Beach Park          80-14-1388  6/9/88
6-6-07:07     Pōhaku Lanai                  80-04-226   11/26/86
6-6-09:23     Waialua Courthouse             80-04-1334  2/20/79
6-6-13:03     Waialua Fire Station           80-14-1346  7/19/80   12/2/80
(Portion)
6-9-02:06, 09 Ka‘ena Complex               80-03-1183  6/9/88
8-6-08:17     KeAli‘i o Ka Malu Church     80-04-9834  8/26/00
* NOTE: Pu‘u o Mahuka Heiau was designated as a National Historic Landmark
in 1996.
 
3.4.1   Policies
The following are policies for historic and cultural resources.
   ·   Emphasize physical references to North Shore’s history and cultural
roots to help foster the area’s unique sense of place.
   ·   Protect existing visual landmarks and support the creation of new,
culturally appropriate landmarks.
   ·   Preserve and protect significant cultural and historic features from
earlier periods.
   ·   Retain, whenever possible, significant vistas associated with
archaeological features.
   ·   Respect significant historic resources by applying appropriate
management policies and practices. Such practices may range from total
preservation to integration with contemporary uses.
   ·   Restore or keep intact sites with cultural or religious significance, or
both, out of respect for their inherent cultural and religious values.
   ·   Encourage public access and use of historic and cultural resources,
where appropriate and feasible.
3.4.2   Guidelines
The treatment of a particular historic or cultural site should depend upon its
characteristics and potential value. Appropriate treatments range from direct
physical access or use of a site to limited visual contact, or both. In some
cases, adaptive reuse may be the only feasible way to preserve a site. In other
cases, however, it may be highly advisable to restrict access to protect the
physical integrity or sacred value of the site. The following guidelines should
be used to determine appropriate treatment for cultural and archaeological
sites.
   ·   Implement in situ preservation and appropriate protection measures for
sites that have high preservation value because of their good condition or
unique, historic, cultural, and archaeological features, and for which the
State Historic Preservation Division has recommended such treatment.
   ·   Consider the particular qualities of a site and its relationship to its
physical surroundings when determining the appropriate treatment for a site.
Determine the following on a site-by-site basis in consultation with the State
Historic Preservation Division:
-   appropriate preservation methods;
-   appropriate delineation of site boundaries and setbacks; and
-   appropriate restrictions on uses and development of adjacent lands.
   ·   Include input from all pertinent community resources in the development
of a site preservation plan.
   ·   Include sight lines and view planes that are significant to the original
purpose and value of the site in criteria for adjacent use restrictions.
   ·   Determine the appropriateness of public access on a site-by-site basis
in consultation with the State Historic Preservation Division, Hawaiian
cultural organizations, and the owner of the land on which the site is located.
3.5   RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITIES
Vital, contemporary communities oriented toward meeting the needs of their
residents often offer a network of amenities to facilitate and enhance
individual, family, and community life. At their best, they may offer parks and
landscaped public open spaces, churches, community centers, and other places
for social and civic functions, residences or other facilities for persons with
special needs, and safe, pleasant bicycle and pedestrian connections that link
homes and important destinations. While this plan refrains from prescribing
what the specific ingredients of any given community should be, it takes this
opportunity to cite the need, in each community, for appropriate elements which
aid and enhance the overall quality of life of the community.
Residential areas on the North Shore are concentrated around the former
plantation towns of Hale‘iwa and Waialua, with smaller clusters of residential
neighborhoods scattered between Mokulē‘ia, Kawailoa, Sunset Beach, and the
uplands above Pūpūkea. The Community Growth Boundary is intended to contain the
spread of development away from significant agriculture and preservation areas.
The need for additional housing on the North Shore will be met primarily by
“infill” development of existing vacant lands within the Community Growth
Boundary.
Table 3-7 presents North Shore housing trends from the 1990 and 2000 U.S.
Census. Between 1990 and 2000, the North Shore’s housing inventory increased by
about 25 percent, with nearly 1,400 new homes constructed during that period.
The homeownership rate declined slightly, as indicated by the decrease in the
percentage of owner- occupied units and the increase in the percentage of
renter-occupied units. In comparison to the housing growth between 1990 and
2000, the North Shore’s resident population increased by 2,651 persons (from
15,729 to 18,380 people), representing a 16.9 percent growth rate. In general,
the difference between the housing and population growth rates supports the
increased number of vacant units and smaller household size reported in 2000.
Table 3-7: North Shore Housing Trends: 1990 to 2000
Housing Data Category 1990 2000
Table 3-7: North Shore Housing Trends: 1990 to 2000
Housing Data Category 1990          2000
Total Housing Units   5,287         6,648
Occupied Units        4,825 (91.3%) 5,893 (88.6%)
Owner-occupied Units  2,279 (43.1%) 2,595 (39.0%)
Renter-occupied Units 2,546 (48.2%) 3,298 (49.6%)
Vacant Units          462 (8.7%)    755 (11.4%)
Homeownership Rate    47.2%         44.0%
Household Size        3.18          3.05
 
According to the 2000 U.S. Census, the North Shore’s housing inventory is
comprised of mostly older homes. Slightly more than 1/4 (27 percent or 1,799
units) of the structures are greater than 50 years old, and another 1/3 (35
percent or 2,328 units) are more than 25 years old. Considering that the
average age of the typical single-family home is 41 years old, a trend towards
an increase in the number of home renovation and/or replacement projects in the
near future is expected.
The median price of a single-family home sold on O‘ahu in 2000 was $295,000 and
the median condominium price was $125,000. In 2000, the median family income
for the island of O‘ahu was $60,142, which was about $11,000 over the median
family income for the North Shore ($48,948). Between 2000 and 2005, the median
sales price of a single-family home on O‘ahu increased nearly 103 percent to
$590,000 and the median condominium price increased nearly 115 percent to
$269,000. 8  Despite fluctuations in the real estate market, home prices on the
North Shore have remained high, as the median price of a single-family home
sold on the North Shore during the second quarter of 2009 9  was $754,500 and
the median condominium price was $255,000. In contrast, an “affordable” single-
family home for a family of four with an annual income of $76,100 (80 percent
of O‘ahu’s median income) would be priced at $365,000, assuming a 10 percent
down payment and financing at 5.4 percent. 10  Under the same conditions, a
family of four earning an annual income of $95,125 (100 percent of O‘ahu’s
median income) would be expected to afford a home priced at $470,017, while a
family of four with an annual income of $114,150 (120 percent of O‘ahu’s median
income) would be expected to afford a home priced at $574,587.
Inflated real estate values and the lack of affordable housing on the North
Shore have made it difficult for many North Shore residents to purchase a home.
In many cases, families that are unable to purchase homes are either moving
away from the North Shore or resorting to multi-generational living
arrangements – adding rooms to existing homes to accommodate extended families
– as a way to afford the cost of housing.
Current real estate trends have also affected the availability of affordable
long-term rentals. With homeowners choosing to sell their rental properties
and/or convert them into illegal short-term vacation rentals that bring in
additional income, the supply of available rental units has decreased and rents
have increased. Faced with a shortage of rental housing units, many residents
who depend on rental housing are no longer able to afford to live on the North
Shore and are moving to other parts of O‘ahu. As the North Shore continues to
develop as a major visitor destination, the increased demand for visitor
accommodations will further exacerbate the current problem of illegal vacation
rental units (short-term vacation rentals and bed and breakfast establishments
(B&Bs)) supplanting opportunities for long-term rentals. Attached, multi-family
housing development concentrated around Hale‘iwa and Waialua Town centers is
desired to ensure affordable and appropriately priced housing for existing
residents, including low- and moderate-income groups and the “gap group” (e.g.,
those that make too much to qualify for affordable housing but cannot afford to
purchase a home at the current market rate). Although single- family homes are
the dominant housing type on the North Shore, multi-family building forms are
necessary to provide housing options that allow existing families to stay on
the North Shore without altering the integrity and density of existing
neighborhoods. There is also strong community sentiment for the elimination of
illegal vacation rental units in order to free up some percentage of those
units for long-term rentals, thus adding to the available housing inventory
without the need for excessive overbuilding.
Housing forecasts prepared by the department of planning and permitting
indicate the need for an additional 1,504 housing units by the year 2035 to
support the projected population growth 11  (about 2,000 more people between
2005 and 2035). Despite a strong community desire for housing that is
affordable to the average North Shore family, the development of an additional
1,504 new homes is not preferred because it would result in a significant
growth in housing (nearly 25 percent more than the number of units in 2000).
Community concerns include the potential impacts that the increased housing and
population may have on the rural character, and open space and scenic
resources.
3.5.1   Policies
The following policies are intended primarily to maintain and promote rural
character in existing and new residential development:
   ·   Maintain sufficient inventory of land within the Community Growth
Boundary to accommodate existing and future housing needs.
   ·   Direct future residential development to Hale‘iwa and Waialua within the
Community Growth Boundary, including new apartment districts adjacent to
Hale‘iwa and Waialua Towns where increased densities that address affordability
may be desired, subject to community and agency review.
   ·   Preserve and protect the rural character and natural features and
setting of the North Shore by establishing appropriate development and
subdivision standards for buildings, roadways, and infrastructure systems, in
contrast to existing urban standards. Incorporate rural standards that require
development to be sensitive to and have minimal impact on the area’s rural
character.
   ·   Provide a mix of housing types and prices to meet the needs of existing
residents, including accommodations which are affordable to low- and moderate-
income, gap group, and elderly households, and other special needs populations.
   ·   Ensure safe and efficient circulation networks that provide bicycle and
pedestrian travel between residential areas and neighborhood destinations such
as schools, parks, and neighborhood commercial facilities.
   ·   Support the development of sustainable communities through the use of
low-impact development principles and technologies.
3.5.2   Guidelines
Except for small pockets of existing apartments in Mokulē‘ia, almost all the
housing on the North Shore consists of single-family residences. This plan
recognizes three categories of residential development: Rural, Rural
Residential, and Low-Density Apartment.
Table 3-8 gives an overview of the density and height guidelines for planned
and existing residential developments.
 
Table 3-8: Density and Height Guidelines by Residential Category
Residential Category  Density (Housing Units) Building Height
Rural                 1 unit/acre             not over two stories/25 feet
Rural Residential     5-8 units/acre          not over two stories/25 feet
Low-Density Apartment 10-20 units/acre        not over three stories/40 feet
 
It is important that residential areas exhibit the physical characteristics of
a rural context, including:
   ·   Smaller building footprints, less lot coverage, and greater open space
than encountered in more urbanized areas;
   ·   Alternative development patterns such as clustering and traditional
compact layouts to preserve open space and minimize infrastructure demands;
   ·   Low-rise structures, generally not exceeding 2 stories;
   ·   Plantation style architecture;
   ·   Relatively narrow roadway widths;
   ·   Minimal amount of paved driveway surfaces;
   ·   Landscaping and design alternatives that reduce impervious surfaces,
such as grassed swales rather than curbs and gutters; and
   ·   Rural-oriented landscaping and fencing.
The City should utilize appropriate subdivision standards for roads and
utilities in rural residential subdivisions. For example, current City
subdivision rules and regulations require curb/gutter/sidewalks for most new
subdivisions. These standards are essentially urban or suburban standards, but
may not be appropriate for most “Country” subdivisions with 1-acre lots or for
subdivisions with R-20 or R-10 zoning located in rural areas. Standards for
rural residential subdivisions should be studied. These rural type standards
could result in less cost for the development of these subdivisions, and thus,
more affordable lot prices for local families, as well as be more in keeping
with the North Shore’s rural character.
3.5.2.1   RURAL
This category consists of single-family homes on relatively large lots (e.g.,
lots of one acre or more). Development is low density and generally consists of
single-family homes, ancillary structures if necessary, low site coverage, and
a large predominance of landscaped open space.
This designation allows agricultural activities and can also serve as a land
use transition from the more densely developed rural residential neighborhoods
to agricultural uses. Rural areas on the North Shore are within the Community
Growth Boundary and consist of existing lands in the Country zoning district
and a few infill parcels in Sunset Hills, Pūpūkea, and parts of Hale‘iwa.
Single-family homes surrounded by open landscapes such as fields or tree cover,
and largely unobstructed views and rural roadways are the principal visual
qualities of these communities. Agricultural subdivision standards currently
apply to country-zoned lands. As there is sufficient capacity on existing
Country-zoned lands within the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan area,
no new Country lots should be allowed for the North Shore.
   ·   Utilize a traditional density of one unit per acre with lots ranging in
size from 1 to 3 acres, although alternative layouts that promote clustering
are encouraged. Limit buildings to 2 stories or 25 feet, although the height
may vary according to required flood elevation, slope, and roof form.
   ·   Ensure compatibility between country-district uses and adjacent
agricultural lands, natural resources, views, or cultural features.
3.5.2.2   RURAL RESIDENTIAL
This category is intended to describe the bulk of existing and new residential
developments located within the Community Growth Boundary. Rural Residential
areas are intended to consist of single-family homes in rural settings, as well
as higher densities (e.g., smaller lot sizes, multifamily homes) around Waialua
and Hale‘iwa Town cores. Typical residential lot sizes range from just less
than 1 acre to about 5,000 square feet. Alternate development forms which
result in greater amounts of open space and common facilities or higher
densities that support affordable housing may also be used.
A majority of the homes on the North Shore consist of low-density one- and two-
story single-family attached or detached dwellings, or both, ranging in size
from 5,000-square-foot lots to 20,000-square-foot lots. New residential single-
family development may occur through infill development on existing
residential-zoned vacant lots and larger residential-zoned parcels that can be
subdivided, or in areas designated for new residential development contiguous
to Waialua and Hale‘iwa Towns. The Waialua Town Master Plan (2005) calls for
400-500 new homes in former plantation fields surrounding Waialua Town that lie
within the Community Growth Boundary, including lands mauka of the mill camp
between Pu‘uiki Road and Goodale Avenue. In Hale‘iwa, a maximum of 350 new
housing units is to be accommodated on lands outside the flood plain north of
Pa‘ala‘a Road.
The expanded residential areas in Waialua and Hale‘iwa are intended to respond
to existing housing needs of residents and accommodate residential needs
generated by anticipated long-term job growth in diversified agriculture and
other industries. The intent of directing residential development to these
areas is not to promote larger lots, which may make them unaffordable to area
residents, or may encourage sprawl, but to allow for more site flexibility,
integration of open space and neighborhood parks, and a joint infrastructure
system for cost efficiency.
The intent of the Rural Residential designation is to distinguish rural from
urban residential development. It is anticipated that Rural Residential will
carry development standards for roadways, building envelope, or other features
that will convey rural rather than urban character. Although existing
residential districts island-wide generally allow for a range of 3,500- to
20,000-square-foot lots (2 to 10 or 12 units per acre), the new rural
residential areas in Hale‘iwa and Waialua are intended to support densities
ranging from 5 to 10 units per acre, so that they remain affordable and at the
same time maintain the rural character, by adhering to the following
guidelines:
   ·   Densities range from 5 to 8 units per acre, or up to 10 units per acre
for alternative development options which enhance rural character and maximize
consolidated, usable open space. Lot sizes range from 5,000 square feet to
10,000 square feet, allowing the application of optional design standards. For
smaller lot developments of less than 5,000 square feet, alternative clustering
is encouraged.
   ·   Use rural development standards to determine appropriate scale and
character, smaller building footprints, greater setbacks, and more landscaping
(use of hedges to create walls and grassed front yards, and rural roadways with
no sidewalks, curbs, and gutters).
   ·   Avoid monotonous rows of garages and driveways along neighborhood street
frontages by employing features such as varied building setbacks and shared
driveways.
   ·   Plan and design new or infill housing development, as well as
modifications to existing homes, to be generally compatible with the
predominant form and character of existing homes on adjacent properties and
with the neighborhood as a whole.
   ·   Use plantation architectural features such as pitched roofs in varied
forms, exterior colors and finishes, building orientation, floor plans, and
architectural details to provide visual interest and individual identity and
accentuate the rural setting. In general, buildings are to be less than two
stories or 25 feet, although the height may vary in response to required flood
elevation, slope, or other physical site constraints.
   ·   Support affordable housing initiatives in areas designated for new
housing development.
3.5.2.3   LOW-DENSITY APARTMENT
This category consists of predominately two- to four-story townhouse complexes,
stacked flats, or low-rise apartment buildings. The existing apartment-zoned
districts in Mokulē‘ia are recognized. No new apartment districts in Mokulē‘ia
are recommended, although new apartment districts may be appropriate adjacent
to Waialua and Hale‘iwa town centers, where increased densities that address
affordability are desired.
   ·   Maintain the existing apartment district boundaries.
   ·   Densities range from 10 to 20 units per acre. Buildings should not be
more than three stories or exceed 40 feet in height.
   ·   Where possible, enhance the compatibility of development within
apartment districts with adjacent residential uses.
   ·   Employ building form, orientation, location of entries, and landscape
screening that reflects single-family residential character and provides
greater privacy and individual identity for housing units.
   ·   Ensure compatibility of building scale, roof form, and the quality of
materials with those of adjacent residential areas.
3.5.2.4   SPECIAL NEEDS HOUSING
Special needs housing does not indicate a specific housing or building type.
Instead, it refers to facilities designed for certain segments of the
population with special living requirements. Categories of special needs groups
include low-income sectors, senior citizens, homeless, disabled people, and
people with health problems or the need for other forms of special care. Often
such housing includes special features and accessory support services, such as
congregate dining and social rooms; laundry, housekeeping, and personal
assistance services; shuttle bus services for residents; skilled nursing beds
or physical therapy clinics. Temporary shelters and transitional housing for
homeless and low-income populations, permanent housing for persons requiring
assistance to live independently, and emergency safe havens are types of
facilities that provide special needs housing. There are a number of special
needs housing facilities on the North Shore, including Helemano Plantation at
Helemano.
   ·   Locate special needs housing within or near Hale‘iwa or Waialua Towns
within close proximity to public transit, community services, and commercial
activities, but not so clustered together to create a significant change to
neighborhood character, especially as viewed along collector roads.
   ·   As an exception to standard density situations, special needs housing
may have densities of up to 20 units per acre, not including beds in skilled
nursing facilities, if they consist primarily of smaller dwelling units with
residential scale and character. Proposals for special needs housing should be
subject to community and agency review.
   ·   Limit building heights in line with the region’s rural character.
   ·   Ensure compatibility of building scale, roof form, and materials with
adjacent residential areas.
3.5.3   Relation to Land Use Map
Residential areas are shown conceptually on the Land Use Map in Appendix A as
follows:
Rural. This land use designation covers large lot residential development with
lots ranging in size from 1 acre to 3 acres and includes lands generally
consistent with the Country District of the City’s Land Use Ordinance (LUO).
Rural Residential. This land use designation provides for the dominant housing
form on the North Shore which consists of single-family detached dwellings on
lot sizes under 1 acre.
Low-Density Apartment. Concentrated primarily in Mokulē‘ia, apartment areas are
recognized where they occur as a preexisting zoned use, but they are not
designated on the Land Use Map. No new apartment areas are planned in
Mokulē‘ia. New apartment districts may be allowed adjacent to Waialua and
Hale‘iwa town centers subject to project-by-project review for compatibility
with surrounding uses.
Special Needs Housing. This land use is not specifically designated on the Land
Use Map, but it is allowed in residential areas subject to project-by-project
review for compatibility with surrounding uses.
Nonresidential uses that are not specifically designated on the Land Use Map
but are allowed in all residential areas include: elementary schools, parks,
churches, community centers, child care centers, and other public facility and
utility uses serving the area. It should be noted that some of these uses do
require project review or public hearings, or both, and issuance of permits
before they can be developed within a residential area.
3.6   COMMERCIAL AREAS
A variety of commercial areas are present throughout the North Shore. These
vary in size and type from small, individual, freestanding stores, groups of
small stores along a main street in Hale‘iwa and Waialua, to small commercial
centers. For purposes of this Sustainable Communities Plan, the various types
of commercial uses are defined and designated in three categories: Country
Town, Rural Community Commercial Center, and Country Store.
As the largest of the three commercial types, country towns are the region’s
primary commercial districts, and include a wide range of commercial
establishments and civic activities to serve both area residents and visitors.
The rural community commercial center is a smaller cluster of retail and
service businesses, and country stores are freestanding neighborhood
establishments. Both the rural community commercial center and country stores
emphasize convenient and essential services to meet the needs of the
surrounding community. Pedestrian and bicycle access is important for all
commercial areas, while transit access is important for country towns and rural
community commercial centers.
3.6.1   Policies
The following policies apply to all commercial areas, including the expansion
or renovation of existing commercial areas as well as to the development of new
commercial facilities.
   ·   Scale and Purpose. Ensure that commercial uses are appropriately scaled
to be compatible with the region’s rural character and surrounding land uses,
with an emphasis on locally-owned small businesses. Maintain Hale‘iwa as the
region’s primary commercial center and visitor attraction, with Waialua Town
serving the local community.
   ·   Physical Linkages and Accessibility. Promote pedestrian, bicycle, and
transit access.
   ·   Appropriate Building Scale and Architectural Style. Promote
compatibility between the building mass of a commercial area and its rural and
natural setting. The architectural character and scale of commercial areas
should respect the surrounding rural and natural features, particularly when
located adjacent to a residential area or significant natural or historic
feature.
   ·   Environmental Compatibility. Emphasize environmental compatibility in
the development and operation of commercial areas. Direct commercial
enterprises to locate within existing commercial districts, and utilize
sustainable building design and resource conservation measures as much as
possible, including the use of solar panels, passive solar design strategies,
landscaping features, and water constrictors, as well as on-site collection/
storage areas to encourage individual property owners to recycle.
3.6.2   Country Towns
Country towns are generally distinguishable from their larger, often newer,
urban counterparts by their compactness, small scale, and mixture of different
land uses located in close proximity to each other. Buildings are usually one
to two stories in height and built to the front property line. Commercial
activity is often along the street frontage or in similar “main street”
settings. Rural communities often take their identities from the character of
their particular town center.
The country town districts for Hale‘iwa and Waialua identify the general area
where commercial establishments as well as public services and civic activities
are concentrated (see Exhibit 3.3). Hale‘iwa serves as the region’s primary
commercial attraction. Waialua Town’s commercial area provides Waialua and
Mokulē‘ia residents with convenient access to goods and services at a rural
community scale and character. Although both are designated similarly as
country towns, they have their own distinct attributes and character and are
discussed separately below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8625.png]
Exhibit 3.3: Hale‘iwa and Waialua Country Town Districts
Hale‘iwa. Situated along Kamehameha Highway between Hale‘iwa Beach Park and
Weed Junction, the town serves as gateway to the North Shore as well as the
region’s major commercial center and attraction for visitors. The Anahulu
Stream Bridge and Pacific Ocean are distinct physical elements that enhance the
sense of character of Hale‘iwa Town. The distant Ko‘olau and Wai‘anae Mountain
Ranges and expansive plateaus of agricultural lands present the image of a
quaint rural town surrounded by agriculture and open space. The boundary for
the Hale‘iwa Country Town is generally coterminous with the Hale‘iwa Special
District, except for agricultural areas adjacent to Hale‘iwa Beach Park,
Hale‘iwa Beach Park Mauka, and Loko Ea Pond which will remain outside the
Country Town District. Current land uses within the Country Town District
include a wide range of retail stores, restaurants, specialty shops, service
establishments, and professional offices. The continued success of Hale‘iwa as
a town center and visitor attraction will be dependent on its ability to
preserve its rural town character while accommodating economic development and
growth.
Waialua. Waialua is a former plantation town oriented around the Waialua Mill
site. The town core is concentrated around the existing shopping center and
Dole office buildings and consists of shopping and civic facilities surrounded
by residential neighborhoods, many of which are remnants of the old plantation
camps. Centered around the intersection of Goodale Avenue and Kealohanui
Street, the town core is anchored by the historic Bank of Hawai‘i Building, the
Waialua Public Library, and the Waialua Park and new Waialua Bandstand, which
helps to form an entrance to the Waialua Mill site. With the closing of the
Waialua Sugar Company in 1996, Waialua’s future lies in strengthening its
residential communities, retaining and highlighting the rich social, cultural
and industrial heritage associated with the plantation industry, establishing
agricultural support businesses as part of the overall development of
diversified agricultural industry, promoting technology training within its
schools and community, and revitalizing its town core through economic
development that is compatible with the rural character of this community.
The Waialua Town Master Plan was completed in 2005 to address future
development and economic revitalization opportunities. The Plan recommends a
series of physical improvements and actions – including revitalization of the
existing shopping center, new public buildings, expansion of the farmers
market, landscaping and pedestrian- oriented improvements, and infill and new
residential development – to ensure the long-term viability of the town center
and the larger Waialua community.
3.6.2.1   POLICIES
   ·   Maintain Hale‘iwa and Waialua Towns as the main commercial districts on
the North Shore. Encourage landowners to invest in the physical and economic
revitalization of the towns’ commercial cores.
   ·   Preserve and enhance the historic rural “small town” character and allow
for a compatible mix of commercial, service industrial, and residential uses
that complement the rural town context. Encourage multi-family housing (low-
density apartment districts) and housing for resident senior citizens in close
proximity to both Hale‘iwa and Waialua town centers.
   ·   Allow for a diverse range of civic, retail, office, and light industrial
uses that meet the needs of residents and visitors.
   ·   Support the continued viability of locally-owned small businesses, while
prohibiting large commercial “big box” retailers that are contradictory to the
region’s rural character.
   ·   Maintain the low-rise (one to two stories) human-scale and physical
organization of buildings arranged along the traditional “main street”.
   ·   Preserve scenic views of agricultural fields and open spaces of
surrounding areas seen from Hale‘iwa and Waialua Towns.
   ·   Ensure that architectural and landscaping features are compatible with
the rural character.
   ·   Protect and enhance natural resources and ecosystems, such as wetlands
and streams, fishponds, mature trees, and open space areas, within the country
town areas.
   ·   Protect, preserve and – where feasible – restore historic and cultural
features that reflect the North Shore’s heritage and contribute to the town’s
identity.
   ·   Allow for the development of small-scale visitor accommodations in
Hale‘iwa Town.
3.6.2.2   GUIDELINES – HALE‘IWA COUNTRY TOWN
   ·   Limit building heights to two stories, and employ building design
elements which reflect the architectural characteristics of the early 1900-
period architecture identified in the Hale‘iwa Special District Design
Guidelines.
   ·   Incorporate generous, functional, public, and open spaces reflective of
the town’s agricultural heritage.
   ·   Encourage commercial and related activities that are conducive to the
pedestrian character to locate at the sidewalk level along Kamehameha Highway.
Encourage less pedestrian-dependent and conducive activities (such as
manufacturing areas for products and compatible light industrial uses,
residences, services, etc.) to locate behind or above commercial activities so
as not to detract from the commercial retail character of Kamehameha Highway.
   ·   Focus the town’s commercial core around a mix of compatible activities
such as recreation, marine-related enterprises, farmers’ markets, historic and
cultural attractions, “clean” light industrial, small businesses and offices,
civic and governmental services, businesses, and retail activities for both
residents and visitors.
   ·   Upgrade drainage, wastewater, and water infrastructure within Hale‘iwa
Town, as needed.
   ·   Support home-based businesses and “Mom and Pop” type stores within the
town center.
   ·   Concentrate new development near existing built areas emphasizing
redevelopment and infill along Kamehameha Highway, makai of the Hale‘iwa Bypass
Road (Joseph P. Leong Highway). Provide adequate landscaped buffer adjacent to
the bypass.
   ·   Ensure that commercial uses adjoining the Kamehameha Highway corridor
include support facilities such as parking lots and rest rooms that can
adequately accommodate the planned commercial activities.
   ·   Support the expansion and enhancement of Hale‘iwa Harbor. If possible,
integrate the harbor’s attractions and facilities with commercial activities in
Hale‘iwa Town.
   ·   Expand indoor recreational and educational facilities and programs
(museums, movie theater, gym, and cultural performance theaters) and
historical, cultural, and arts programs to further enrich Hale‘iwa’s civic
core.
   ·   Provide improved, expanded, and continuous pedestrian walkways linking
commercial establishments within Hale‘iwa, including connections between
farmers’ markets or other kinds of agricultural product and retail outlets, and
open space and environmental resources (such as beach parks, Hale‘iwa Harbor,
and Loko Ea Pond).
   ·   Enhance the attractiveness and general landscaped open space character
of the area by providing roadway improvements, street trees, streetlights,
street furniture, and signage compatible with the rural character of Hale‘iwa
Town.
   ·   Continue to use and support production of the visitors’ map showing
attractions and services in Hale‘iwa.
   ·   Maintain Kamehameha Highway as a two-lane thoroughfare through Hale‘iwa
Town.
   ·   Consolidate off-street parking to areas behind buildings, while
retaining existing on-street parking wherever possible and appropriate. As
needed, parking should be rearranged to accommodate the pedestrian walkway
system along Kamehameha Highway.
   ·   Provide signage and other forms of orientation to help direct motorists
through the town to major facilities and to off-street parking facilities.
   ·   Improve conditions for transit and bicycling through Hale‘iwa Town by
providing better designed and located bus stops, and a designated bike lane
through the town.
   ·   Enhance Weed Junction and Kamehameha Highway/Joseph P. Leong Junction,
which are entry points to Hale‘iwa, in a manner which conveys their gateway
functions through appropriate design, landscaping, signage, and painting.
   ·   Encourage private and community-based initiatives to protect and enhance
the streams, wetlands, and other natural resources within Hale‘iwa Town. Retain
the agricultural use adjacent to Weed Junction and the Preservation designation
at Loko Ea Pond.
3.6.2.3   GUIDELINES – WAIALUA COUNTRY TOWN
   ·   Ensure new developments are consistent with the Waialua Town Master Plan
recommendations for the town center (Chapter 4.0 of the Waialua Town Master
Plan).
   ·   Integrate neighborhood parks and community-oriented recreation areas
into new residential development.
   ·   Locate churches and public services in or near the town.
   ·   Retain large, readily accessible open spaces where outdoor recreation
facilities and neighborhood gardens create open vistas and green spaces. Retain
open space entrances to the town core, including Weed Junction, Thompson
Corner, and Waialua Beach Road, with Waialua Park as the entrance to the
country town district.
   ·   Incorporate significant historic features from the plantation era and
earlier periods into new developments, where feasible and appropriate. Existing
buildings of historical, cultural and/or architectural significance, such as
the surviving elements of the Waialua Mill, should be preserved and maintained
through rehabilitation and adaptive reuse. Where feasible, adapt and highlight
these structures as landmarks and icons representative of Waialua’s plantation
town history.
   ·   While buildings in the commercial core may be two stories in height,
one-story heights should be emphasized, in keeping with the area’s historic
scale and to preserve the prominence and views of existing mill structures.
   ·   New commercial buildings should be similar in architectural character,
scale, and materials to historic structures such as the former Waialua Sugar
Company offices and the Waialua Library.
   ·   Use design guidelines described in the Waialua Town Master Plan to
promote and develop a special image for Waialua’s commercial and industrial
core that reflects the town’s historic character and reinforce the town’s role
as the cultural and business center for Waialua. Encourage renovations and new
construction in accordance with the design guidelines.
   ·   Provide pedestrian and bicycle access between surrounding residential
neighborhoods and Waialua’s commercial core.
   ·   Encourage infill development and new commercial development around
Kealohanui Street to strengthen the town core and provide the critical mass
necessary in developing a healthy town center.
   ·   Direct new residential development outside but adjacent to the town
core, as generally indicated on the Land Use Map.
   ·   Locate industrial uses around the former sugar mill (see Section 3.7
Industrial Areas for applicable policies and guidelines).
   ·   Promote agricultural support activities at the agricultural support area
adjacent to the mill site.
   ·   New housing units should incorporate rural features (such as small
building footprints, larger setbacks, and more landscaping) and be sited and
organized to give a strong sense of community.
   ·   Work with developers to establish housing programs that place high
priority on the needs of existing Waialua residents.
   ·   Provide job or entrepreneurial opportunities for area residents, and
make available training programs for new jobs and businesses.
   ·   Promote historical and cultural attractions such as museums or activity
centers that illustrate the history of the community or feature current
agricultural operations near the mill site to encourage visitors to Waialua
Town.
   ·   Encourage computer-oriented, high technology business, health care, and
medical services to locate in Waialua.
   ·   Provide for safe and pleasant pedestrian circulation along the
storefronts. As it redevelops, emphasize pedestrian circulation along
Kealohanui Street. Retain a distinctive pedestrian-oriented commercial area for
residents and visitors through the use of signage, street furniture, and street
tree plantings to encourage walking and biking.
   ·   Support production of a map showing services in Waialua and attractions
in the region, such as Ka‘ena Point and nearby beach parks.
   ·   Promote Kealohanui Street as a pedestrian-oriented promenade in Waialua.
   ·   Link proposed pedestrian walkways to the Waialua Town core, including
linkages to farmers’ markets and other kinds of agricultural products and
retail outlets.
   ·   Provide convenient parking that should be landscaped and screened from
roadways.
   ·   Enhance Waialua Beach Road and Farrington Highway as gateways to Waialua
Town through signage and landscaping.
   ·   Plant street trees to enhance the pedestrian experience and to create a
strong streetscape image. A detailed street tree and planting plan should be
developed and implemented as part of the right-of-way plan.
3.6.3   Rural Community Commercial Center
The rural community commercial center is a small cluster of commercial and
service businesses located on major thoroughfares that provide a range of goods
and services to meet the needs of the surrounding residential communities.
Located along highways and major thoroughfares, these centers also attract
visitors and residents from outside the immediate community. Commercial
establishments may include grocery stores, sundries stores, restaurants, and
other services and shops catering to residents and visitors to the region. They
are generally one- and two-story in height and equivalent in size to
neighborhood grocery stores. With fewer business establishments and services
than a country town, the rural community commercial center typically covers
less land area and has less commercial floor area than a country town. The area
between the existing Foodland market and the adjacent commercially zoned
properties between Pūpūkea Road and Pāhoe Road is designated as a Rural
Community Commercial Center.
3.6.3.1   POLICIES
   ·   Cluster commercial uses within a more concentrated, but small-scale
commercial center on existing Commercial-zoned lands, rather than dispersing
them along the highway.
   ·   Ensure that commercial buildings reflect the rural character and are
compatible with adjacent residential areas.
   ·   Promote safe and convenient transit, pedestrian, and bicycle access
between commercial centers and surrounding areas.
   ·   Emphasize commercial and civic establishments that serve the immediate
residential community.
3.6.3.2   GUIDELINES
   ·   Limit rural community commercial centers to existing zoned areas between
Pūpūkea Road and Pahoe Road that currently serve the commercial needs of
residents and visitors.
   ·   Design rural community commercial centers to provide a compact and
efficient organization of various commercial services which primarily serve the
immediate community.
   ·   Rural community commercial centers should be designed to provide a
compact and efficient organization of various commercial services.
   ·   Architectural scale and character should respect the surrounding natural
features, and adjacent residential areas. Buildings should reflect a rural
character compatible with surrounding open spaces and adjacent residential
uses.
   ·   Limit building heights to no more than two stories.
   ·   Locate parking behind buildings or provide parking that is landscaped.
Parking should be visually screened from the street and adjacent residential
lots, by planting a landscaped screen of trees and hedges along street
frontages and property lines and planting shade trees throughout the parking
lot.
   ·   Incorporate pedestrian and bicycle facilities, including bicycle paths
and storage racks, and off-site improvements such as crosswalks.
   ·   Site bus stops in close proximity to rural community commercial centers.
3.6.4   Country Stores
This category generally refers to freestanding retail or eating establishments
located on commercially zoned lands or which exist as nonconforming uses. Its
purpose is to recognize such establishments and to provide guidance for
renovation, reconstruction, or minor expansion of these facilities. It is not
intended to provide for new country stores. Existing country stores include
stand-alone retail or eating establishments on Commercial-zoned lands or
nonconforming uses, or both. They include Ted’s Bakery, Sunset Beach Store/
Restaurant, Sharks Cove Shell Station, Chun’s Market, Pa‘ala‘a Kai Center,
Otake Store, and Waialua Service. With storeowners retiring and rising
operating costs affecting businesses, several country stores have closed in
recent years, including Kammie’s Market and Sagara Store in Waialua.
Country stores are typically single, stand-alone establishments. They are
usually one-story in height and are generally equivalent in size to a small
neighborhood grocery store, such as those mentioned immediately above, that
provides convenience goods and services to the surrounding community. Building
character is typically residential in scale and generally harmonious with
adjacent development and setting in form, material, finishes, and color.
3.6.4.1   POLICIES
   ·   Prohibit the establishment of new sites for country stores.
   ·   Ensure that proposals for renovations or reconstruction of existing
country stores complement the needs of the surrounding community and are
compatible with adjacent residential communities.
   ·   Support the long-term viability and existence of country stores.
3.6.4.2   GUIDELINES
   ·   Design country stores to be small-scale, freestanding, compact
commercial facilities. Prohibit country stores from expanding to larger,
continuous commercial strip types of developments along arterial roads.
   ·   Limit country stores primarily to retail uses that provide services to
the surrounding community.
   ·   Architectural scale and character should respect the surrounding natural
features, and adjacent residential areas. Buildings should reflect a rural
character compatible with surrounding open spaces and adjacent residential
uses.
   ·   Limit building heights to one story.
   ·   Locate parking behind buildings, or provide parking that is landscaped.
Parking should be visually screened from the street and adjacent residential
lots, by planting a landscaped screen of trees and hedges along street
frontages and property lines and planting shade trees throughout the parking
lot.
   ·   Promote pedestrian and bicycle access to country stores.
   ·   Assist business owners with maintaining their financial stability to
ensure that country stores remain in operation.
3.6.5   Relation to Land Use Map
Commercial areas are shown conceptually on the Land Use Map in Appendix A as
follows:
Country Towns. This land use designation identifies the two primary country
town districts on the North Shore: Hale‘iwa and Waialua.
Rural Community Commercial Center. The single rural community commercial center
identified on the Land Use Map is the area between Pūpūkea Road and Pāhoe Road
which consists of the Foodland store and adjacent Commercial-zoned property.
Country Stores. This land use designation refers to existing country stores
that provide commercial services to the surrounding communities. Due to their
relatively small scale, their locations are not depicted on the Land Use Map.
3.7   INDUSTRIAL AREAS
The North Shore, especially Waialua Town, was built and populated primarily to
service the sugar industry, which for many decades was the predominant economic
force in the region until recent years. While most of the agricultural lands
were used for cultivation, some lands were dedicated to related operations such
as harvesting and processing, and were thus designated industrial. Industrial
lands provide for activities and services such as manufacturing, food and
agricultural processing, boat and car repair, and the storage of materials and
products. They provide employment opportunities for area residents as well as
goods and services for consumption. Industrial uses can help revitalize the
area’s economy and maximize residents’ choice of employment opportunities in
the region.
The industrial site at the former Waialua Sugar Mill is no longer used for
sugar processing and has been renovated for other industrial uses, including
diversified agriculture-related light industrial uses, clothing and souvenir
manufacturing, surfboard manufacturing and repair, warehousing, wholesale
activities, and other compatible industrial-type uses. The long-term goal is to
ensure that the supply of industrial-zoned lands is adequate to accommodate the
mix of industrial, light industrial, retail, and service-oriented uses that
would benefit from locating within the Sugar Mill site. Appropriate types of
light industrial uses that complement commercial-related activities can also be
accommodated in Hale‘iwa and Waialua Country Town Districts.
3.7.1   Policies
The following policies are applicable for industrial areas:
   ·   Encourage compatible industrial uses that help diversify and revitalize
the economic base of the region. Industrial uses should be compatible with the
rural character, with minimal impact on the natural environment, cultural
resources, open spaces, and scenic views.
   ·   Promote industries that provide employment opportunities, as well as
goods and services for area residents.
   ·   Establish the former Waialua Mill site as the North Shore’s main
industrial center. Direct industrial activities, including boat repair, auto
body and fender shops, to the Waialua Mill site.
   ·   Promote forms of economic development and business enterprises that
offer training and technical skill development to area residents. Promote
agricultural support activities such as food processing and packaging, as well
as “quiet” industries, such as cold storage and clothing manufacturing,
computer hardware or software development, or other forms of high technology
enterprises that provide job or entrepreneurial opportunities for area
residents and are compatible with the rural character.
3.7.2   Guidelines
The following guidelines are applicable to industrial development.
   ·   Maintain adequate open buffer zones between industrial activities and
residential districts.
   ·   Minimize impacts (views, noise, and smells) and reduce the visibility of
large building masses, machinery elements, parking, storage areas, industrial
equipment, and operation areas through proper site planning and landscape
plantings.
   ·   Encourage uses which have few environmental impacts and those which
complement the development scale of the surrounding community.
   ·   Allow low-impact, service industrial uses in enclosed buildings within
the Hale‘iwa and Waialua Country Town Districts, so as not to detract from the
pedestrian-oriented commercial/retail character of roadways, such as Kamehameha
Highway, Kealohanui Street, and Goodale Avenue. These could include
manufacturing of clothing, arts and crafts, and surfboard repair.
   ·   Building height and form should reflect the contexts of their sites. At
the Waialua Mill site, they should follow guidelines reflecting the Mill’s
image. In Hale‘iwa Town, they should follow the Hale‘iwa Special District
Design Guidelines. In Waialua Town, they should be consistent with guidelines
of this document and the Waialua Town Master Plan. In general, buildings should
be designed to reflect the architectural character of Hale‘iwa or Waialua Town.
Basic design principles, texture, construction materials, and colors should be
compatible with the styles from the era and surrounding buildings.
   ·   Where taller vertical structures are required as part of an industrial
operation, site and design such structures to minimize impacts on view planes
and reduce visibility from scenic vistas, public roadways, residential areas,
commercial areas, parks, and other significant open space areas.
   ·   Limit industrial uses located along the shoreline to water-dependent
activities (such as boat repair and maritime-related activities). Consider
environmental, visual, and noise impact during the permit application process.
   ·   Maintain and upgrade infrastructure to support industrial facilities.
3.7.3   Relation to Land Use Map
One industrial area is shown conceptually at the Waialua Mill site on the Land
Use Map in Appendix A. Future expansion of the industrial area should be
accommodated makai of the mill site. In addition to the industrial- designated
lands, compatible types of light industrial uses may also be permitted within
the country town districts at Hale‘iwa and Waialua if they meet the policies
and guidelines described in this section and in Section 3.6 relating to
Commercial Areas.
3.8   VISITOR ACCOMMODATIONS
The availability of existing legal overnight accommodations for visitors on the
North Shore is limited, consisting of a small inn/hostel offering budget
accommodations (Backpackers Vacation Inn and Plantation Village), several
privately operated camps with campgrounds and cabins, B&B establishments, and
vacation rentals (both homes and condominium properties). The only hotel along
O‘ahu’s northern shoreline is the Turtle Bay Resort, a four-star luxury
property at Kawela Bay, which is located within the Koolauloa Sustainable
Communities Plan area.
An increase in the number of visitors seeking affordable vacation opportunities
on the North Shore, combined with the limited inventory and absence of
moderate-priced, mid-quality overnight accommodations, has resulted in the
growth of illegal short-term vacation rentals. Many North Shore residents are
concerned that using homes as vacation rentals results in noise, traffic, and
parking problems for neighboring homes, and disrupts the stability and
character of a community due to the transient nature of the tenants. Due to the
incompatible nature of vacation rentals, real estate market pressures (e.g.,
increased real estate values and rental prices, reduced availability of long-
term rental units), and the limited capacity of existing infrastructure systems
and public services – including overly crowded roads, wastewater issues, and
limited police presence – the community expects, if not insists on, appropriate
regulatory and enforcement mechanisms for the vacation rental industry.
Furthermore, the community feels strongly that any additional overnight
accommodations for visitors in the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan
area should be prohibited until community concerns about illegal vacation
rentals are resolved and enforcement mechanisms to eliminate the current
illegal operations are in place.
In general, residents support the concept of affordable, short-term
accommodations for tourists, local families, and off-island contractors needing
lodging in the area (noting that overnight accommodations would keep visitors
in the region longer, eliminate the evening commute to hotels/lodging in other
parts of the island, and provide choices for the cost-conscious traveler). Any
new visitor accommodations should be small in scale and compatible with the
rural character of the built environment and adjacent natural features. An
appropriate type of visitor accommodation would be located within the
boundaries of the Hale‘iwa Country Town District and be similar in scale as the
historic Hale‘iwa Hotel. The Hale‘iwa Hotel opened in 1899 on 40 acres of land
at the mouth of the Anahulu River (where the Hale‘iwa Joes Restaurant now
sits). Commissioned by Benjamin Dillingham, owner of the OR&L Company Railroad,
the hotel was a popular weekend “country retreat” for Honolulu’s affluent at
the turn of the century. Hotel guests would travel the 3-hour, 56-mile journey
from Honolulu to Hale‘iwa on the OR&L Company’s train, and stay overnight at
the resort destination. The main Victorian-style two-story building featured 14
guest rooms with deluxe accommodations, and several guest cottages. Following
the hotel’s closure in 1928, the property was reopened in 1931 as an exclusive
private club (the Hale‘iwa Beach Club). It was used as an officer’s club during
World War II, and eventually torn down in 1952. 12
Considering that Hale‘iwa has been a tourist destination since 1899 when the
Hale‘iwa Hotel was first opened, the return of a similar country inn in
Hale‘iwa can serve as a valuable link that honors Hale‘iwa’s heritage, adding
to the town’s historic character and further promoting efforts to revitalize
the town’s core. Although the community opposes large-scale visitor
accommodations and resort zoning on the North Shore, small-scale visitor
accommodations may be allowed within Hale‘iwa Town and Waialua Town Center
provided that any such projects should not be allowed through a conditional use
permit or through any other permitting process that does not require approval
of the City Council under a process to be created under the Land Use Ordinance
which includes opportunity for public input and public hearings and based on
specific criteria which are outlined in the policies and guidelines below.
It is the general desire of the North Shore community not to have more than one
small country inn in Haleiwa and no more than one small country inn in Waialua.
Resort zoning is not appropriate for the North Shore.
3.8.1   Policies
The following policies are applicable to visitor accommodations:
   ·   Integrate small-scale visitor accommodations in the form of a small
country inn (no more than one in Hale‘iwa and one in Waialua) with the social
and economic life of the surrounding communities and to be compatible with
adjacent uses.
   ·   Avoid degradation or elimination of public access to public lands or
resources by visitor accommodations.
   ·   Prohibit amenities and necessary activities typically associated with
destination-style full-service resorts, such as nightclubs, convention centers,
shopping facilities, and banquet facilities.
   ·   Prohibit the proliferation of visitor accommodation projects that would
take over the social and economic character of Hale‘iwa Town and Waialua Town
Center.
   ·   Prevent the expansion of the B&B and vacation rental industry on the
North Shore.
3.8.2   Guidelines
The following are guidelines pertaining to visitor accommodations. Other forms
of overnight visitor accommodations that do not meet these guidelines are
generally not complementary to the North Shore’s rural character, and are not
desired in the community – and are not to be permitted.
   ·   Allow a small country inn only in Hale‘iwa Town and the Waialua Town
Center to help restore and promote the historic character of the towns.
   ·   Design the small country inn in Hale‘iwa to be consistent with the
Hale‘iwa Special District Design Guidelines. In general, the small country inn
should be small in scale (limited to two stories in height), be compatible with
the architectural style and character of Hale‘iwa Town, and observe the same
building envelopes and design standards of adjacent buildings.
   ·   Any proposed small country inn must follow all ordinances pertaining to
zoning, density, and other applicable rules. As there is no ordinance currently
governing small country inns in either Hale‘iwa or Waialua Towns, such an
ordinance must be in place and approved by the City Council prior to any
approvals for either small country inn to be built.
   ·   Establish locational, spacing, or density limits to control the overall
proliferation of visitor accommodations.
   ·   Provide convenient and safe access for pedestrians and vehicles.
   ·   Incorporate mixed use that caters to pedestrian activity located on the
ground floor and visitor accommodations provided on the upper floor.
   ·   Provide adequate off-street parking which is landscaped and screened
from public roadways.
   ·   Address the streetscape and provide a setting that is conducive to
pedestrian activity, when located along pedestrian-oriented streets.
   ·   Ensure that existing and/or proposed infrastructure can adequately
accommodate the proposed development and associated visitor population.
   ·   Minimize impacts (noise, traffic, parking, visual) on surrounding
activities/properties and from public roadways.
   ·   Prohibit the granting of new permits, including nonconforming use
certificates, for B&B and vacation rental operations on the North Shore.
3.8.3   Relation to Land Use Map
The visitor accommodations described above are not shown on the Land Use Map in
Appendix A. As specified, they should be allowed only within the Hale‘iwa
Country Town District and in the Waialua Town Center, subject to policies and
guidelines outlined in the preceding section and in accordance with applicable
criteria and standards.
3.9   INSTITUTIONAL USES
The purpose of designating lands for institutional uses is to provide areas for
public and quasi-public institutions, such as schools, airports, harbors, major
health care facilities; major utility plants and substations; landfill sites,
corporation yards, and maintenance yards of public agencies; religious, social,
and social service institutions; and other public services.
3.9.1   Policies
Public facilities and institutions should provide convenient public services or
functionally support other governmental activities. These facilities should be
planned and developed in a manner consistent with the rural character of the
region and sensitive to the surrounding community land uses.
3.9.2   Guidelines
The following guidelines implement the policies for institutional facilities
listed above.
   ·   Colocate neighborhood or community parks with elementary or intermediate
schools and coordinate design of facilities when efficiencies in development
and use of athletic, meeting, and parking facilities can be achieved.
   ·   Colocate social, social service institutions, and other public service
agencies to provide convenient one- stop services to the region.
3.9.3   Relation to Land Use and Public Facilities Maps
Institutional areas and major public facilities (both existing facilities and
future improvements) are identified by appropriate symbols on the Public
Facilities Map located in Appendix A. Religious, social, social service
institutions, and other public service uses are not conceptually shown on the
Land Use Map but are permitted within the commercial areas and residential
communities if the uses comply with the City’s Land Use Ordinance.
3.10   MILITARY
Military areas include all lands used for military and military support
purposes including residential, commercial, industrial and park uses. The
Helemano Military Reservation, with its existing and planned military housing,
related community facilities and industrial uses, and the Kawailoa Training
Area and Dillingham Military Reservation are lands owned and leased by the
military on the North Shore.
3.10.1   Policies
Applicable policies for residential, industrial, commercial, and other related
uses should be applied to military lands.
3.10.2   Guidelines
   ·   Encourage all government agencies (City, State, and Federal) to
coordinate efforts with the U.S. military, especially where the Kahuku and
Kawailoa Training Areas overlap with environmentally sensitive areas.
   ·   Encourage the military to provide appropriate infrastructure services to
support military uses on their lands and minimize any potential impacts to the
region.
   ·   Work with the military to allow use of Drum Road as an emergency access
bypass route during natural disasters or other emergency incidents.
   ·   Encourage low-rise military facilities that support educational and
recreational programs and are compatible with the region on Military
Reservation lands such as Dillingham Airfield.
3.10.3   Relation to Land Use Map
Helemano Military Reservation and Dillingham Airfield are shown conceptually on
the Land Use Map in Appendix A. Other military uses within the region not
specified on the Land Use Map should be compatible with the policies and
guidelines of the specific land use designation shown on the Land Use Map.
Military-owned lands that are leased or licensed to others on a full-time basis
for nonmilitary uses are excluded from this designation.
4.   PUBLIC FACILITIES AND INFRASTRUCTURE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
The vision for the North Shore described in Chapter 2 will be implemented in
part through application of the policies and guidelines for public facilities
and infrastructure, which are presented in the following sections.
The provision of adequate infrastructure and public facilities and services is
essential to maintaining the quality lifestyle that residents desire. For the
North Shore, this means that infrastructure systems, public facilities, and
services are properly maintained and operated, that they are sufficient to meet
current requirements, and that they have the capacity to accommodate future
system demands without negatively impacting any of the region’s resources. A
key concern for area residents is that the design of infrastructure systems –
including roadways and wastewater treatment systems – reflect the rural
qualities of the region, with particular emphasis on how such systems are
sized. As a corollary concern, the impacts of development that occur beyond the
North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan’s boundaries are important
considerations when analyzing entitlement requests that affect North Shore
infrastructure. Thus, the North Shore community expressed its concerns about
any further expansion of resort accommodations in the Turtle Bay complex
because of the potential adverse impacts such development may have on the North
Shore’s infrastructure, particularly on Kamehameha Highway, and on its quality
of life.
A survey conducted by the State of Hawai‘i Department of Business Economic
Development and Tourism for two separate time periods – Winter 2003 and Summer
2005 – indicates that more than half (51 percent) of all visitors to O‘ahu in
2003 and 2005 visited the North Shore. 13  This translates into an estimated
2.4 million tourists per year visiting the North Shore, or almost 7,000
visitors per day on average, 14  which is about 40 percent of the total number
of residents living on the North Shore in 2005 (about 18,400 residents). 15
Although the effect is economically positive, the dramatic influx of tourists
to the North Shore has significantly stressed the community’s infrastructure
with increasing traffic congestion, overcrowded beaches and park facilities,
and insufficient rest room facilities in Hale‘iwa Town.
Chapter 4 is organized under the following headings:
SECTION
   4.1   TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
   4.2   WATER SYSTEMS
   4.3   WASTEWATER TREATMENT
   4.4   ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS
   4.5   SOLID WASTE HANDLING AND DISPOSAL
   4.6   DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
   4.7   SCHOOL FACILITIES
   4.8   PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES
   4.9   OTHER COMMUNITY FACILITIES
4.1   TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
This section describes the existing road, transit, and bikeway network on the
North Shore, as well as plans and proposals for future improvements, followed
by policies and guidelines to guide future transportation system development in
the North Shore. These elements are shown in the Public Facilities Map in
Appendix A.
Act 54 (Session Laws Hawai‘i, 2009) requires State and County transportation
departments to adopt and implement a complete streets policy and establishes a
task force to determine necessary standards and guidelines. The intent of a
complete streets policy is to create and configure a connected street system
that provides for all users including but not limited to pedestrians,
bicyclist, and transit passengers of all ages and abilities.
4.1.1   Roadway Network
The only major arterial on the North Shore is Kamehameha Highway, a two-lane
thoroughfare which links North Shore communities with Central O‘ahu and
Koolauloa. It is a scenic highway which traverses the coastline from Hale‘iwa
through the communities of Kawailoa, Waimea, Pūpūkea, and Sunset Beach.
Minor arterials on the North Shore include Kaukonahua Road and Farrington
Highway. Kaukonahua Road is a narrow two-lane roadway which goes from Wahiawā
north to Thompson Corner and continues as Farrington Highway past Waialua and
Mokulē‘ia to Ka‘ena Point. Numerous local streets, including Hale‘iwa Road,
Goodale Avenue, Waialua Beach Road, and Pūpūkea Road, serve the rural
residential communities. Kamehameha Highway, except for the segment from Weed
Junction to Hale‘iwa Beach Park, Farrington Highway, and Kaukonahua Road from
Thompson Corner to Weed Junction, are under State jurisdiction. Except for
former cane haul roads, most of the remaining streets in the North Shore
Sustainable Communities Plan area are under City and County of Honolulu
jurisdiction.
Planning and development of major roadways is the shared responsibility of the
State department of transportation (DOT) and the City Department of
Transportation Services (DTS). The planning and use of federal transportation
funds is coordinated through the O‘ahu Metropolitan Planning Organization
(OMPO), a joint City-State agency.
The O‘ahu Regional Transportation Plan 2030 (April 2006) 16  indicated that the
morning peak-hour traffic volume in the North Shore corridor is at an
acceptable level and will continue to be at an acceptable level in the year
2030. However, North Shore residents regularly experience “bottleneck” traffic
congestion at Waimea, and near Laniākea on weekend days and during periods of
high surf. While congestion along Kamehameha Highway has been historically
limited to the winter months when spectators travel slowly through the area to
observe the high surf, traffic delays in the vicinity of Hale‘iwa Town and
Laniākea Beach have become frequent throughout the year. In addition, segments
of Kamehameha Highway along the North Shore are sometimes closed during periods
of high surf and flooding when roads are hazardous to travelers, or as a result
of rock slides.
With traffic delays increasing in frequency, the community is concerned that
traffic conditions along Kamehameha Highway are reaching a critical stage,
especially when considering that the highway has not been greatly improved
since it was first built in the late 1920s . 17  Community concerns include
limitations that the existing two-lane highway is unable to accommodate any
additional cars, and that the bottlenecks negatively affect emergency vehicle
response time. Roadway improvements that correct safety deficiencies, promote
alternative modes of transportation, and minimize the number of vehicles on the
road are desired. Increasing highway capacity to accommodate more cars is not
supported, unless considered necessary for safety reasons. Providing secondary/
emergency access bypass routes into and out of the region to facilitate access
when Kamehameha Highway is closed is also of significant concern.
Several improvement projects are identified in the FY 2008-2013 State
Transportation Improvement Program (STIP) for Kamehameha Highway: (1) Bridge
Rehabilitation, Kawailoa Stream Bridge (Project No. OS51); (2) Rockfall
Protection, Waimea Bay (Project No. OS73); (3) Shoreline Protection, Vicinity
of Kawailoa Beach (Project No. OS77); (4) Traffic Improvements, Kahalu‘u to
Waimea Bay (Project No. OS78); and (5) Wetland Enhancement, Vicinity of ‘Uko‘a
Pond (Project No. OS79) 18 . The STIP is presently being updated. The O‘ahu
Regional Transportation Plan 2030 identifies one proposed State improvement
project for future consideration: Kamehameha Highway Safety Improvements from
Hale‘iwa to Kahalu‘u, including improvements such as turn lanes, guardrails,
signage, crosswalks, etc. No future highway capacity improvement projects are
identified for the North Shore.
Other proposed projects for roadway improvements identified by the City DTS
include improvements to Kamehameha Highway, Hale‘iwa Road, Waialua Beach Road,
Pūpūkea Road, Alapi‘o Road, Kaukonahua Road, and Wilikina Drive.
Resolution of the traffic congestion at Laniākea is a high priority for the
community, especially when City and State improvements currently being planned
for the area are taken into consideration. (i.e., The City is planning beach
support facilities on the mauka side of the highway, which would encourage more
pedestrian crossings and further aggravate the safety concerns and traffic
slowdowns under the current roadway configuration. The State DOT has a project
to rehabilitate the Kawailoa Stream Bridge.) Possible alternatives include
either highway realignment (re-routing the segment of Kamehameha Highway that
passes Laniākea Beach inland) or construction of a new bypass road between
Laniākea Beach and Ashley Road. While a new bypass road would improve traffic
flow along the highway, realignment would allow future beach support facilities
to be built on the beach, thereby providing the additional benefits of a
healthier and wider shoreline/beach area and protection for pedestrians. As a
result of strong community support, the State DOT is conducting a planning
study for the Laniākea Realignment/ Bypass Route.
4.1.2   Transit (Bus Service) System
Fixed route bus service is provided through the City DTS, which currently
contracts with O‘ahu Transit Services (OTS) for operation of TheBus. OTS also
operates the Handi-Van system, which provides transportation service for
individuals who are unable to independently use TheBus due to a disability
under the Americans with Disabilities Act.
According to the O‘ahu Regional Transportation Plan 2030 (April 2006), TheBus
system provides 100 numbered bus routes island-wide with a fleet of 531 buses,
including five bus routes to service the North Shore.
In addition to the DTS service, there is a state-operated school bus system
that provides both fixed route and curb service transportation for students of
Hale‘iwa Elementary, Waialua Elementary, Sunset Beach Elementary, and Waialua
Intermediate and High Schools.
There are no plans to extend or expand the number of bus routes on the North
Shore. DTS continues to monitor community needs and ridership, and makes
noncost adjustments to existing services for the North Shore. The introduction
of new service will be contingent on available funding.
4.1.3   Bikeway System
Bike Plan Hawai‘i (2003), a State DOT master plan for bikeways, identifies
145.7 miles of existing bikeways on O‘ahu, and 258.9 miles of proposed bikeways
island-wide to bring O‘ahu’s total bikeway network to 394.6 miles. The
timetable for development will depend upon construction feasibility (including
right-of-way acquisition) and funding. Bike Plan Hawai‘i defines the various
types of bikeways, as follows.
   ·   Signed Shared Roadway. Any street or highway specifically designated by
signs for the shared use of bicycles and motor vehicles and/or pedestrians.
Such facilities are of two types: a widened curb lane in an urban-type area or
a paved right shoulder in a rural-type area. The Signed Shared Roadway,
according to the Bike Plan Hawai‘i, is “…the preferred route for bicycle use,”
when mainly due to land width or other mitigating factors.
   ·   Bicycle Lane. A portion of a roadway designated by striping, signing,
and/or pavement markings for the preferential or exclusive use of bicycles. The
right-of-ways assigned to bicyclists and motorists are delineated to provide
for more predictable movements of each. Only crossflows by motor vehicles or
pedestrians to gain access to driveways or parking facilities or bus stops are
allowed.
   ·   Shared Use Path. A bikeway that is physically separated from motorized
vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier, and is either within the highway
right-of-way or has an independent right-of-way. Often shared with pedestrians,
skaters, joggers, and other nonmotorized users.
The State’s bikeway master plan indicates a North Shore bikeway system that
includes the existing Ke Ala Pūpūkea Bike Path; a coastline route with links to
Central O‘ahu, the Koolauloa District, and around Ka‘ena Point to Wai‘anae; a
route through Hale‘iwa Town; an existing leg along the Joseph P. Leong Highway
(Hale‘iwa Bypass Road); and along Hale‘iwa Road and Waialua Beach Road.
Additional potential bikeways, including one along Pa‘ala‘a Road in Hale‘iwa,
and three in Waialua (Pu‘uiki Street, Cane Haul Road (Extension), and
Kealohanui Street, respectively) are also included in this Sustainable
Communities Plan. Existing and proposed bikeways are shown on Exhibits 4.1 and
4.2.
The City DTS is in the process of updating the 1999 Honolulu Bicycle Master
Plan. While the scope of the current plan is limited to Honolulu’s urban core
between Kahala and Pearl City, the updated plan will cover the entire island of
O‘ahu.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8629.png]
Exhibit 4.1: North Shore Bikeway System
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8627.png]
Exhibit 4.2: Waialua - Hale‘iwa Pedestrian/Bikeway System
4.1.4   Other Transportation Facilities
Airports. Dillingham Airfield in Mokulē‘ia is the only public airport facility
located on the North Shore. The U.S. Army owns the field, but it is used
jointly by the U.S. Army and the State of Hawai‘i. The airfield consists of one
5,000-foot-long runway, hangars and tie-downs for smaller aircraft, facilities
for air-taxi services, and storage.
The airport services general aviation demands for small aircraft including
civilian-powered flights, sailplane/glider flights, and parachute activities,
as well as military flights. Air traffic is limited to daytime operations, as a
condition of the lease DOT has with the Army, and the existing airfield can
satisfy only a portion of general aviation demands for O‘ahu. The State DOT has
indicated that no major expansion is planned for Dillingham Airfield, except
for improvements to existing facilities and construction of additional hangars.
General aviation demands will instead be met by existing airport facilities at
Kalaeloa Airport (formerly the Barbers Point Naval Air Station).
Harbors. The Hale‘iwa Boat Harbor is the only recreational boat harbor facility
in the North Shore region. The facility is managed by the DLNR, Division of
Boating and Ocean Recreation. Policies and guidelines pertaining to Hale‘iwa
Boat Harbor are included in Section 3.3.
4.1.5   Policies
The following are policies for transportation systems on the North Shore.
   ·   Retain both Kamehameha Highway and Farrington Highway as two-lane
thoroughfares, to maintain the North Shore’s rural character. Provide roadway
improvements to promote pedestrian and vehicular safety and traffic efficiency.
   ·   Improve mobility and connectivity between residences, jobs, shopping,
and recreation areas on the North Shore.
   ·   Ensure safe and efficient access to adjacent areas, especially to
Central O‘ahu.
   ·   Support a multi-modal transportation system to reduce automobile
dependency. Provide more opportunities and support facilities for convenient
and safe alternative modes of transportation, including bus, pedestrian and
bicycle travel, and other modes of personal transportation.
   ·   Ensure that existing regional roadways are adequate to accommodate
proposed development proposals, prior to the construction of such developments.
4.1.6   Guidelines
The following guidelines relate to transportation systems for the North Shore.
   ·   Establish rural streetscape design and development standards within
residential areas consistent with the rural character of the region. Allow for
rural elements that reduce the amount of impervious surfaces, such as minimum
pavement widths to support traffic demands and emergency vehicle access, shared
driveways, reduced parking requirements, more landscaping, and grassed swales
as an alternative to sidewalks with curbs and gutters.
   ·   Emphasize accessibility from residential streets to bus routes, parks,
schools, and commercial centers. Design roadways to facilitate the use of
alternative transportation forms, including bicycle and pedestrian travel, and
personal motorized devices.
   ·   Provide scenic lookout points to minimize hazards created by slower
sightseeing traffic and to enhance the appreciation of the region’s scenic
resources.
   ·   Provide appropriately sited and designed off-street parking areas at
popular beach parks wherever feasible, including parking in support parks mauka
of the highway.
   ·   Study the safety and feasibility of developing passing zones on
Kamehameha Highway and Kaukonahua Road from Hale‘iwa/Waialua to Wahiawā to
reduce traffic delays due to slower moving vehicles, and to improve safety
conditions.
   ·   Provide safety improvements along Kaukonahua Road and Kamehameha Highway
from the Joseph P. Leong Highway (Hale‘iwa Bypass Road) to Wahiawā and beyond.
   ·   Promote the development of emergency runaway vehicle ramps on Kamehameha
Highway and Kaukonahua Road, from Wahiawā to Hale‘iwa/Waialua.
   ·   Approve new residential and commercial development only if the State DOT
and the City DTS confirm that adequate transportation access can be provided.
   ·   Continue to include the daily visitor population that visits the North
Shore in determining allocations of resources and facilities for the North
Shore.
   ·   Promote the use of transportation demand management strategies,
including measures such as ride-sharing (car/van pooling), improved bus service
and routes, the use of nonvehicular travel modes, modified work hours and
teleworking to reduce commutes.
   ·   Protect the natural resources of Ka‘ena Point from potentially damaging
vehicular traffic. Prohibit construction of a roadway around Ka‘ena Point.
   ·   Provide pedestrian-friendly walkways, off-street parking, bus pull-outs,
tour bus maneuvering areas, and drainage improvements in Hale‘iwa Town.
   ·   Improve the main roadways within Hale‘iwa and Waialua Country Town
Districts with shade trees, landscaping, sidewalks, street furniture, and
signage to promote pedestrian orientation within these country towns.
   ·   Create a regional pedestrian/bikeway system linking the parks, schools,
and town centers in Hale‘iwa and Waialua with outlying communities, as shown in
Exhibits 4.1 and 4.2.
   ·   Coordinate bikeway development with responsible State and City agencies
and private landowners to ensure that safety, liability, and a mixture of use
issues are adequately addressed.
   ·   Locate bus stops to be convenient and accessible to residential areas
and hubs of community activity.
   ·   Design bus shelters to provide weather protection for bus passengers and
complement the natural setting.
   ·   Explore the possibility of a Historic Hale‘iwa Trolley as an alternative
for visitors to experience the North Shore.
   ·   Encourage the State to upgrade, maintain, and expand the boating
facilities at Hale‘iwa Harbor to meet the needs of recreational and commercial
fishing and leisure boating activities.
   ·   Maintain small aircraft, general aviation, and other recreational,
commercial, or other military uses at Dillingham Airfield in cooperation with
the U.S. Army. As necessary, upgrade and maintain facilities to support
airfield use.
   ·   Limit uses in the vicinity of Dillingham Airfield to those that are
compatible with aircraft noise levels and overflights from the airfield.
   ·   Identify and maintain former cane haul roads and other mauka roads to
provide for the safe and quick evacuation of residents and the movement of
emergency response personnel (e.g., fire, police, ambulance) in the event that
the primary highways become impassable due to natural disasters or other
emergency incidents. Investigate the use of the following for safety and
emergency access: the cane haul road system mauka of Farrington Highway in
Mokulē‘ia; the roads connecting with Drum Road including cane haul road (Twin
Bridge Road) in Hale‘iwa, Kawailoa Road, Ashley Road, Pūpūkea Road, and
Motocross/Kaunala Road. COMSAT/Girl Scout Camp (Paumalū) Road does not connect
with Drum Road and would be for evacuation use only.
4.2   WATER SYSTEMS
Groundwater, which is water found beneath the earth’s surface, is one of
Hawai‘i’s most important natural resources. Used for agricultural, industrial,
and domestic purposes, groundwater is the principal source of O‘ahu’s municipal
water supply. Statewide, groundwater provides about 99 percent of Hawai‘i’s
domestic water and about 50 percent of all the freshwater used in the State. 19
Consequently, protecting the quality and quantity of groundwater resources is
essential to Hawai‘i’s future well-being.
In 1987, the State enacted the Water Code (HRS Chapter 174-C) in order to
protect, control, and regulate the use of the State’s water resources for the
benefit of its people. Under the Code, the City is responsible for preparing
the water use and development plan for the City and County of Honolulu.
This plan, called the Oahu Water Management Plan (OWMP), is prepared by the
department of planning and permitting with the assistance of the State
Commission on Water Resource Management (CWRM) and the Board of Water Supply,
and approved by the City Council following extensive public review and comment.
The OWMP was adopted by the CWRM and the City Council in 1990. The most recent
revision of the Technical Reference Document for the OWMP (December 1998)
includes updated supporting data, analyses, and conclusions, which reflect the
closing of Oahu Sugar Company and Waialua Sugar Company and the most recent
data and analytical review. Future revisions to the OWMP shall be submitted to
the City Council for its review and approval.
The OWMP is currently being updated using the watershed approach to water
resource management to account for watershed protection and water use and
development. To improve the integration of land use and water resources, the
OWMP has been divided into eight watershed management plans (WMP), which
coincide with the eight Development Plan and Sustainable Communities Plan
areas. The goal of the WMP for each planning area is to formulate an
environmentally holistic, community-based, and economically viable WMP
balancing: (1) the preservation and management of O‘ahu’s watersheds; and (2)
sustainable ground and surface water use and development to serve present users
and future generations. Each WMP shall be submitted to the City Council for
adoption by ordinance.
The Board of Water Supply OWMP overview section of the WMP, 2009, evaluated
available water supplies and the water development needs of the existing and
new residential and commercial development (including retail, office, resort,
recreational, and industrial) likely by 2030 as a result of implementation of
the City’s Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans. There is
available water supply to accommodate projected water needs through the 2030
planning horizon. The North Shore Watershed Management Plan will provide
guidance for the sustainable management and use of all water resources in the
watershed (both surface and ground water resources).
CWRM has adopted sustainable yields to protect groundwater resources and
regulate water use by water use permits. The following table summarizes the
available water in aquifers underlying the North Shore area.
 
Table 4-1: 2005 Groundwater Use by Aquifer (mgd)
                 Previous    Revised     2005    Unallocated Existing
Aquifer Aquifer  Sustainable 2008        Water   Sustainable Water Use SY Minus
Sector  System   Yield (SY)  Sustainable Permits Yield       July 2005 Pumpage
                             Yield (SY)  Issued
North   Mokuleia 12          8           8.301   -0.301      0.303     7.697
       Waialua  40          25          30.311  -5.311      3.020     21.980
       Kawailoa 39          29          1.549   27.451      0.682     28.318
Total            91          62          40.161  21.839      4.005     57.995
North
Reference: Oahu Water Management Plan: Overview Section 2009
 
Groundwater resources within the region are comprised of the three distinct
aquifer systems that comprise O‘ahu’s North Aquifer Sector: the Mokulē‘ia,
Waialua, and Kawailoa Aquifer Systems. This aquifer sector is designated by
CWRM as a water management area, and approval of water use permits from CWRM
are required to withdraw water from these systems. The Hawai‘i Water Plan Water
Resources Protection Plan (2008) indicates the sustainable yield of the three
aquifer systems in 2005 about 62 million gallons per day (mgd). In 2005, water
use permit allocations for the three aquifer systems accounted for about 40
mgd, while water withdrawals were estimated at about 4 mgd. A significant
amount of water is allocated to agricultural water use permits that remain
unused due to the closure of plantation agriculture.
Based on CWRM’s 2005 basal permitted uses of groundwater on O‘ahu (estimated at
about 295 million mgd, there is approximately 112 mgd of unallocated
sustainable yield remaining in the island-wide groundwater supply that could be
developed.
The BWS supplies municipal water service to most of the North Shore, with the
exception of Mokulē‘ia which is served by a private water company. Municipal
water demand for the North Shore in 2000 was approximately 2.8 mgd, of which
2.5 mgd were withdrawn from sources within the region and 0.3 mgd were imported
from Koolauloa. BWS projections forecast that water demand for the area will
increase to about 3.4 mgd by the year 2030. 20  The BWS considers the water
supply from existing wells on the North Shore more than adequate to meet
current and future demand in the region. Agricultural irrigation demand for
nonpotable water for the 20,000 acres of prime agricultural land on the North
Shore is estimated at 35.8 mgd.
The following tables indicate potential potable and nonpotable sources of water
to meet future demands in the North Shore area. BWS is proposing the increase
of permitted use for the existing Waialua Wells potable water source in the
Waialua aquifer of the North Shore area. This increased withdrawal from an
existing source will be pursued as part of the BWS’s development and operation
of an integrated island-wide water system.
 
Table 4-2: Potential Groundwater Sources of Potable Water for the North
Shore
Ground Water  Current Permitted Additional      Total Permitted CWRM Aquifer
Source        Use (mgd)         Permitted Use   Use Requested   System Area
                                Requested (mgd) (mgd)
Waialua Wells 1.73              0.27            2.00*           Waialua
*Pending CWRM approval of BWS Water Use Permit Increase Application January
26, 2010
 
Table 4-3: Potential Alternative Nonpotable Water for the North Shore
Resource              Minimum Estimate  Maximum Estimate  SCP Area Served
                      (mgd)             (mgd)
Wahiawa Reservoir     8.5               22.0              North Shore Central
                                                          O‘ahu
Recycled Water: Army, 2                 4                 North Shore Central
City, Wahiawa WWTP                                        O‘ahu
Kawailoa Irrigation
System                –               –               North Shore
(Data coming from
Kamehameha Schools)
Kaukonahua Stream minimum average month = 8.5 mgd; 2002 annual average = 22
mgd.
Wahiawa Reservoir storage capacity = 9,200 acre-feet or 3.066 mg
 
The CWRM has authority in all matters regarding administration of the State
Water Code. By Charter, the BWS has the authority to manage, control, and
operate the water systems of the City, and therefore should coordinate the
development and allocation of potable and nonpotable water sources and systems
intended for municipal use on O‘ahu as guided by the City’s land use plans and
the OWMP.
The BWS Six-year Capital Improvement Program (CIP) for FY2010-FY2015 contains
several projects for the North Shore, including a proposed 16-inch main along
Kamehameha Highway from Pūpūkea to Waiale‘e, and three other projects to
replace aging waterlines. The existing private water transmission system
serving Mokulē‘ia was built in the 1930s, and is in need of replacement/
upgrades to address water contamination issues and meet current fire protection
standards. BWS has indicated that the private owner would need to upgrade the
system to meet current standards before the BWS could consider acquiring the
system. Consideration has also been given for BWS to provide a water service
connection with the system remaining private.
4.2.1   Policies
The following policies seek to maintain an adequate supply of good quality
water, retain sufficient acreage in watersheds to insure infiltration into
groundwater aquifers, and strengthen the protection of water sources and
watersheds.
   ·   Protect and preserve the region’s water resources, including
groundwater, streams, wetland areas, natural drainage systems, watershed areas,
and the shoreline and coastal areas. Ensure that the high quality of the
region’s nearshore and coastal waters is maintained to benefit recreation, the
economy, the region’s natural biological systems, and future generations.
   ·   Protect and manage the water resources that support wetland farming
(taro and lotus root) and diversified agriculture to ensure sufficient quantity
and quality.
   ·   Integrate management of all potable and nonpotable water sources,
including groundwater, surface water, stormwater, and reclaimed water following
City development of plans and adoption of appropriate management processes in
accordance with City and State mandates.
   ·   The BWS will either indicate that adequate potable and nonpotable water
is available, deny, or will require/recommend conditions that should be
included as part of any application for zone changes, master plans,
subdivisions, and building permit approvals for a new residential or commercial
development on the North Shore, in order to assure water service adequacy,
dependability and efficiency.
   ·   All developments are required to conserve water supplies by implementing
water efficiency and conservation measures, such as monitoring water use and
water loss, fixing leaks, installing low flow plumbing fixtures, drought
tolerant landscaping, sub-metering, and soil moisture sensors in irrigation
systems.
   ·   Rain catchments connected to roof gutters should be promoted in the
North Shore for landscape irrigation to supplement municipal water supplies.
Rain catchments also reduce stormwater runoff into streams and nearshore
waters.
   ·   An adequate supply of nonpotable water should be developed and required
for irrigation of large landscaped areas and other suitable uses on the North
Shore, if available, in order to conserve the natural water supplies of potable
water for future generations.
   ·   A sufficient amount of water should be allocated to meet the diversified
agricultural needs for the North Shore for the long-term support of a viable
agricultural industry. The agricultural industry’s water needs are uncertain
and substantial, yet important, to support O‘ahu’s growing population by
providing locally and organically grown produce, Asian-based specialty crops,
niche and off-season fruits and vegetables for export, and bio-fuels for
renewable energy systems. Future water demand depends on the types of crops
cultivated, the climate, and the number of acres in cultivation.
   ·   Source water protection best management practices should be required of
all agricultural activities to minimize the transport of pesticides,
herbicides, and fertilizers into the underlying potable aquifers and into
streams and nearshore waters.
4.2.2   Guidelines
   ·   Confirm that adequate potable and nonpotable water is available before
approving new residential or commercial development.
   ·   Ensure that State and private well development projects are integrated
into and consistent with City water source development plans.
   ·   Support infrastructure improvements that provide for the efficient and
secure transmission and delivery of quality water.
   ·   Conserve the use of potable water by implementing the following
measures, as feasible and appropriate:
-Low-flush toilets, flow constrictors, rainwater catchment, and other water
conserving devices in commercial and residential developments
-   Indigenous, drought-tolerant plant material and drip irrigation systems in
landscaped areas
-Use of reclaimed water for the irrigation of agricultural lands, parks, golf
courses and other landscaped areas where this would not adversely affect
potable groundwater supply or pose possible health and safety risks.
4.3   WASTEWATER TREATMENT
The majority of the homes in the North Shore area are served by individual
cesspools and septic tanks/leachfield systems. The Pa‘ala‘a Kai Wastewater
Treatment Plant (WWTP), a municipal facility in Waialua, was constructed in
1980 to serve 314 homes in the Pa‘ala‘a Kai subdivision. Effluent from the
facility is discharged into injection wells. There are also 31 private
treatment plants serving various apartment complexes with effluent disposal
into injection wells. Of the 31 private WWTPs operating in 2008, 19 are located
in Waialua, six are in Hale‘iwa, and six are in the Sunset Beach/Pūpūkea area.
Privately operated injection wells are a convenient, long-term disposal
alternative to the lack of a municipal sewage collection and disposal system.
However, the nature of injection wells and the common lack of land space for
replacement injection wells make them a costly and often unreliable method of
discharge.
Research has indicated that approximately 40 percent of the cesspools in the
Waialua-Hale‘iwa area have failed and require pumping on a frequent basis. Even
when working properly, cesspools remove only a small percentage of the
pollutants contained in domestic sewage, with groundwater carrying the
remainder into the ocean. As a result, cesspools are considered a potential
health problem for recreational users of shoreline waters in this area.
An older wastewater plan for the North Shore 21  recommended that a centralized
subregional wastewater treatment system (collection and conveyance system,
treatment plant, and effluent disposal by means of irrigation and rapid
infiltration) be constructed to serve Waialua, Hale‘iwa, and a portion of
Kawailoa. While there are currently no funds or community consensus in support
of a centralized system, the City is committed to working with the community to
develop, implement, or facilitate appropriate, effective, and environmentally
sound wastewater treatment systems that will not impact groundwater and ocean
resources. An ocean outfall in the North Shore area has been rejected by the
community as an option due to environmental and economic considerations. The
City is currently in the process of preparing the North Shore Regional
Wastewater Alternatives Plan to evaluate various alternatives for providing
small regional wastewater treatment and disposal solutions for the North Shore
region.
The Pūpūkea-Sunset Beach area is not currently part of the City’s Waialua-
Hale‘iwa Wastewater Service Basin, but should be included in future wastewater
treatment plans in order to protect the critical ocean environment in the area.
Over the last few years, the State Department of Health (DOH) has been slowly
requiring upgrades for individual cesspools to individual wastewater treatment
systems in an effort to eventually eliminate all cesspools. All wastewater
plans must conform to applicable provisions of the DOH’s Administrative Rules,
Chapter 11-62, “Wastewater Systems”.
4.3.1   Policies
The following policies apply to wastewater treatment systems on the North
Shore.
   ·   Provide adequate public and private wastewater treatment facilities and
improve the existing wastewater management services on the North Shore to
protect the North Shore’s water resources and the health of the community is
the highest priority.
   ·   Support alternative wastewater technologies that reflect the community’s
values and rural character.
4.3.2   Guidelines
   ·   Use reclaimed water for irrigation and other uses, where feasible, in
accordance with the Guidelines for the Treatment and Use of Recycled Water (May
15, 2002) by the State department of health and the No Pass Zone established by
the Board of Water Supply. A “wetlands” treatment system could serve as wild
bird refuges that could also be used as a picnicking area and/or children’s
fishing park.
   ·   Replace outdated individual cesspools with septic tanks and individual
wastewater systems. Consider public programs or policies to support private
conversion efforts.
   ·   Discourage new residential, commercial, or school uses in close
proximity to wastewater treatment facilities where odors may be objectionable.
   ·   Identify appropriate areas and technologies for future wastewater
facilities that maintain the rural character and are proportionate to future
population projections.
   ·   Do not permit an ocean outfall for treated wastewater effluent in the
North Shore area.
4.4   ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS
Power to the North Shore is provided by Hawaiian Electric Company, and
distributed throughout the community through a system of subtransmission and
distribution lines, as well as distribution substations.
Hawaiian Electric is committed to increasing its renewable energy portfolio,
and is engaged in a broad spectrum of renewable energy-related initiatives and
activities occurring on the North Shore, including:
Solar Water Heating. Hawaiian Electric’s solar water heating program encourages
households statewide to install rooftop solar water heating systems.
Biofuels. Hawaiian Electric provides research funding for biofuels crop
research, such as the evaluation of promising oil crops.
Photovoltaics. The number of photovoltaic systems installed under net energy
metering increased significantly in 2007, and is expected to increase into the
future. Through the Sun Power for Schools program, Hawaiian Electric partners
with the State Department of Education to install photovoltaic systems at
Hawai‘i public schools. Waialua High School has been a past participant in the
Sun Power program.
In addition, private developers are in the process of implementing projects
that use the region’s wind resources to generate electricity.
Communications for Hawaiian Electric have become an increasingly important and
integral part of the island’s energy delivery system. Fiber optics, mobile
radio, microwave radio, packet radio, and multiple address system UHF radio
links improve operations, control, and service of the utility’s electrical
system. As the energy system grows and as future applications materialize in
the areas of metering and customer communication, supervisory control and data
acquisition, and mobile communications, the need to control, service, and
monitor the facilities to ensure system reliability and emergency
communications capability becomes greater. Hawaiian Electric has proposed plans
to improve the mobile radio coverage with the addition of new telecommunication
sites and upgrades at existing sites throughout O‘ahu including communications
sites in the North Shore area. The utility’s long-range plan is to further
improve mobile radio communications, with the adaption of mobile data, and
completion of a microwave radio communications loop system around the island.
Additional policies and guidelines pertaining to electrical systems are
included in Section 3.1.3.7 Scenic Resources and Scenic Views and Section
3.1.3.8 Utility Corridors and Greenways.
4.4.1   Policies
   ·   Provide adequate and reliable electrical service.
   ·   Locate and design system elements such as electrical power facilities,
substations, communication sites, and transmission lines to avoid or mitigate
any potential adverse impacts on scenic and natural resources.
   ·   Locate powerlines underground.
   ·   Promote the use of renewable energy sources and energy conservation
measures.
4.5   SOLID WASTE HANDLING AND DISPOSAL
Solid waste collection and disposal systems on the North Shore consist of a
City and County-operated solid waste transfer facility at Kawailoa. Household
refuse collection services are provided by the City and County and private
haulers. Municipal wastes are primarily processed at the H-POWER facility or
recycled. The Kawailoa Refuse Transfer Station is located on Kawailoa Drive,
and is an intermediate disposal site which accepts trash from City collection
vehicles, some private haulers, and small businesses. It also serves as a
convenience center for residents to dispose of their household solid waste.
Refuse generated by nonhousehold sources is collected by private haulers and
delivered to the H-POWER facility. There is only one active landfill for O‘ahu
(Waimānalo Gulch) in the ‘Ewa area, that accepts primarily noncombustible
wastes. The Waimānalo Gulch landfill is operating on a temporary permit
extension, and the City is moving ahead with plans to expand the existing site.
The City has instituted recycling and other waste diversion programs in an
effort to expand the useful life of this landfill.
The City’s Solid Waste Integrated Management Plan (November 2019) outlines a
comprehensive, unified approach to such vital issues as landfill and disposal
facility siting, expansion of existing services and facilities, specialized
waste disposal (e.g., batteries, tires, sewage sludge, medical and hazardous
wastes), waste reduction, and recycling strategies. There are no plans to
create an additional convenience center, transfer station, or landfill
operations on the North Shore.
As waste management and technological innovations occur, the North Shore can
and should play a part in the City’s long-term efforts to establish more
efficient waste diversion and collection systems. However, since the region is
not expected to contribute significantly to future increases in O‘ahu’s solid
waste management demands and does not contain sites suitable for the processing
or disposal of solid waste on an island-wide scale, it would be inappropriate
to consider any future landfills on the North Shore.
Littering and illegal dumping on agricultural lands and vacant lots is a
chronic problem in parts of the North Shore region. In addition, there is a
shortage of regular maintenance crews to pick up all the trash left on public
beaches, parks, and highways.
4.5.1   Policies
The following policies apply to solid waste handling and disposal in the North
Shore:
   ·   Provide adequate resources for trash removal, cleanup of illegal dumps,
and enforcement of antidumping laws.
   ·   Promote recycling and other source reduction programs dedicated to
minimizing the amount of solid waste generated.
4.5.2   Guidelines
   ·   Expand recycling collection facilities and services, and public outreach
and education programs that promote responsible waste management and source
reduction.
   ·   Encourage recycling of regional green waste by establishing green waste
facilities in an appropriate location, possibly integrated with or adjacent to
the Kawailoa Refuse Transfer Station.
   ·   Expand the use of automated refuse collection in residential areas.
   ·   Monitor and regulate illegal dumping and littering activities.
4.6   DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
Flooding is a recurring natural hazard for the North Shore’s coastal areas due
to the region’s natural topography and the inadequate capacity of existing
drainageways. All coastal areas in the North Shore region are prone to flooding
because of heavy mauka stream flows, high waves, and tsunami activity. However,
the low-lying areas surrounding Kaiaka Bay and Waialua Bay are the most
vulnerable to flooding, due to the watershed’s large size and the number of
streams and gulches that converge at the shoreline in this area (including
Ki‘iki‘i Stream, Paukauila Stream and the Anahulu River). Modifications to
natural drainage patterns and activities that increase storm runoff from the
mauka areas – including stream channelization, increased erosion and
sedimentation, debris buildup/blockage to restrict stream flow – further
compound flood hazards in this area.
Recently completed or ongoing drainage system studies to address the
community’s concerns about flooding in the Waialua-Hale‘iwa area include: (1)
Hale‘iwa Road Drainage Improvements Engineering Study; (2) Kaukonahua Stream
Dredging Study (from Otake Camp to Kaiaka Bay); and (3) Kaiaka Bay Watershed
Demonstration Project. In addition, the community supports a comprehensive
study of the Waialua-Kaiaka Bay watershed to address regional drainage and
flooding issues and coastal water quality.
Open and undeveloped lands generally benefit surface and stormwater management
systems by providing large areas of highly infiltrative surfaces, which support
the natural absorption of water. In general, existing stormwater systems do not
meet current City drainage standards.
4.6.1   Policies
   ·   Improve drainage systems in the region to provide adequate protection
from flooding and protect the quality of nearshore waters.
   ·   Encourage coordination between public agencies and private landowners to
identify needed drainage improvements and develop a phased plan for
improvements.
   ·   To the extent possible, integrate planned improvements to the drainage
system into the regional open space network.
   ·   Maintain the waters of Waialua Bay, which is designated by the State
department of health as Class AA waters, in as natural and pristine state as
possible.
   ·   Administer and enforce zoning controls to restrict future development
within identified floodway, flood fringe, coastal high hazard, tsunami
inundation areas, and general flood plain districts.
   ·   Require property owners to elevate existing structures above the
regulatory flood elevation or relocate to sites beyond floodprone areas.
4.6.2   Guidelines
   ·   Require all structural and land improvements to provide adequate
drainage and flood mitigation measures to reduce storm runoff and flood hazard.
   ·   Employ retention and detention methods that allow for the gradual
release of stormwater. Where feasible, use open spaces, including parking lots,
landscaped areas, and parks, to detain or allow ground infiltration of
stormwater flows to reduce their volume, runoff rates, and the amounts of
sediment and pollutants transported.
   ·   Use detention/retention basins as passive recreational areas and to
provide recreational access for pedestrians and bicyclists.
   ·   Retain natural gulches as flood plains and open space resources.
Restrict development within gulches, and prohibit grading or other disturbance
of gulch walls.
   ·   Emphasize control and minimization of nonpoint source pollution in
drainage system design. Where hardening of stream channels is unavoidable,
improvements should protect habitat, maintain rural character and aesthetic
quality, and avoid degradation of coastline and of stream and nearshore water
quality, consistent with guidelines stated in Section 3.1.2.4.
   ·   Design drainageways to control 100-year floods. Any future work
performed within the 100-year floodplain shall adhere to the requirements of
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and meet all flood-proofing
requirements.
   ·   Regularly maintain and clean drainageways and flood mitigation
structures of debris to ensure that they achieve the purpose for which they
were designed.
   ·   Employ best management practices to minimize runoff from existing
conservation and agricultural land uses, and other areas that may generate
sediment and debris.
   ·   Repair and maintain related agricultural irrigations systems and
infrastructure.
   ·   Develop a drainage master plan for the Waialua watershed to address
erosion and flood protection concerns.
   ·   Conduct public outreach and education programs that explain the
potential for flooding and efforts to minimize the effects of flooding.
4.7   SCHOOL FACILITIES
Primary (K-6) and secondary (7-12) educational opportunities on the North Shore
are provided by the Department of Education (DOE) and individual private
schools. At present, there are four public schools in the North Shore
Sustainable Communities Plan area: three primary (K-6) schools and one combined
intermediate (7-8) and high (9-12) school. Private schools in the region
include St. Michael’s School (Preschool-8), Sunset Beach Christian School (K-
8), and the Aloha Ke Akua High School. The 2007-2008 enrollment and capacity,
and 2013-2014 projected enrollment for the DOE schools are shown in
Table 4-4 .
Table 4-4:    Public School Enrollment and Capacity, North Shore
School 2007-2008 Enrollment 2007-2008 Capacity 2013-2014 Projected Enrollment
Table 4-4:    Public School Enrollment and Capacity, North Shore
School              2007-2008 Enrollment 2007-2008 Capacity 2013-2014 Projected
                                                            Enrollment
Elementary                                                 
Hale‘iwa Elementar167                  566                140
Sunset Beach        387                  466                381
Elementary
Waialua Elementary  521                  580                529
Intermediate and
High School
Waialua High and    649                  1040               569
Intermediate
SOURCE: DOE Facilities Development Branch, August 2007.
 
DOE enrollment projections are utilized for facilities and program planning.
The projections for individual schools reflect current migration patterns
within the school service area. Adjustments are made in the school service area
for new housing developments, birth statistics, changes in service boundaries,
changes in school organization, and attendance of students from outside the
school service area by district exception. Recent enrollment figures show that
all the DOE schools are operating near or below capacity. Waialua Elementary is
operating near capacity, while other schools may have more space to accommodate
additional students from outside the school’s service boundary. Future
residential developments in the area will have an impact on the area schools,
although there are currently no major projects planned or under construction.
The DOE currently does not project any new schools for the North Shore.
Temporary classrooms may be used to handle future enrollment increases at the
various schools. In many communities where meeting spaces, recreation
facilities and social halls are limited (the North Shore included), public
schools often supplement their primary role for classroom education, and assume
important secondary functions as cultural and recreational centers during
nonschool hours. School cafeterias are used as meeting facilities for community
groups and organizations, youth groups and health and fitness classes. School
playing fields and playgrounds are used for youth sports programs and are often
gathering places for families with young children. Some schools also serve as
the community’s primary emergency shelter during emergency events or disaster
situations. Recognizing the multipurpose role of public schools as community
gathering places, the City prefers that school facilities be designed and
operated as community centers with shared recreation, athletic, and meeting
facilities.
Although existing DOE policies allow school principals to permit outside use of
school facilities during nonschool hours and weekends, financial limitations
have affected the DOE’s ability to design facilities as community centers. In
addition, DOE has experienced operational problems where schools and parks are
colocated. School programs require separate spaces to assure student safety and
adequate space for physical education and athletic activities, making it
impractical to allow community use of the facilities during school hours. DOE
programs are given priority, and the sharing of facilities is only accommodated
when the outside programs do not adversely affect student education.
Nevertheless, a long-term goal should be to have school facilities
appropriately designed to take advantage of opportunities to serve different
functions.
4.7.1   Policies
Policies for school facilities are as follows:
   ·   Provide and maintain quality school facilities that serve the needs of
the community.
   ·   Integrate school facilities with other community uses.
4.7.2   Guidelines
The following guidelines should be followed in planning and operating public
schools in the North Shore:
   ·   Confirm the adequacy of school facilities before approving new
residential development. Approve new residential developments only after the
State Department of Education confirms that adequate school facilities, either
at existing schools or at new school sites, will be available at the time new
residential units are occupied.
   ·   Design DOE schools as community centers to facilitate community use
after school hours.
   ·   Colocate elementary and intermediate schools with parks, and coordinate
facility design with the State DOE and the City DPR whenever possible to avoid
duplication of parking and athletic, recreation, and meeting facilities.
   ·   Coordinate the development and shared use of athletic facilities such as
swimming pools, gymnasiums, and playfields and courts with the DOE where the
joint use of such facilities would maximize use and reduce duplication of
function without compromising the schools’ athletic programs.
   ·   Promote facility design and construction that allows for school
buildings to be used as public hurricane shelters.
   ·   Support the DOE’s request for school impact fees from developers of
residential projects to ensure that adequate school facilities are in place
when new residential units are occupied.
4.8   PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES
Police Protection. The North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan area is
considered part of the Honolulu police department’s (HPD) District 2. District
2, which includes Wahiawā, is divided into 13 patrol beats. Beats are defined
areas patrolled by one or more officers during the course of a work shift with
definitions based on geographic area, type of population, and calls for police
service. Approximately 5 or 6 officers are needed to staff one beat on a 24-
hour basis. Currently, there are four police beats covering the North Shore.
The HPD has estimated that an additional two beats will be needed to serve the
North Shore over the next 20 years.
Police service for the Helemano Military Reservation is provided by Federal
authority, and has little effect on HPD operations.
Fire Protection. The Honolulu fire department operates fire stations at Sunset
Beach and Waialua-Hale‘iwa. The fire department’s long-range goals and
objectives for the North Shore include: (1) relocation of the Waialua Fire
Station out of an established flood and tsunami inundation zone; (2) facility
expansion to operate as a regional fire station providing emergency fire and
medical services and logistical supply support in times of emergency situations
where supply lines are cut off; (3) installation and activation of a new water
tanker to assist in areas where water sources are limited or nonexistent; and
(4) improvements to the Anahulu Bridge to accommodate the increasing weights of
HFD equipment. The fire department continues to monitor development trends and
service needs to determine the requirement for new fire stations. HFD is
currently considering the long-term potential for new stations at Kawailoa and
Kawela. Land acquisition for any future stations will be dependent upon
development timetables.
Ocean Safety. The emergency services department, Ocean Safety and Lifeguard
Services Division provides lifeguard services for the following ocean safety
towers on the North Shore: Sunset Beach, ‘Ehukai, Ke Waena, Waimea Bay, and
Hale‘iwa Ali‘i Beach. There is an increasing demand to establish permanent
lifeguard services at Laniākea, Chun’s Reef, and Velzyland.
There are approximately 30 water safety officers assigned to the North Shore.
In addition to personnel at lifeguard towers, they conduct daily patrols from
rescue crafts and also patrol from Waimea Bay to Sunset Beach on all- terrain
vehicles. The number of water safety officers within the district will
fluctuate seasonally, with more officers assigned to the area during the high
surf season in the winter and less during the summer months. It is noted by
Ocean Safety officials that rescue craft patrols will play a larger role in
extending lifeguard services in response to new or expanded beach parks in the
region.
Emergency Management. The emergency management system for the City and County
of Honolulu is the responsibility of the Department of Emergency Management
(DEM). The DEM is responsible for monitoring, warning, evacuating and securing
(if necessary) the vulnerable areas of the entire North Shore.
The North Shore is susceptible to natural hazards such as tsunami, tropical
storms, high surf, and hurricanes. In the event of these hazardous conditions,
residents need to evacuate to shelter facilities. There are two public
hurricane shelter facilities for the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan
area – Waialua High and Intermediate School and Sunset Beach Elementary School.
In addition, Waialua Recreation Center is used for high surf, flood, and other
required evacuations. The Outdoor Warning Siren system for the North Shore area
was completely upgraded in 2007.
Flooding is the most common and recurring hazard. Under heavy, continuous rain
and flooding conditions, DEM plans are in place to evacuate large portions of
Hale‘iwa and Waialua, if required, and include additional evacuation options in
the event Wilson Dam were to fail.
According to DEM, planning for the area must include preparedness education and
the provision of adequate warning devices, designation of adequate
transportation routes for evacuee movement, and suitable shelters where
evacuees can seek refuge. The DEM recommends that any new public buildings such
as schools and recreation centers be required to consider emergency shelter
capabilities as a secondary use of the building.
4.8.1   Policies
Policies for all public safety facilities are as follows:
   ·   Promote an integrated approach to public safety on the North Shore,
which will enable police, fire, ocean safety, emergency management, and
emergency medical efforts to share resources and information, as appropriate.
   ·   Encourage the development of safe, crime-deterrent public and private
environments.
   ·   Provide adequate staffing and facilities to ensure effective and
efficient delivery of basic government service and protection of public safety.
4.8.2   Guidelines
   ·   Include visitor demands and needs when allocating public safety
resources.
   ·   Sponsor public education programs to increase awareness about public
safety issues.
   ·   Identify, improve and service transportation networks (via signage,
traffic control personnel, and equipment) to ensure efficient evacuee movement.
   ·   Support highway improvements that would reduce emergency vehicle
response times and facilitate emergency personnel movement through traffic.
   ·   Expand lifeguard services at beaches with high visitor demands, such as
Laniākea, Chun’s Reef, and Velzyland.
   ·   Confirm the availability of adequate police and fire protection before
approving new development.
   ·   Increase police presence, including car and bicycle patrols and
community policing efforts, especially in high-theft areas such as beach parks.
Support the availability of adequate staffing and funding to enable this.
   ·   Establish facilities which police officers could use as a local base of
operations.
   ·   Support the physical improvements and infrastructure upgrades needed to
ensure adequate fire protection.
   ·   Use crime-preventive principles in the planning and design of
communities, open spaces, circulation networks, and buildings.
   ·   Design new public buildings, such as schools and recreation centers, to
serve a secondary function as an emergency shelter.
4.9   OTHER COMMUNITY FACILITIES
Antennae have been around as long as we have had radio and television services.
Antennae associated with communication purposes have grown tremendously since
the introduction of mobile communication devices in the early 1980s. While the
telecommunication industry has provided more convenient communication
capabilities for individuals, it has also increased public agencies’ ability to
provide faster and more efficient response to those in need, particularly
during times of emergency.
While the benefits of the telecommunications industry cannot be disputed,
communities have opposed new antennae due to aesthetic impacts, especially
related to public views and neighborhood character. Their visibility has
increased, particularly where antennae are mounted on freestanding towers.
The public has also raised concerns about the environmental effects of
electromagnetic field exposure associated with radio transmission, as evidenced
by the presence of antennae. However, the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) is responsible for evaluating the human environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions, assuming that the provider is in compliance with the
Commissions radio frequency rules.
4.9.1   Policies
The following are policies governing the utilization of antennae
   ·   Encourage colocation of antennae; towers should host the facilities of
more than one service provider to minimize their proliferation and reduce
visual impacts.
   ·   Mount antennae onto existing buildings or structures so that public
scenic views and open spaces will not be negatively affected. However, except
for the occupant’s personal use, antennae on single-family dwelling roofs in
residential districts are not appropriate.
   ·   Use “stealth” technology (e.g., towers disguised as trees) especially on
freestanding antenna towers in order to blend in with the surrounding
environment and minimize visual impacts.
5.   IMPLEMENTATION
Implementation of the City’s Development and Sustainable Communities Plans is a
major challenge for the City’s planners, engineers, and other technical and
policy-level personnel, as well as elected officials who determine the
allocation of City resources. The plans seek to implement a vision for the
future by providing wider guidance for decisions and actions related to land
use, public facilities, and infrastructure, as well as for zoning matters. As a
result, many of their provisions reflect the consultations which occurred
throughout the planning process with pertinent implementing agencies and
community representatives. It should be noted that implementation will depend
on each department’s priorities and availability of resources.
Many municipal jurisdictions throughout the United States have instituted
comprehensive planning programs that emphasize a proactive community-based
planning and implementation process. These local governments seek to establish
a strong link between planning policies and guidelines, and specific
organization, funding, and actions needed to implement a variety of public and
private projects and programs. The following sections of this chapter are
intended to strengthen the linkage to implementation to realize the vision of
the future presented in this plan.
Implementation of the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan will be
accomplished by:
   ·   Initiating zoning map and development code amendments to achieve
consistency with the policies and guidelines of the Sustainable Communities
Plan;
   ·   Guiding public investment in infrastructure through Functional Plans and
Special Area Plans which support the vision of the Sustainable Communities
Plan;
   ·   Reviewing zoning and other development applications based on how well
they support the vision for the North Shore;
   ·   Incorporating Sustainable Communities Plan priorities through the Public
Infrastructure Map and the City’s annual budget process; and
   ·   Conducting a review of the vision, policies and guidelines, and Capital
Improvement Program (CIP) priority investments of the North Shore Sustainable
Communities Plan every five years and recommending revisions as necessary.
Chapter 5 is organized under the following headings:
SECTION
   5.1   PUBLIC FACILITY INVESTMENT PRIORITIES
   5.2   DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES
   5.3   SPECIAL AREA PLANS
   5.4   FUNCTIONAL PLANNING
   5.5   REVIEW OF ZONING AND OTHER DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS
   5.6   FIVE-YEAR SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN REVIEW
   5.7   IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
5.1   PUBLIC FACILITY INVESTMENT PRIORITIES
The vision for the North Shore requires the cooperation of both public and
private agencies in planning, financing, and constructing infrastructure. The
City must take an active role in planning infrastructure improvements,
including improvements for wastewater treatment, drainage, parks and public
access, and roadways.
5.2   DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES
Projects to receive priority in the approval process are those which:
   ·   Involve land acquisition and improvements for public projects that are
consistent with the Sustainable Communities Plan’s vision, policies, and
guidelines;
   ·   Involve applications for zoning and other regulatory approvals which are
consistent with the Sustainable Communities Plan’s vision, policies, and
guidelines; and
   ·   Are located on vacant usable parcels within the Community Growth
Boundary as shown on the Land Use Map in Appendix A.
5.3   SPECIAL AREA PLANS
For areas requiring particular attention, Special Area Plans provide more
detailed policies and guidelines than the Development and Sustainable
Communities Plans. The form and content of Special Area Plans depend on what
characteristics and issues need to be addressed in greater detail in planning
and guiding development or use of the Special Area.
Special Area Plans can be used to guide land use development and infrastructure
investment in Special Districts, Redevelopment Districts, or Resource Areas.
Plans for Special Districts would provide guidance for development and
infrastructure investment in areas with distinct historic or design character
or significant public views. Plans for Redevelopment Districts would provide
strategies for the revitalization or redevelopment of an area. Plans for
Resource Areas would provide resource management strategies for areas with
particular natural or cultural resource values. There are no Special Area Plans
proposed in the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan area.
5.4   FUNCTIONAL PLANNING
Functional planning is the process through which various City agencies
determine needs, assign priorities, establish timing and phasing, and propose
financing for projects within their areas of responsibility that will further
the implementation of the vision articulated in the Development and Sustainable
Communities Plans. This process may take a variety of forms, depending upon the
missions of the various agencies involved, as well as upon requirements imposed
from outside the City structure, such as federal requirements for wastewater
management planning. Typically, functional planning occurs as a continuous or
iterative activity within each agency.
The functional planning process involves annual review of existing functional
planning documents and programs by the City agencies responsible for developing
and maintaining infrastructure and public facilities or for provision of City
services. As a result of these reviews, the agencies then update, if required,
existing plans or prepare new long-range functional planning documents that
address facilities and service system needs. Updates of functional planning
documents are also conducted to assure that agency plans will serve to further
implement the Development and Sustainable Communities Plans as well as to
provide adequate opportunity for coordination of plans and programs among the
various agencies.
The number and types of functional planning documents will vary from agency to
agency, as will the emphasis and contents of those documents. A typical agency
may develop a set of core documents such as:
   ·   A resource-constrained long-range capital improvement program. A
“resource-constrained” program is one which identifies the fiscal resources
that can be reasonably expected to be available to finance the improvements.
   ·   A long-range financing plan, with identification of necessary new
revenue measures or opportunities.
   ·   A development schedule with top priorities for areas designated for
earliest development.
   ·   Service and facility design standards, including level of service
guidelines for determining adequacy.
Other documents may also be developed as part of an agency’s functional
planning activities, such as master plans for provision of services to a
specific region of the island. In some cases, functional planning activities
will be undertaken in cooperation with agencies outside the City structure,
such as the transportation planning activities that are conducted in
association with the O‘ahu Metropolitan Planning Organization.
Functional planning is intended to be a proactive public involvement process
which provides public access to information about infrastructure and public
facility needs assessments, alternatives evaluations, and financing. Outreach
activities should involve Neighborhood Boards, community organizations,
landowners, and others who may be significantly affected by the public
facilities and infrastructure projects or programs to be developed to further
implement the policies of the Development and Sustainable Communities Plans.
The functional planning process should be characterized by opportunities for
early and continuing involvement, timely public notice, public access to
information used in the evaluation of priorities, and the opportunity to
suggest alternatives and to express preferences. The functional planning
process provides the technical background for the Capital Improvement Program
and public policy proposals which are subject to review and approval by the
City Council.
5.5   REVIEW OF ZONING AND OTHER DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS
A primary way in which the vision of the North Shore Sustainable Communities
Plan will guide land use is through the review of applications for zone changes
and other development approvals. Approval for all development projects should
be based on the extent to which the project supports the vision, policies, and
guidelines of the Sustainable Communities Plan.
Projects which do not involve “significant” zone changes will be reviewed by
the department of planning and permitting for consistency with the vision,
policies, and guidelines of the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan during
the zone change application process. Projects which meet the criteria for a
“significant” zone change are required to prepare an environmental assessment
or environmental impact statement following the provisions of Hawai‘i Revised
Statutes, Chapter 343. The criteria to establish a zone change as “significant”
in need of HRS, Chapter 343 environmental review is defined in the North Shore
Sustainable Communities Plan adopting ordinance.
5.5.1   Adequate Facilities Requirement
All projects requesting zone changes shall be reviewed to determine if adequate
public facilities and infrastructure will be available to meet the needs
created as a result of the development. Level of service guidelines to define
adequate public facilities and infrastructure requirements will be established
during the CIP process.
In order to guide development and growth in an orderly manner as required by
the City’s General Plan, zoning and other development applications for new
developments should be approved only if the responsible City and State agencies
confirm that adequate public facilities and utilities will be available at the
time of occupancy, or if conditions the functional agency indicates are
necessary to assure adequacy are otherwise sufficiently addressed.
The department of planning and permitting will review the project for
consistency with the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan’s vision, and
summarize any individual agency’s findings regarding public facilities and
utilities adequacy which are raised as part of the EA/EIS process. The
Department will address these findings and any additional agency comments
submitted as part of the agency review of the zone change application and
recommend conditions that should be included in the unilateral agreement or
development agreement to insure adequacy of facilities.
5.6   FIVE-YEAR SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN REVIEW
The department of planning and permitting shall conduct a comprehensive review
of the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan and report its findings and
recommended revisions to the Planning Commission and the City Council five
years after adoption and every five years thereafter. It is intended that the
Community Growth Boundary will remain fixed through the 2035 planning horizon.
5.6.1   Adoption of the Sustainable Communities Plan and Existing Land Use
Approvals
This Sustainable Communities Plan will go into effect upon adoption by
ordinance. Land use approvals granted under existing zoning, unilateral
agreements, and approved urban design plans will remain in force and guide
entitlement decisions until any zoning action to further implement the vision
and policies of the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan is initiated. If
an EA or EIS is accepted in the course of a Sustainable Communities Plan land
use approval for a project, it should be acceptable to meet the requirement for
an initial project EA/EIS when zone change applications are submitted for
subsequent phases of the project, unless the project scope and land uses are
being significantly changed from that described in the initial EA/EIS.
5.7   IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
This section provides a summary of the specific physical improvements and
actions identified in Chapters 3 and 4 of this Plan to help organize and
facilitate plan implementation.
Table 5-1 presents the implementing actions, the related plans, regulatory code
or action, and the public or private entities responsible for implementing the
action. The table is organized by land use category, with the categories listed
according to the order of Chapters 3 and 4. A key to the abbreviations used in
the table follows at the end of the table.
   ·   The first column of the table – Policies and Guidelines – is comprised
of the guideline statements for each land use category. Policy statements are
used if the land use category does not include guidelines (e.g., Electrical
Systems).
   ·   The second column – Program – relates each statement to a specific
regulatory code, functional plan, or other action. The term “project review”
indicates the review of discretionary land use approvals, such as State land
use, zoning and special management area use permits. In some instances, To Be
Determined (TBD) was used to indicate that the related code/plan/action was not
clear. TBD actions are intended to be identified and developed by the agencies
responsible for implementation.
   ·   The third column – Agency – identifies the public and/or private
entities responsible for implementing the policy or guideline. Although many of
the implementing actions fall under DPP’s jurisdiction, some actions are the
responsibility of other Federal, State or City departments or public agencies,
while a few have been assigned to private entities or individual landowners.
   ·   The fourth column identifies the role of the agencies involved in
implementation. The three categories identified include implementation,
regulation, or advocacy.
Table 5-1
Implementation Matrix
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
    Policies/Guidelines                                                      Program      Agency   Role
Open Space and Natural Environment – Mountain Areas
                                                                             Conservation
    Maintain, protect, and restore native forests and ecosystems within the  District
    State Conservation District and lands designated Preservation on the     Management   DLNR     Implementer
1.  North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan Land Use Map. Ensure the        Plan,                 
    protection of State conservation lands, especially those on the Ka‘ena Watershed    BWS      Advocate
    coastline and Mokulē‘ia foothills.                                    Management
                                                                             Plan
    Reclassify important watershed areas which are designated but unused     Land Use     DLNR     Implementer
2.  State Agricultural or Urban Districts to the State Conservation or City  Ordinance    DPP      Implementer
    Preservation Districts.
    Identify and protect endangered species habitats, native ecosystems, and
3.  other important ecologically sensitive areas, including the natural area TBD          DLNR     Implementer
    reserves and forest reserves, from such threats as fire, alien species,
    feral animals, and human activity.
4.  Identify mountain areas within the AG-2 General Agricultural District    Land Use     DPP      Implementer
    that are suitable for rezoning to P-2 General Preservation District.     Ordinance
5.  Avoid the establishment of utility corridors and other uses that would   TBD          DLNR     Regulator
    disturb areas with high concentrations of native species.
    Encourage coordination of natural resource protection and management     Conservation DLNR
    efforts between the State DLNR and private landowners, as well as with   District     U.S.     Implementer
6.  the U.S. Military, especially where the Kahuku and Kawailoa Training     Management   Army     Advocate
    Areas overlap with environmentally sensitive areas.                      Plan         private  Advocate
                                                                                          entities
    Acquire and maintain public access easements to trail heads and public                DLNR
7.  campgrounds, including parking and signage at trailheads, where          TBD          Na Ala   Implementer
    appropriate. Such access should be required, as appropriate, for any new              Hele     Implementer
    development.                                                                          Program
    Support State efforts to seek opportunities for cooperative agreements
8.  with private landowners to gain access to trails leading to public       TBD          DLNR     Implementer
    lands.
9.  Implement recommendations in the State’s Na Ala Hele Program Plan to   TBD          DLNR     Implementer
    maintain and enhance mauka trail systems.
10. Identify historic trails and old government roads of cultural and        TBD          DLNR     Implementer
    recreational value to the public.
Open Space and Natural Environment – Shoreline Areas
    Preserve rare and sensitive coastal resources including coastal strand                DLNR     Regulator
11. vegetation, sand dunes, and anchialine pools. Establish buffer zones     TBD          DPP      Regulator
    around these areas where necessary.
    Prohibit off-road vehicle, motorcycle, and bicycle use in ecologically                DLNR     Implementer
12. sensitive areas, including coastal dunes and shoreline beaches. Identify TBD          DPP      Regulator
    and maintain recreational areas specifically designated for such use.                 DPR      Implementer
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
    Policies/Guidelines                                                          Program    Agency   Role
                                                                                 Hawaii
                                                                                 Coastal
                                                                                 Nonpoint
                                                                                 Pollution  DLNR     Regulator
    Protect nearshore coral reefs and other marine life from damaging activities Control    CZM      Regulator
13. such as soil erosion, nonpoint source pollution, dredging of coral reefs,    Program    Program  Regulator
    and alterations to nearshore water circulation.                              Management DPP      Advocate
                                                                                 Plan,      DDC
                                                                                 Storm
                                                                                 Drainage
                                                                                 Standards
    Establish access where justified by public demand, traditional use patterns,            DPR      Implementer
14. high quality recreational resources, or to circumvent barriers that exist    TBD        DDC      Implementer
    along the shoreline                                                                     DPP      Regulator
    Improve and expand public access to the shoreline at approximately 1/2-mile             DPR      Implementer
15. intervals with vehicular and bicycle parking and lateral access along the    TBD        DDC      Implementer
    shoreline.                                                                              DPP      Regulator
                                                                                 Hawaii
                                                                                 Coastal
    Implement the recommendations of the State of Hawai‘i’s Coastal Nonpoint Nonpoint   CZM
16. Pollution Control Program and utilize best management practices in           Pollution  Program  Implementer
    agricultural land use and operations to avoid or minimize chemical runoff    Control    DOH TMDL Regulator
    and other “nonpoint” contaminants in shoreline areas.                    Program    Program
                                                                                 Management
                                                                                 Plan
                                                                                 Coastal
17. Support research to determine causes of coastal erosion and identify         Erosion    DLNR     Implementer
    appropriate management strategies to avoid future erosion hazards.           Management DPP      Advocate
                                                                                 Plan
    Encourage interagency coordination and public/private cooperation in         Coastal
18. developing and implementing beach management plans, with an emphasis on      Erosion    DLNR     Implementer
    nonstructural approaches.                                                    Management DDC      Implementer
                                                                                 Plan
                                                                                 CZM        Office
    Discourage development or activities which result in beach loss, and         Program,   of       Implementer
19. encourage development practices or activities such as increased shoreline    Land Use   Planning Implementer
    setbacks which result in beach preservation or enhancement.                  Ordinance, DLNR     Regulator
                                                                                 Project    DPP
                                                                                 Review
    Require buildings along the shoreline to adhere to the City’s and Federal  Land Use
    Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) minimum building elevations and           Ordinance,
20. structural guidelines. In addition, adopt development standards that require Building   DPP      Regulator
    new structures to incorporate building styles compatible with coastal        Code,
    hazards such as coastal erosion, tsunami, and hurricane overwash.            Project
                                                                                 Review
    Discourage visual obstructions such as walls and fences along the coastal    Land Use   DLNR     Regulator
    highway to maintain and enhance existing panoramic views identified on the   Ordinance, DOT      Implementer
21. Open Space Map. Clear shrubs and vegetation on vacant State- and County-     Project    DPP      Regulator
    owned properties that would maintain views of the ocean from public roadways Review     DFM      Implementer
    along the shoreline.
    Implement active protection and management practices that preserve and
    enhance native and other resident fish and aquatic species populations and
22. habitats, including nearshore coral reefs. Efforts to enhance opportunities  TBD        DLNR     Implementer
    for commercial and recreational fishing should use management practices and
    techniques that sustain fish populations and habitat quality so as to
    maintain a quality aquatic environment for public enjoyment.
23. Place sand from channel, stream, and harbor mouth dredging projects on local TBD        USACE    Implementer
    beaches in accordance with Hawai‘i Revised Statutes Chapter 205A.                     DLNR     Implementer
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
    Policies/Guidelines                                                           Program    Agency     Role
Open Space and Natural Environment – Wetlands
    Preserve and maintain all North Shore wetlands and wildlife habitats. When                          Regulator/
    considering future activities/construction in the vicinity of biologically    Project    DLNR       Advocate
24. sensitive areas such as wetlands, the preferred sequence will be to: avoid    Review               Regulator/
    ecologically sensitive areas entirely; minimize potential project impacts;               DPP        Advocate
    and require mitigation that will offset the loss of resources.
    Support the restoration and protection of ‘Uko‘a Marsh. Protection can be            DLNR
25. achieved through fee acquisition, land banking, cooperative agreements with   TBD        Kamehameha Advocate
    public agencies and private landowners, conservation easements, or other                 Schools    Implementer
    strategies.
    Support efforts to restore Loko Ea Fishpond as an interactive, productive and
    functioning aquaculture resource. Promote the development of a cultural
    learning center providing both visitors and residents opportunities to
    experience the unique environment around Loko Ea Pond and ‘Uko‘a Marsh.              DLNR       Advocate
26. Possible activities may include tours of a working aquaculture farm, as well  TBD        Kamehameha Implementer
    as cultural and environmental education programs that teach traditional and              Schools
    modern aquaculture techniques and the history of the Pond and its adjacent
    areas. Walkways extending north to ‘Uko‘a Pond could provide opportunities
    for interpretive nature walks.
Open Space and Natural Environment – Natural Gulches, Streams, and Drainageways
                                                                                  Watershed
    Preserve the aesthetic and biological values of the natural gulches, streams, Management DLNR       Regulator/
    and drainageways as part of the North Shore’s open space system. Where      Plan,                Implementer
27. feasible, establish wildlife habitat protective buffer zones and/or setbacks  Land Use   BWS        Advocate
    along rivers, streams, and shoreline areas. Where possible, provide public    Ordinance, DPP        Regulator
    access to these open space and recreational resources.                        Project    DPR        Implementer
                                                                                  Review
    Minimize soil erosion, runoff of pesticides, fertilizers, and other nonpoint
    source contaminants into streams, wetlands, and marine habitats. In addition             DLNR       Regulator/
    to stream setback, utilize erosion control devices, integrated pest                                Implementer
28. management plans, and revegetation of disturbed areas. Incorporate erosion    TBD        DOA        Implementer
    control measures and best management practices, as recommended in the State              DPP        Regulator
    Coastal Nonpoint Pollution Control Program, to prevent pollution of wetlands,            DPR        Implementer
    streams, estuaries, and nearshore waters.
    Limit uses in these areas to conservation uses, compatible recreational uses
    such as hiking, traditional hunting, fishing, gathering, religious and        Land Use   DLNR       Regulator
29. cultural practices, and controlled diversion for agricultural purposes. Avoid Ordinance, LUC        Regulator
    development in ecologically sensitive areas; if activities are allowed,       Project    DPP        Regulator
    minimize impacts and implement mitigative measures that will fully offset any Review
    loss of resources.
                                                                                  Watershed
    Preserve and maintain the natural streams and drainageways within the         Management DLNR       Regulator
    developed areas by designating them as part of the open space system. To the  Plan,      BWS        Advocate
30. extent possible, limit any modifications to natural gulches and drainageways, Land Use   DPP        Regulator
    unless they are necessary for flood protection, to preserve water quality and Ordinance, DPR        Advocate
    protect aesthetic and biological resources.                                   Project
                                                                                  Review
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
    Policies/Guidelines   Program              Agency               Role
    If modifications are
    necessary, mitigate
    impacts on biological
    habitats by using
    stream-side
    vegetation, rip-rap   Land Use Ordinance,  DPP                  Regulator
31. boulder lining of     Storm Drainage       ENV                  Implementer
    steam banks, v-shaped Standards            DDC                  Implementer
    bottom channels to
    maintain a stream
    flow during low
    rainfall periods, and
    other designs to
    promote aeration.
    Integrate planned
    improvements to the
    North Shore drainage
    system into the                            DLNR                 Advocate
    regional open space   Storm Drainage       DPP                  Regulator
32. network by            Standards            ENV                  Implementer
    emphasizing the use                        DDC                  Implementer
    of retention basins
    and recreational
    access in the design
    approach.
Open Space and Natural Environment – Scenic Resources and Scenic Views
    Conduct planning with
    attention to
    preservation of
    natural open space,                        DLNR                 Regulator
33. protecting coastal    Project Review       DPP                  Regulator
    and mauka views from
    public roadways, and
    conserving important
    viewsheds.
    When view reductions
    may come from
    agricultural
    activities which
    intrude into
    viewplanes or
    otherwise degrade or                       DLNR                 Regulator
34. diminish scenic       Project Review       DPP                  Regulator/
    qualities, the                                                  Advocate
    protection of roadway
    views should be
    balanced with the
    operating
    requirements of
    agriculture.
    Evaluate the impact
    of land use proposals
    on the visual quality                      DLNR                 Regulator
35. of the landscape,     Project Review       DPP                  Regulator/
    including viewplane                                             Advocate
    and open space
    considerations.
    Site new antennas,
    telecommunication
    equipment, and
    alternative energy
    systems in
    appropriate locations                                           Regulator
36. to minimize their     Land Use Ordinance,  DLNR                 Regulator/
    impact on visual      Project Review       DPP                  Advocate
    resources. Encourage
    site clustering and
    techniques that blend
    the equipment into
    the natural
    landscape.
    Discourage the use
    and installation of
    overhead utility
    lines and poles.
    Strong consideration
    should be given to
    placing replacement
    and new transmission
    lines underground.
    Undergrounding
    utility lines will                         PUC                  Regulator
    enhance viewplanes    Utilities            HECO                 Implementer
37. and increase highway  Undergrounding Plan, Telecommunica- tions Implementer
    safety. Whenever      Project Review       providers             
    possible, relocate or                      DDC                  Implementer
    place underground                          DPP                  Advocate
    overhead utilities
    that significantly
    obstruct public
    views. If
    unavoidable, locate
    any future overhead
    utilities on the
    mauka side of the
    public coastal
    highway.
    Minimize the adverse
    effects of artificial
    lighting on wildlife
    and human health by
    balancing the need of
    outdoor lighting for
    night utility,        Land Use Ordinance,
38. security, and desire  Project Review       DPP                  Regulator
    for reasonable
    architectural
    expression with the
    need to conserve
    energy and protect
    the natural
    environment.
    Adopt outdoor night
    lighting standards
    that encourage
    efforts to minimize
39. glare and stray       Land Use Ordinance   DPP                  Implementer
    light, and reinforce
    the differences
    between urban and
    rural communities.
Open Space and Natural Environment – Utility Corridors and Greenways
    Provide sufficient
    easement width for
    the major trunk lines
    and transmission                           HECO                 Implementer
    lines for utility                          Telecommunica- tions Implementer
40. systems, when their   TBD                  providers             
    alignment is not                           DPP                  Advocate
    within a road right-                       DDC                  Advocate
    of-way, to permit the
    growth of trees
    within the easement.
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
    Policies/Guidelines                                                         Program     Agency         Role
    When overhead transmission lines are located within or adjacent to a road               HECO           Implementer
    right-of-way, there should be sufficient width to permit the growth of                  Telecommunica- Implementer
    trees adjacent to the transmission line, consistent with the applicable                 tions           
41. operations, maintenance, and safety requirements. The purpose of the        TBD         providers      Advocate
    landscaping is to divert attention from the overhead lines and, preferably,             DOT            Implementer
    obscure views of the overhead line from the travelway and adjacent                      DPP            Advocate
    residential areas.                                                                      DDC            Regulator
                                                                                            DTS
                                                                                            HECO           Implementer
                                                                                            Telecommunica- Implementer
    Permit the use of utility easements for pedestrian and bicycle routes.                  tions           
42. Encourage coordination between utility companies, landowners, pertinent     TBD         providers      Implementer
    agencies, and the community to ensure that safety, liability, and                       DOT            Advocate
    maintenance issues are adequately addressed.                                            DPP            Implementer
                                                                                            DDC            Implementer
                                                                                            DTS
                                                                                            HECO           Implementer
    Encourage the use of indigenous vegetation that is slow growing and thus                Telecommunica- Implementer
43. minimizes the need to use herbicides for vegetation control.                TBD         tions           
                                                                                            providers      Implementer
                                                                                            DDC
Agriculture – Agricultural Lands
                                                                                            PUC            Regulator/
    Promote technologies that support alternative energy sources, including                               Advocate
44. solar, wind, and wave power. Allow community and agency review of           TBD         HECO           Implementer/
    individual proposals to ensure compatibility and suitability.                                         Advocate
                                                                                            DPP            Regulator/
                                                                                                           Advocate
                                                                                            LUC            Regulator/
    Enforce permitted uses on agricultural lands to ensure that the use is      Code                      Advocate
45. contributing to meaningful and credible agricultural production on the same Enforcement DPP            Regulator/
    or nearby properties.                                                                                 Advocate
                                                                                            BFS            Advocate
    Cluster and locate dwellings near similar uses to preserve open space,      Land Use
46. maximize the use of productive agricultural lands, and reduce               Ordinance,  DPP            Regulator/
    infrastructure costs, when planned as part of an agricultural activity.     Project                    Advocate
                                                                                Review
    Design and site buildings and other facilities that are accessory to an     Land Use
47. agricultural operation to minimize the visual impact on nearby areas and    Ordinance,  DPP            Regulator/
    views from arterial and major collector roads.                              Project                    Advocate
                                                                                Review
    Adopt development standards and permitting procedures that simplify and     Land Use
48. streamline the permitting requirements for uses that support the growth of  Ordinance,  DPP            Implementer
    agriculture, including agricultural support facilities and agriculture-     Project
    based tourism.                                                              Review
                                                                                Land Use
49. Maintain adequate physical buffers between agricultural land uses and       Ordinance,  DPP            Regulator/
    surrounding land uses.                                                      Project                    Advocate
                                                                                Review
                                                                                Subdivision
50. Base any subdivision of agricultural lands on the most appropriately sized, Rules,      DPP            Regulator
    viable economic unit for agricultural production.                           Project
                                                                                Review
    Identify and implement – as an immediate high priority action item at the             DBEDT          Implementer
51. State and County levels – appropriate economic incentives designed to     TBD         DOA            Implementer
    promote and facilitate the growth of diversified agriculture.                           City OED       Implementer
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
    Policies/Guidelines                                                        Program     Agency   Role
    Support agricultural research and development activities targeted towards              DOA
52. increasing operational efficiencies, economic returns, and the effective   TBD         private  Implementer
    utilization of agricultural lands and supporting infrastructure, which                 entities Implementer
    enables sustainable usage of agricultural resources.
    Assist residents to develop skills in agriculture and related specialized              DOA      Implementer
53. industries so that residents can seek local employment in the area.        TBD         DCS      Advocate
                                                                                           UH       Implementer
    Support a mentor program for area teens to learn about agricultural                    DOE      Implementer
54. practices, economics, and business so that interest and commitment to      TBD         DCS      Implementer
    agriculture may continue on to future generations.                                     DPR      Advocate
                                                                                           UH       Advocate
    Support the expansion and diversification of aquaculture in the region,                DOA      Implementer
55. including the continued cleanup of the former Dillingham Quarry site in    TBD         UH       Advocate
    Mokulē‘ia and expansion of existing aquaculture operations in the area.             private  Implementer
                                                                                           entities
                                                                                           DOA      Implementer
56. Identify potential sites for aquaculture or mariculture parks.             TBD         private  Implementer
                                                                                           entities
    Encourage agricultural producers to develop Conservation Plans in                      DOA      Advocate
57. conjunction with the West O‘ahu Soil and Water Conservation District to  TBD         WO SWCD  Implementer
    manage and protect natural resources.                                                  private  Implementer
                                                                                           entities
58. Assist governmental agencies and landowners to upgrade and maintain        TBD         DFM      Advocate
    existing infrastructure networks, including roads and irrigation systems.              DDC      Advocate
                                                                               Wastewater  DOH      Advocate
59. Improve the quality of irrigation water from Lake Wilson.                  Facility    ENV      Implementer
                                                                               Plan
                                                                                           DOA
                                                                                           Dept. of Advocate
60. Work with the State to identify and protect Important Agricultural Lands   IAL, Act    Taxation Advocate
    (IAL) as defined by Act 183 (2005).                                        183 (2005)  DPP      Implementer
                                                                                           private  Implementer
                                                                                           entities
Agriculture – Agricultural Support Facilities
                                                                               Land Use
61. Develop agricultural support facilities in Waialua and Kawailoa.           Ordinance,  DPP      Regulator/
                                                                               Project              Advocate
                                                                               Review
                                                                               Land Use
    Ensure that permitted agricultural support facilities do not adversely     Ordinance,
62. affect agricultural production in the area or present health hazards or    Project     DPP      Regulator/
    nuisances to adjacent areas.                                               Review,              Advocate
                                                                               Code
                                                                               Enforcement
                                                                               Land Use
                                                                               Ordinance,
63. Require all agricultural support facilities in the region to maintain a    Project     DPP      Regulator/
    direct relationship to local agricultural production.                      Review,              Advocate
                                                                               Code
                                                                               Enforcement
                                                                               Land Use
64. Site and design facilities to minimize development impacts and maximize    Ordinance,  DPP      Regulator/
    the amount of farmland preserved.                                          Project              Advocate
                                                                               Review
Agriculture – Agriculture-Based Tourism
    Allow agricultural, recreational, and educational programs, and limited    Land Use
65. outdoor recreational or other uses if the activity is complementary to the Ordinance,  DPP      Regulator/
    primary agricultural use of the land and it does not interfere with the    Project              Advocate
    agricultural use of the site.                                              Review
    Monitor tourism-related activities conducted on agricultural lands to      Code
66. ensure that such activities do not adversely impact on-site or adjacent    Enforcement DPP      Implementer
    agricultural activities or other resources.
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
    Policies/Guidelines                                                           Program    Agency   Role
    Provide technical and business development support for visitor- related                  DBEDT    Implementer
67. proposals.                                                                    TBD        DOA      Implementer
                                                                                             City OED Implementer
    Identify and develop a convenient, suitable location in or near Hale‘iwa and/          private
68. or Waialua Town to establish a farmers’ market where farmers can market     TBD        entities Implementer
    products locally.
69. Identify and develop a permanent site in the Sunset Beach vicinity to promote TBD        private  Implementer
    the North Shore Country Market.                                                          entities
70. Develop an agricultural museum that includes a demonstration area showing     TBD        private  Implementer
    various crops in different stages of growth and processing.                              entities
    Develop Hale‘iwa Beach Park Mauka as a community-based park to expand activePark       DPR      CIP
71. recreational facilities for North Shore residents.                            Master     DDC      CIP
                                                                                  Plan
                                                                                  Park       DPR      CIP
72. Acquire Pu‘uiki Park for community use.                                     Master     DDC      CIP
                                                                                  Plan
    Expand Waialua District Park by acquiring agricultural land across Goodale    Park       DPR      CIP
73. Avenue.                                                                       Master     DDC      CIP
                                                                                  Plan
    If new residential development occurs, it should provide land for open space
    and recreation purposes at a minimum of two acres per 1,000 residents.        Project    DPP      Regulator/
74. Community-based parks (and associated service radius) include miniparks (1/   Review             Advocate
    2 mile), neighborhood parks (1/2 mile), community parks (one mile), and                  DPR      Implementer
    district parks (two miles).
    Locate community and neighborhood parks which emphasize intensive uses such   Park
75. as ball fields, playing courts, and community buildings in or adjacent to the Facilities DPR      Implementer
    neighborhoods or communities they serve, in order to maximize accessibility.  Functional DDC      Implementer
                                                                                  Plan
                                                                                  Park
76. Provide more youth activities, programs, and facilities on the North Shore.   Facilities DPR      Implementer
                                                                                  Functional
                                                                                  Plan
Parks and Recreation – Mauka Areas
    Expand public access to the upland or mauka areas for appropriate types of
    recreational activities that are low-impact, resource- sensitive and do not              DLNR     Implementer
77. compromise significant environmental resources and important agricultural     TBD        DPR      Implementer
    activities. These would include nature-based activities such as picnicking,              DDC      Implementer
    camping, hiking, mountain biking, hunting and the appreciation of scenic,
    natural, and cultural resources.
    Acquire and maintain public and/or private campgrounds and hiking trails in              DLNR     Implementer
78. the mauka areas.                                                              TBD        DPR      Implementer
                                                                                             DDC      Implementer
    Develop a system of mauka trails and paths to interconnect the major                     DLNR     Implementer
79. recreational areas of the North Shore for use by nonmotorized transportation  TBD        DPR      Implementer
    modes, e.g., walking, biking, horseback riding.                                          DDC      Implementer
    Coordinate planned private and public actions pertaining to trails and                   DLNR     Implementer
80. access. Identify historic trails and old government roads of cultural and     TBD        DPR      Implementer
    recreational value to the public.
                                                                                  Land Use
81. Limit new developments along the shoreline to parks and other compatible open Ordinance, DPP      Regulator/
    space uses.                                                                   Project             Advocate
                                                                                  Review
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
    Policies/Guidelines                                                            Program     Agency Role
Parks and Recreation – Beach Parks and Shoreline Areas
    Improve and expand public access to the shoreline at approximately one-half    Park
    mile intervals in rural areas of the North Shore, or at closer intervals where Facilities         Implementer
82. justified by public demand, traditional use patterns, the quality of the       Functional  DPR    Regulator/
    recreational resources, emergency services response time, or to bypass natural Plan,       DPP    Advocate
    barriers that impede public access to the shoreline.                           Project
                                                                                   Review
    Maintain and expand lateral access along the coast, especially in areas with   Park
83. high recreational or scenic value, including the shoreline along Sunset Beach  Facilities  DPR    Implementer
    and Kawailoa where access to popular sandy beaches and surf spots are in       Functional  DFM    Implementer
    demand.                                                                        Plan
                                                                                   Land Use
84. Limit uses within beach parks and nearshore ocean area uses to preserve        Ordinance,  DPP    Regulator
    overall environmental quality, rural character, scenic views, and open space.  Project
                                                                                   Review
    Provide adequate public parking and related support facilities (such as rest   Park
    rooms and showers) at popular beach parks, including lifeguard equipment       Facilities
85. storage facilities in anticipation of increased lifeguard services needed at   Functional  DPR    Implementer
    those parks. Improvements are planned for North Shore beach parks at Pu‘uiki Plan, Park  DDC    Implementer
    Beach, Laniākea, Chun’s Reef, Kawailoa, Leftovers, Uppers, Kahawai, Banzai  Master
    Rock, Kaunala, and Waiale‘e.                                                 Plans
    Acquire shoreline properties as opportunities arise or obtain public use       Park
86. easements and maintenance agreements with private landowners, especially lands Facilities  DPR    Implementer
    adjacent to existing public parks.                                             Functional  DFM    Implementer
                                                                                   Plan
Parks and Recreation – Maintenance and Management of Parks, Recreation Areas and Recreational Resources
                                                                                               DLNR   Advocate
87. Provide sufficient resources – including funding and manpower – to ensure tOperations  DPR    Implementer
    public facilities are adequately maintained.                                   Budget      DFM    Implementer
                                                                                               BFS    Implementer
                                                                                               DLNR   Implementer
88. Identify limitations on recreational resources and implement policies to       TBD         DPR    Implementer
    regulate and mitigate impacts to these resources.                                          DPP    Regulator/
                                                                                                      Advocate
89. Establish and enforce rules and regulations to mitigate conflicts among        Code        DLNR   Implementer
    recreational activities.                                                       Enforcement DPP    Implementer
    Engage public and private organizations in partnership with government         Facility    DLNR   Implementer
90. agencies to maintain recreational resources.                                   Management  DPR    Implementer
                                                                                   Plans
Parks and Recreation – Site Design of Recreational Facilities
    Incorporate natural and/or cultural features of the site and use landscape     Project     DPP    Implementer/
91. materials that are indigenous to the area, where feasible, into the design of  Review            Advocate
    recreation facilities and areas.                                                           DDC    Implementer
                                                                                   Land Use
92. Locate uses that generate high noise levels away from existing and planned     Ordinance,  DPP    Regulator/
    residential areas.                                                             Project            Advocate
                                                                                   Review
    Design and site improvements and landscaping to enhance the rural character    Project     DPP    Regulator/
93. and the aesthetic value of open space elements and natural resources.          Review            Advocate
                                                                                               DDC    Implementer
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
     Policies/Guidelines                                                          Program     Agency   Role
                                                                                  Project     DOT      Implementer
     Provide pedestrian and bicycle pathways from surrounding streets to parks,   Review,     DTS      Implementer
94.  to facilitate convenient access to the parks.                                Bicycle     DPP      Regulator/
                                                                                  Master Plan         Advocate
                                                                                              DDC      Implementer
                                                                                  Land Use
                                                                                  Ordinance,
                                                                                  Project
                                                                                  Review,     DLNR     Implementer
95.  Site parks and recreational attractions intended for regional or island-wide Park        DPP      Regulator/
     uses along or near regional roadways.                                        Facilities          Advocate
                                                                                  Functional  DPR      Implementer
                                                                                  Plan,
                                                                                  Park Master
                                                                                  Plans
     Minimize environmental impacts (such as siltation, pesticide, and fertilizer Project     DPP      Regulator/
     runoff) of recreational facilities and activities. Expansive recreational    Review,             Advocate
96.  facilities, such as community and regional parks, should comply with State   Facility    DPR      Implementer
     department of health guidelines related to ground and nearshore water        Maintenance private  Implementer
     quality.                                                                     Plans       entities
Parks and Recreation – Recreational Activities that Support the North Shore’s Economy
     Promote recreational and specialty events such as surf meets, fishing
     tournaments, bike tours, races, and other competitions which contribute to               City OED Advocate
97.  the North Shore’s economy. Such events shall meet State and City rules and TBD         private  Implementer
     regulations for park and ocean uses to avoid conflict with recreational                  entities
     uses.
     Manage impacts to the recreational resource and surrounding communities      Project     DOT      Regulator
98.  (such as noise, parking, traffic, etc.) associated with special events.      Review      DPR      Regulator
                                                                                              DTS      Regulator
     Promote instructional programs, training clinics, and other activities that              private
99.  cater to the health and recreation industry and which will not impact the    TBD         entities Implementer
     North Shore’s rural character.
100. Explore the potential of equestrian activities, such as trail rides and      TBD         private  Implementer
     riding adventures, as an adjunct to the area’s attractions.                            entities
     Support equine activities through a variety of means, including
     establishment of well-designed, safe riding trail networks linking                       DLNR
101. destinations in the rural communities and in the mauka areas that have long  TBD         private  Advocate
     been used by riders. Cooperative agreements for the development and                      entities Implementer
     maintenance of such networks should be forged through public-private
     partnerships.
Historic and Cultural Resources
     Implement in situ preservation and appropriate protection measures for sites Chapter 6E,
102. that have high preservation value because of their good condition or unique, HRS         DLNR     Regulator/
     historic, cultural, and archaeological features, and for which the State     TBD                  Advocate
     Historic Preservation Division has recommended such treatment.
     Consider the particular qualities of a site and its relationship to its                           Regulator/
     physical surroundings when determining the appropriate treatment for a site. Chapter 6E, DLNR     Advocate
103. Determine appropriate preservation measures, site boundaries and setbacks,   HRS                 Regulator/
     and development restrictions on a site-by- site basis in consultation with               DPP      Advocate
     the State Historic Preservation Division.
104. Include input from all pertinent community resources in the development of a TBD         DLNR     Implementer
     site preservation plan.                                                                  DPP      Advocate
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
     Policies/Guidelines         Program                Agency Role
     Include sight lines and
     view planes that are
105. significant to the original TBD                    DLNR   Regulator
     purpose and value of the
     site in criteria for
     adjacent use restrictions.
     Determine the
     appropriateness of public
     access on a site-by-site
     basis in consultation with                         DLNR   Regulator/
106. the State Historic          TBD                          Advocate
     Preservation Division,                             DPP    Regulator/
     Hawaiian cultural                                         Advocate
     organizations, and the
     owner of the land on which
     the site is located.
Residential Communities – Rural
     Utilize a traditional
     density of one unit per
     acre with lots ranging in
     size from one to three
     acres, although alternative
     layouts that promote        Land Use Ordinance,
107. clustering are encouraged.  Project Review         DPP    Regulator
     Limit buildings to two
     stories or 25 feet,
     although the height may
     vary according to required
     flood elevation, slope, and
     roof form.
     Ensure compatibility
     between country-district
108. uses and adjacent           Land Use Ordinance,    DPP    Regulator/
     agricultural lands, natural Project Review                Advocate
     resources, views, or
     cultural features.
Residential Communities – Rural Residential
     Densities range from five
     to eight units per acre, or
     up to 10 units per acre for
     alternative development
     options which enhance rural
     character and maximize
     consolidated, usable open
109. space. Lot sizes range from Land Use Ordinance,    DPP    Regulator/
     5,000 square feet to 10,000 Project Review                Advocate
     square feet, allowing the
     application of optional
     design standards. For
     smaller lot developments of
     less than 5,000 square
     feet, alternative
     clustering is encouraged.
     Use rural development
     standards to determine
     appropriate scale and
     character, smaller building
     footprints, greater         Land Use Ordinance,           Regulator/
110. setbacks, and more          Subdivision Rules,     DPP    Advocate
     landscaping (use of hedges  Project Review
     to create walls and grassed
     front yards, and rural
     roadways with no sidewalk,
     curbs, and gutters).
     Avoid monotonous rows of
     garages and driveways along
     neighborhood street         Land Use Ordinance,           Regulator/
111. frontages by employing      Subdivision Rules,     DPP    Advocate
     features such as varied     Project Review
     building setbacks and
     shared driveways.
     Plan and design new or
     infill housing development,
     as well as modifications to
     existing homes, to be       Land Use Ordinance,
112. generally compatible with   Subdivision Rules,     DPP    Regulator/
     the predominant form and    Project Review                Advocate
     character of existing homes
     on adjacent properties and
     with the neighborhood as a
     whole.
     Use plantation
     architectural features such
     as pitched roofs in varied
     forms, exterior colors and
     finishes, building
     orientation, floor plans,
     and architectural details
     to provide visual interest
113. and individual identity and Land Use Ordinance,    DPP    Regulator/
     accentuate the rural        Project Review                Advocate
     setting. In general,
     buildings are to be less
     than two stories or 25
     feet, although the height
     may vary in response to
     required flood elevation,
     slope, or other physical
     site constraints.
     Support affordable housing  Land Use Ordinance,    HPHA   Implementer/
     initiatives in areas        Zone Change Unilateral       Advocate
114. designated for new housing  Agreement,             DPP    Regulator
     development.                Housing Development    DCS    Implementer/
                                 Programs                      Advocate
Residential Communities – Low-Density Apartment
     Maintain the existing       Land Use Ordinance,
115. apartment district          Project Review         DPP    Regulator
     boundaries.
     Densities range from 10 to
     20 units per acre.          Land Use Ordinance,
116. Buildings should not be     Project Review         DPP    Regulator
     more than three stories or
     exceed 40 feet in height.
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
     Policies/Guidelines                                                             Program        Agency Role
     When possible, enhance the compatibility of development within apartment        Land Use              Regulator/
117. district uses with adjacent residential uses.                                   Ordinance,     DPP    Advocate
                                                                                     Project Review
     Employ building form, orientation, location of entries, and landscape screening Land Use              Regulator/
118. that reflects single-family residential character and provides greater privacy  Ordinance,     DPP    Advocate
     and individual identity for housing units.                                      Project Review
     Ensure compatibility of building scale, roof form, and the quality of materials Land Use              Regulator/
119. with those of adjacent residential areas.                                       Ordinance,     DPP    Advocate
                                                                                     Project Review
Residential Communities – Special Needs Housing
                                                                                     Land Use
     Locate special needs housing within or near Hale‘iwa or Waialua Towns within  Ordinance,
     close proximity to public transit, community services, and commercial           Project        HPHA   Implementer/
120. activities, but not so clustered together to create a significant change to     Review,              Advocate
     neighborhood character, especially as viewed along collector roads.             Housing        DPP    Regulator
                                                                                     Development
                                                                                     Programs
     As an exception to standard density situations, special needs housing may have
     densities of up to 20 units per acre, not including beds in skilled nursing     Land Use
121. facilities, if they consist primarily of smaller dwelling units with            Ordinance,     DPP    Regulator
     residential scale and character. Proposals for special needs housing should be  Project Review
     subject to community and agency review.
                                                                                     Land Use
122. Limit building heights in line with the region’s rural character.             Ordinance,     DPP    Regulator
                                                                                     Project Review
     Ensure compatibility of building scale, roof form, and materials with adjacent  Land Use              Regulator/
123. residential areas.                                                              Ordinance,     DPP    Advocate
                                                                                     Project Review
Commercial Areas – Hale‘iwa Country Town
     Limit building heights to two stories, and employ building design elements      Land Use
124. which reflect the architectural characteristics of the early 1900-period        Ordinance,     DPP    Regulator
     architecture identified in the Hale‘iwa Special District Design Guidelines.   Project Review
     Incorporate generous, functional, public, and open spaces reflective of the     Land Use              Regulator/
125. town’s agricultural heritage.                                                 Ordinance,     DPP    Advocate
                                                                                     Project Review
     Encourage commercial and related activities that are conducive to the
     pedestrian character to locate at the sidewalk level along Kamehameha Highway.  Land Use
126. Encourage less pedestrian-dependent and conducive activities (such as           Ordinance,     DPP    Regulator/
     manufacturing areas for products and compatible light industrial uses,          Project Review        Advocate
     residences, services, etc.) to locate behind or above commercial activities so
     as not to detract from the commercial retail character of Kamehameha Highway.
     Focus the town’s commercial core around a mix of compatible activities such as
     recreation, marine-related enterprises, farmers’ markets, historic and culturaLand Use              Regulator/
127. attractions, “clean” light industrial, small businesses, and offices, civic Ordinance,     DPP    Advocate
     governmental services, businesses, and retail activities for both residents and Project Review
     visitors.
     Upgrade drainage, wastewater, and water infrastructure within Hale‘iwa Town, aInfrastructure ENV    Implementer
128. needed.                                                                         Facility Plans DDC    Implementer
                                                                                                    BWS    Implementer
     Support home-based businesses and “Mom and Pop” type stores within the town Land Use              Regulator/
129. center.                                                                         Ordinance,     DPP    Advocate
                                                                                     Project Review
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
     Policies/Guidelines                                                           Program                         Agency   Role
     Concentrate new development near existing built areas emphasizing             Landscape Plan,                          Implementer
130. redevelopment and infill along Kamehameha Highway, makai of the Hale‘iwa    Land Use Ordinance,             DOT      Regulator/
     Joseph P. Leong Highway (Hale‘iwa Bypass Road). Provide adequate landscaped Project Review                  DPP      Advocate
     buffer adjacent to the bypass.
     Ensure that commercial uses adjoining the Kamehameha Highway corridor include Land Use Ordinance,                      Regulator/
131. support facilities such as parking lots and rest rooms that can adequately    Project Review                  DPP      Advocate
     accommodate the planned commercial activities.
     Support the expansion and enhancement of Hale‘iwa Harbor. If possible,
132. integrate the harbor’s attractions and facilities with commercial activitiesTBD                             DLNR     Implementer
     in Hale‘iwa Town.
     Expand indoor recreational and educational facilities and programs (museums,                                  DPR      Implementer
133. movie theater, gym, and cultural performance theaters) and historical,        TBD                             DDC      Implementer
     cultural, and arts programs to further enrich Hale‘iwa’s civic core.                                      private  Implementer
                                                                                                                   entities
     Provide improved, expanded, and continuous pedestrian walkways linking                                                 Implementer
     commercial establishments within Hale‘iwa, including connections between    Capital Improvement Program,    DOT      Advocate
134. farmers’ markets or other kinds of agricultural product and retail outlets, Project Review                  DTS      Regulator/
     and open space and environmental resources (such as beach parks, Hale‘iwa                                   DPP      Advocate
     Harbor, and Loko Ea Pond).
     Enhance the attractiveness and general landscaped open space character of the                                 DOT      Implementer
135. area by providing roadway improvements, street trees, streetlights, street    Capital Improvement Program,    DTS      Advocate
     furniture, and signage compatible with the rural character of Hale‘iwa Town.Project Review                  DPP      Regulator/
                                                                                                                            Advocate
136. Continue to use and support production of a visitors’ map showing attractionTBD                             private  Implementer
     and services in Hale‘iwa.                                                                                   entities
                                                                                   O‘ahu Regional Transportation OMPO     Advocate
137. Maintain Kamehameha Highway as a two-lane thoroughfare through Hale‘iwa TownPlan                            DOT      Implementer
                                                                                                                   DTS      Advocate
     Consolidate off-street parking to areas behind buildings, while retaining                                     DTS      Advocate
     existing on-street parking wherever possible and appropriate. As needed,      Capital Improvement Program,    DPP      Regulator/
138. parking should be rearranged to accommodate the pedestrian walkway system     Project Review                          Advocate
     along Kamehameha Highway.                                                                                     private  Implementer
                                                                                                                   entities
                                                                                                                   DOT      Implementer
139. Provide signage and other forms of orientation to help direct motorists       Capital Improvement Program,    DTS      Implementer
     through the town to major facilities and to off-street parking facilities.                                    DPP      Regulator/
                                                                                                                            Advocate
     Improve conditions for transit and bicycling through Hale‘iwa Town by       Capital Improvement Program,    DOT      Implementer
140. providing better designed and located bus stops, and a designated bike lane   Bicycle Master Plan             DTS      Implementer
     through the town.
     Enhance Weed Junction and Kamehameha Highway/Joseph P. Leong Junction, which                                  DOT      Implementer
141. are entry points to Hale‘iwa, in a manner which conveys their gateway       Capital Improvement Program     private  Implementer
     functions through appropriate design, landscaping, signage, and painting.                                     entities
     Encourage private and community-based initiatives to protect and enhance the                                  DLNR     Implementer
142. streams, wetlands, and other natural resources within Hale‘iwa Town. Retain TBD,                            ENV      Advocate
     the agricultural use adjacent to Weed Junction and the Preservation           Land Use Ordinance              DPP      Regulator/
     designation at Loko Ea Pond.                                                                                           Advocate
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
     Policies/Guidelines                                                            Program     Agency   Role
Commercial Areas – Waialua Country Town
                                                                                    Land Use
143. Ensure new developments are consistent with the Waialua Town Master Plan       Ordinance,  DPP      Regulator/
     recommendations for the town center.                                           Project              Advocate
                                                                                    Review
                                                                                    Land Use
                                                                                    Ordinance,  DPP      Regulator/
144. Integrate neighborhood parks and community-oriented recreation areas into new  Project             Advocate
     residential development.                                                       Review,     DPR      Implementer
                                                                                    Parks       DDC      Implementer
                                                                                    Master Plan
                                                                                    Land Use
145. Locate churches and public facilities in or near the town.                     Ordinance,  DPP      Regulator/
                                                                                    Project              Advocate
                                                                                    Review
     Retain large, readily accessible open spaces where outdoor recreation          Land Use
     facilities and neighborhood gardens create open vistas and green spaces.       Ordinance,           Regulator/
146. Retain open space entrances to the town core, including Weed Junction,         Project     DPP      Advocate
     Thompson Corner, and Waialua Beach Road, with Waialua Park as the entrance to  Review
     the country town district.
     Incorporate significant historic features from the plantation era and earlier
     periods into new developments, where feasible and appropriate. Existing        Land Use
     buildings of historical, cultural and/or architectural significance, such as   Ordinance,           Regulator/
147. the surviving elements of the Waialua Mill, should be preserved and maintained Project     DPP      Advocate
     through rehabilitation and adaptive reuse. Where feasible, adapt and highlight Review
     these structures as landmarks and icons representative of Waialua’s plantation
     town history.
     While buildings in the commercial core may be two stories in height, one-story Land Use
148. heights should be emphasized, in keeping with the area’s historic scale and tOrdinance,  DPP      Regulator/
     preserve the prominence and views of existing mill structures.                 Project              Advocate
                                                                                    Review
     New commercial buildings should be similar in architectural character, scale   Land Use
149. and materials to historic structures such as the former Waialua Sugar Company  Ordinance,  DPP      Regulator/
     offices and the Waialua Library.                                               Project              Advocate
                                                                                    Review
     Use design guidelines described in the Waialua Town Master Plan to promote and Land Use
     develop a special image for Waialua’s commercial and industrial core that    Ordinance,           Regulator/
150. reflects the town’s historic character and reinforces the town’s role as thProject     DPP      Advocate
     cultural and business center for Waialua. Encourage renovations and new        Review
     construction in accordance with the design guidelines.
                                                                                    Local
                                                                                    Circulation          Implementer
                                                                                    Plan,       DOT      Implementer
151. Provide pedestrian and bicycle access between surrounding residential          Bicycle     DTS      Implementer
     neighborhoods and Waialua’s commercial core.                                 Master      DDC      Regulator/
                                                                                    Plan,       DPP      Advocate
                                                                                    Project
                                                                                    Review
     Encourage infill development and new commercial development around Kealohanui  Land Use
152. Street to strengthen the town core and provide the critical mass necessary in  Ordinance,  DPP      Regulator/
     developing a healthy town center.                                              Project              Advocate
                                                                                    Review
                                                                                    Land Use
153. Direct new residential development outside but adjacent to the town core, as   Ordinance,  DPP      Regulator/
     generally indicated on the Land Use Map.                                       Project              Advocate
                                                                                    Review
                                                                                    Land Use    DPP      Regulator/
154. Locate industrial uses around the former sugar mill (see Section 3.7           Ordinance,  private  Advocate
     Industrial Areas for applicable policies and guidelines).                      Project     entities Implementer
                                                                                    Review
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
     Policies/Guidelines                                                         Program     Agency   Role
                                                                                 Land Use    DPP
155. Promote agricultural support activities at the agricultural support area    Ordinance,  private  Implementer
     adjacent to the mill site.                                                  Project     entities Implementer
                                                                                 Review
                                                                                 Land Use
                                                                                 Ordinance,
     New housing units should incorporate rural features (such as small building Project     HPHA     Implementer
156. footprints, larger setbacks, and more landscaping) and be sited and         Review,     DPP      Regulator
     organized to give a strong sense of community.                              Housing     DCS      Implementer
                                                                                 Development
                                                                                 Programs
157. Work with developers to establish housing programs that place high priority TBD         HPHA     Implementer
     on the needs of existing Waialua residents.                                             DCS      Implementer
     Provide job or entrepreneurial opportunities for area residents, and make               DCS      Implementer
158. available training programs for new jobs and businesses.                    TBD         private  Implementer
                                                                                             entities
     Promote historical and cultural attractions such as museums or activity
159. centers that illustrate the history of the community or feature current     TBD         private  Implementer
     agricultural operations near the mill site to encourage visitors to Waialua             entities
     Town.
160. Encourage computer-oriented, high technology business, health care, and     TBD         private  Implementer
     medical services to locate in Waialua.                                                  entities
     Provide for safe and pleasant pedestrian circulation along the storefronts. Land Use
     As it redevelops, emphasize pedestrian circulation along Kealohanui Street. Ordinance,           Regulator/
161. Retain a distinctive pedestrian-oriented commercial area for residents and  Project     DPP      Advocate
     visitors through the use of signage, street furniture, and street tree      Review
     plantings to encourage walking and biking.
162. Support production of a map showing services in Waialua and attractions in  TBD         private  Implementer
     the region, such as Ka‘ena Point and nearby beach parks.                              entities
163. Promote Kealohanui Street as a pedestrian-oriented promenade in Waialua.    Project     DPP      Regulator/
                                                                                 Review               Advocate
                                                                                 Project     DPP      Regulator/
     Link proposed pedestrian walkways to the Waialua Town core, including       Review,             Advocate
164. linkages to proposed farmers’ markets and other kinds of agricultural     Capital     DTS      Implementer
     product and retail outlets.                                                 Improvement DDC      Implementer
                                                                                 Program
                                                                                 Land Use
165. Provide convenient parking that should be landscaped and screened from      Ordinance,  DPP      Regulator/
     roadways.                                                                   Project              Advocate
                                                                                 Review
     Enhance Waialua Beach Road and Farrington Highway as gateways to Waialua    Capital     DOT      Implementer
166. Town through signage and landscaping.                                       Improvement DTS      Implementer
                                                                                 Program     DDC      Implementer
                                                                                 Land Use
                                                                                 Ordinance,  DPP      Regulator/
     Plant street trees to enhance the pedestrian experience and to create a     Project             Advocate
167. strong streetscape image. A detailed street tree and planting plan should   Review,     DTS      Implementer
     be developed and implemented as part of the right-of-way plan.              Capital     DDC      Implementer
                                                                                 Improvement
                                                                                 Program
Commercial Areas – Rural Community Commercial Center
     Limit rural community commercial centers to existing zoned areas between    Land Use
168. Pūpūkea Road and Pāhoe Road that currently serve the commercial needs of Ordinance,  DPP      Regulator
     residents and visitors.                                                     Project
                                                                                 Review
     Design rural community commercial centers to provide a compact and          Land Use
169. efficient organization of various commercial services which primarily serve Ordinance,  DPP      Regulator/
     the immediate community.                                                    Project              Advocate
                                                                                 Review
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
     Policies/Guidelines        Program                    Agency   Role
     Architectural scale and
     character should respect
     the surrounding natural
     features, and adjacent
170. residential areas.         Land Use Ordinance,        DPP      Regulator/
     Buildings should reflect a Project Review                      Advocate
     rural character compatible
     with surrounding open
     spaces and adjacent
     residential use.
171. Limit building heights to  Land Use Ordinance,        DPP      Regulator
     no more than two stories.  Project Review
     Locate parking behind
     buildings or provide
     parking that is
     landscaped. Parking should
     be visually screened from
     the street and adjacent
172. residential lots, by       Land Use Ordinance,        DPP      Regulator/
     planting a landscaped      Project Review                      Advocate
     screen of trees and hedges
     along street frontages and
     property lines and
     planting shade trees
     throughout the parking
     lot.
     Incorporate pedestrian and
     bicycle facilities,
173. including bicycle paths    Project Review             DPP      Regulator/
     and storage racks, and                                         Advocate
     off-site improvements such
     as crosswalks.
     Site bus stops in close    Bus Facilities and Systems
174. proximity to rural         Plans,                     DTS      Implementer
     community commercial       Project Review
     centers.
Commercial Areas – Country Stores
     Design country stores to
     be small-scale,
     freestanding, compact
     commercial facilities.
175. Prohibit country stores    Land Use Ordinance,        DPP      Regulator/
     from expanding to larger,  Project Review                      Advocate
     continuous commercial
     strip types of
     developments along
     arterial roads.
     Limit country stores
176. primarily to retail uses   Land Use Ordinance,        DPP      Regulator/
     that provide services to   Project Review                      Advocate
     the surrounding community.
     Architectural scale and
     character should respect
     the surrounding natural
     features, and adjacent
177. residential areas.         Land Use Ordinance,        DPP      Regulator/
     Buildings should reflect a Project Review                      Advocate
     rural character compatible
     with surrounding open
     spaces and adjacent
     residential uses.
178. Limit building heights to  Land Use Ordinance,        DPP      Regulator
     one story.                 Project Review
     Locate parking behind
     buildings, or provide
     parking that is
     landscaped. Parking should
     be visually screened from
     the street and adjacent
179. residential lots, by       Land Use Ordinance,        DPP      Regulator/
     planting a landscaped      Project Review                      Advocate
     screen of trees and hedges
     along street frontages and
     property lines and
     planting shade trees
     throughout the parking
     lot.
     Promote pedestrian and                                         Regulator/
180. bicycle access to country  Project Review             DPP      Advocate
     stores.
     Assist business owners
     with maintaining their                                City OED Advocate
181. financial stability to     TBD                        DBEDT    Advocate
     ensure that country stores
     remain in operation.
Industrial Areas
     Maintain adequate open
182. buffer zones between       Land Use Ordinance,        DPP      Regulator
     industrial activities and  Project Review
     residential districts.
     Minimize impacts (views,
     noise, and smells) and
     reduce the visibility of
     large building masses,
183. machinery elements,        Land Use Ordinance,        DPP      Regulator/
     parking, storage areas,    Project Review                      Advocate
     industrial equipment, and
     operation areas through
     proper site planning and
     landscape plantings.
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
     Policies/Guidelines                                                           Program        Agency Role
     Encourage uses which have few environmental impacts and those which           Land Use              Regulator/
184. complement the development scale of the surrounding community.                Ordinance,     DPP    Advocate
                                                                                   Project Review
     Allow low-impact, service industrial uses in enclosed buildings within the
     Hale‘iwa and Waialua Country Town Districts, so as not to detract from the  Land Use              Regulator/
185. pedestrian-oriented commercial/retail character of roadways, such as          Ordinance,     DPP    Advocate
     Kamehameha Highway, Kealohanui Street, and Goodale Avenue. These could        Project Review
     include manufacturing of clothing, arts and crafts, and surfboard repair.
     Building height and form should reflect the contexts of their sites. At the
     Waialua Mill site, they should follow guidelines reflecting the Mill’s image.
     In Hale‘iwa Town, they should follow the Hale‘iwa Special District Design Land Use
186. Guidelines. In Waialua Town, they should be consistent with guidelines of     Ordinance,     DPP    Regulator/
     this document and the Waialua Town Master Plan. In general, buildings should  Project Review        Advocate
     be designed to reflect the architectural character of Hale‘iwa or Waialua
     Town. Basic design principles, texture, construction materials, and colors
     should be compatible with the styles from the era and surrounding buildings.
     Where taller vertical structures are required as part of an industrial        Land Use
187. operation, site and design such structures to minimize impacts on view planes Ordinance,     DPP    Regulator/
     and reduce visibility from scenic vistas, public roadways, residential areas, Project Review        Advocate
     commercial areas, parks, and other significant open space areas.
     Limit industrial uses located along the shoreline to water-dependent          Land Use
188. activities (such as boat repair and maritime-related activities). Consider    Ordinance,     DPP    Regulator/
     environmental, visual, and noise impact during the permit application         Project Review        Advocate
     process.
                                                                                   Infrastructure ENV    Implementer
189. Maintain and upgrade infrastructure to support industrial facilities.         Facility Plans DDC    Implementer
                                                                                                  BWS    Implementer
Visitor Accommodations
     Allow visitor accommodations in Hale‘iwa Town to help restore and promote thLand Use              Regulator/
190. historic character of the town.                                               Ordinance,     DPP    Advocate
                                                                                   Project Review
     Design visitor accommodations to be consistent with the Hale‘iwa Special
     District Design Guidelines. In general, visitor accommodations should be      Land Use              Regulator/
191. small in scale (limited to two stories in height), be compatible with the     Ordinance,     DPP    Advocate
     architectural style and character of Hale‘iwa Town, and observe the same    Project Review
     building envelopes and design standards of adjacent buildings.
                                                                                   Capital
                                                                                   Improvement    DOT    Implementer
192. Provide convenient and safe access for pedestrians and vehicles.              Program,       DTS    Implementer
                                                                                   Land Use       DPP    Regulator
                                                                                   Ordinance,
                                                                                   Project Review
     Incorporate mixed use that caters to pedestrian activity located on the       Land Use              Regulator/
193. ground floor and visitor accommodations provided on the upper floor.          Ordinance,     DPP    Advocate
                                                                                   Project Review
     Provide adequate off-street parking which is landscaped and screened from     Land Use              Regulator/
194. public roadways.                                                              Ordinance,     DPP    Advocate
                                                                                   Project Review
     Address the streetscape and provide a setting that is conducive to pedestrian Land Use              Regulator/
195. activity, when located along pedestrian-oriented streets.                     Ordinance,     DPP    Advocate
                                                                                   Project Review
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
      Policies/Guidelines                                                    Program      Agency Role
      Ensure that existing and/or proposed infrastructure can adequately     Project             Regulator/
196.  accommodate the proposed development and associated visitor            Review       DPP    Advocate
      population.
                                                                             Land Use
197.  Minimize impacts (noise, traffic, parking, visual) on surrounding      Ordinance,   DPP    Regulator/
      activities/properties and from public roadways.                        Project             Advocate
                                                                             Review
                                                                             Land Use
      Prohibit the granting of new permits, including nonconforming use      Ordinance,          Regulator/
197A. certificates for B&B and vacation rental operations on the North       Project      DPP    Implementer
      Shore.                                                                 Review,
                                                                             TBD
Institutional Uses
                                                                             Park
      Colocate neighborhood or community parks with elementary or            Facilities   DPR    Implementer
198.  intermediate schools and coordinate design of facilities when          Functional   DDC    Implementer
      efficiencies in development and use of athletic, meeting, and parking  Plan,        DOE    Advocate
      facilities can be achieved.                                            Park Master
                                                                             Plans
199.  Colocate social, social service institutions, and other public service Facility     DDC    Implementer
      agencies to provide convenient one-stop services to the region.        Master Plans
Military
      Encourage all government agencies (City, State, and Federal) to        Conservation
200.  coordinate efforts with the U.S. military, especially where the Kahuku District     DLNR   Advocate
      and Kawailoa Training Areas overlap with environmentally sensitive     Management
      areas.                                                                 Plan
      Encourage the military to provide appropriate infrastructure services  Base Master  U.S.
201.  to support military uses on their lands and minimize any potential     Plan         Army   Implementer
      impacts to the region.
      Work with the military to allow use of Drum Road as an emergency                    U.S.   Implementer
202.  access bypass route during natural disasters or other emergency        TBD          Army   Implementer
      incidents.                                                                          DOT
      Encourage low-rise military facilities that support educational and    Base Master  U.S.
203.  recreational programs and are compatible with the region on military   Plan         Army   Implementer
      reservation lands such as Dillingham Airfield.
Transportation Systems
      Establish rural streetscape design and development standards within
      residential areas consistent with the rural character of the region.   Land Use
      Allow for rural elements that reduce the amount of impervious          Ordinance,          Implementer/
204.  surfaces, such as minimum pavement widths to support traffic demands   Subdivision  DPP    Regulator
      and emergency vehicle access, shared driveways, reduced parking        Rules
      requirements, more landscaping, and grassed swales as an alternative
      to sidewalks with curbs and gutters.
      Emphasize accessibility from residential streets to bus routes, parks, Land Use
205.  schools and commercial centers. Design roadways to facilitate the use  Ordinance,   DPP    Regulator
      of alternative transportation forms, including bicycle and pedestrian  Subdivision
      travel, and personal motorized devices.                                Rules
      Provide scenic lookout points to minimize hazards created by slower
206.  sight-seeing traffic and to enhance the appreciation of the region’s TBD          DOT    Implementer
      scenic resources.
      Provide appropriately sited and designed off-street parking areas at   Park Master  DPR    Implementer
207.  popular beach parks wherever feasible, including parking in support    Plans        DDC    Implementer
      parks mauka of the highway.
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
     Policies/Guidelines                                                          Program                                              Agency   Role
        Policies/Guidelines                                                       Program                                        Agency   Role
     Study the safety and feasibility of developing passing zones on Kamehameha
208. Highway and Kaukonahua Road from Hale‘iwa/Waialua to Wahiawā to reduce    TBD                                                  DOT      Implementer
     traffic delays due to slower moving vehicles, and to improve safety
     conditions.
     Provide safety improvements along Kaukonahua Road and Kamehameha Highway
209. from the Joseph P. Leong Highway (Hale‘iwa Bypass Road) to Wahiawā and    TBD                                                  DOT      Implementer
     beyond. Promote the development of emergency runaway vehicle ramps on
     Kamehameha Highway and Kaukonahua Road, from Wahiawā to Hale‘iwa/Waialua.
     Approve new residential and commercial development only if the State DOT and
210. the City DTS certify that adequate transportation access and services can be Project Review                                       DPP      Implementer
     provided.
                                                                                                                                       DLNR     Implementer
     Continue to include the daily visitor population that visits the North Shore                                                      DPR      Implementer
211. in determining allocations of resources and facilities for the North Shore.  Capital Improvement Program                          DFM      Implementer
                                                                                                                                       BFS      Implementer
                                                                                                                                       BWS      Implementer
     Promote the use of transportation demand management strategies, including
212. measures such as ride-sharing (car/van pooling), improved bus service and    TBD                                                  DOT      Implementer
     routes, the use of nonvehicular travel modes, modified work hours, and                                                            DTS      Implementer
     teleworking to reduce commutes.
213. Protect the natural resources of Ka‘ena Point from potentially damaging    Ka‘ena Point Natural Area Reserve Management Plan, DLNR     Implementer/
     vehicular traffic. Prohibit construction of a roadway around Ka‘ena Point. Land Use Ordinance                                            Advocate
                                                                                  Capital Improvement Program,                         DOT      Implementer
     Provide pedestrian-friendly walkways, off-street parking, bus pull- outs,    Land Use Ordinance,                                  DTS      Implementer
214. tour bus maneuvering areas, and drainage improvements in Hale‘iwa Town.    Project Review,                                      DPP      Regulator/
                                                                                  Facility Improvement Plans                                   Advocate
                                                                                                                                       DDC      Implementer
     Improve the main roadways within Hale‘iwa and Waialua Country Town Districts                                                    DOT      Implementer
215. with shade trees, landscaping, sidewalks, street furniture, and signage to   Capital Improvement Program, Project Review          DTS      Implementer
     promote pedestrian orientation within these country towns.                                                                        DPP      Regulator/
                                                                                                                                                Advocate
216. Create a regional pedestrian/bikeway system linking the parks, schools, and  Bicycle Master Plan                                  DOT      Implementer
     town centers in Hale‘iwa and Waialua with outlying communities.                                                                 DTS      Implementer
     Coordinate bikeway development with responsible State and City agencies and                                                       DOT      Implementer
217. private landowners to ensure that safety, liability, and a mixture of use    Bicycle Master Plan                                  DTS      Implementer
     issues are adequately addressed.
218. Locate bus stops to be convenient and accessible to residential areas and    Bus Facilities and Systems Plans,                    DTS      Implementer
     hubs of community activity.                                                  Project Review
219. Design bus shelters to provide weather protection for bus passengers and     Bus Facilities and Systems Plans,                    DTS      Implementer
     complement the natural setting.                                              Project Review
     Explore the possibility of a Historic Hale‘iwa Trolley as an alternative for                                                    DTS      Advocate
220. visitors to experience the North Shore.                                      TBD                                                  private  Implementer
                                                                                                                                       entities
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
     Policies/Guidelines                                                            Program        Agency Role
     Encourage the State to upgrade, maintain, and expand the boating facilities at Facility
221. Hale‘iwa Harbor to meet the needs of recreational and commercial fishing and Master Plan    DLNR   Implementer
     leisure boating activities.
     Maintain small aircraft, general aviation, and other recreational, commercial, Facility
222. or other military uses at Dillingham Airfield in cooperation with the U.S.     Master Plan    DOT    Implementer
     Army. As necessary, upgrade and maintain facilities to support airfield use.
     Limit uses in the vicinity of Dillingham Airfield to those that are compatible Land Use
223. with aircraft noise levels and overflights from the airfield.                  Ordinance,     DPP    Regulator
                                                                                    Project Review
     Identify and maintain former cane haul roads and other mauka roads to provide
     for the safe and quick evacuation of residents and the movement of emergency
     response personnel (e.g., fire, police, ambulance) in the event that the
     primary highways become impassable due to natural disasters or other emergency Capital
224. incidents. Investigate the use of the following for safety and emergency       Improvement    DTS    Implementer
     access: the cane haul road system mauka of Farrington Highway in Mokulē‘ia; Program        DEM    Implementer
     the roads connecting with Drum Road including cane haul road (Twin Bridge
     Road) in Hale‘iwa, Kawailoa Road, Ashley Road, Pūpūkea Road, and Motocross/
     Kaunala Road. COMSAT/Girl Scout Camp (Paumalū) Road does not connect with Drum
     Road and would be for evacuation use only.
Water Systems
225. Confirm that adequate potable and nonpotable water is available before         Project Review LUC    Regulator
     approving new residential or commercial development.                                          BWS    Implementer
     Ensure that State and private well development projects are integrated into    Watershed
226. and consistent with City water source development plans.                       Management     BWS    Implementer
                                                                                    Plan
     Support infrastructure improvements that provide for the efficient and secure  Water System
227. transmission and delivery of quality water.                                    Infrastructure BWS    Implementer
                                                                                    Plans
     Conserve the use of potable water by implementing the following measures, as   Building Code,
     feasible and appropriate: low-flush toilets, flow constrictors, rainwater      Project
     catchment, and other water conserving devices in commercial and residential    Review,        DPP    Regulator/
228. developments; indigenous, drought-tolerant plant material and drip irrigation  Water Supply         Advocate
     systems in landscaped areas; and reclaimed water for the irrigation of         System and     BWS    Advocate
     agricultural lands, parks, golf courses, and other landscaped areas where this Management     ENV    Implementer
     would not adversely affect potable groundwater supply or pose possible health  Plan
     and safety risks.
     Use reclaimed water for irrigation and other uses, where feasible, in          Water Supply
     accordance with the Guidelines for the Treatment and Use of Recycled Water     System and
     (May 15, 2002) by the State Department of Health and the No Pass Zone          Management     BWS    Advocate
229. established by the Board of Water Supply. A “wetlands” treatment system couPlan,          ENV    Implementer
     serve as wild bird refuges that could also be used as a picnicking area and/or Wastewater
     children’s fishing park.                                                     Management
                                                                                    Plan
     Replace outdated individual cesspools with septic tanks and individual         Water Quality  DOH    Advocate
230. wastewater systems. Consider public programs or policies to support private    Management     ENV    Advocate
     conversion efforts.                                                            Plan
231. Discourage new residential, commercial, or school uses in close proximity to   Zoning/Project DPP    Regulator/
     wastewater treatment facilities where odors may be objectionable.              Review                Advocate
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
     Policies/Guidelines  Program             Agency               Role
Wastewater Treatment
     Identify appropriate
     areas and
     technologies for
     future wastewater
232. facilities that      Wastewater          DOH                  Advocate
     maintain the rural   Management Plan     ENV                  Implementer
     character and are
     proportionate to
     future population
     projections.
     Do not permit an
     ocean outfall for    Wastewater          DOH                  Advocate
233. treated wastewater   Management Plan     ENV                  Implementer
     effluent in the
     North Shore area.
Electrical Systems
     Provide adequate and
234. reliable electrical  Utilities Plan      HECO                 Implementer
     service.
     Locate and design
     system elements such
     as electrical power
     facilities,
     substations,                             HECO                 Implementer
     communication sites, Utilities Plan,     Telecommunica- tions Implementer
235. and transmission     Project Review      providers             
     lines to avoid or                        DPP                  Regulator/
     mitigate any                                                  Advocate
     potential adverse
     impacts on scenic
     and natural
     resources.
     Locate powerlines                        HECO                 Implementer
236. underground or away  Utilities           Telecommunica- tions Implementer
     from Kamehameha      Undergrounding Plan providers             
     Highway.                                 DDC                  Implementer
     Promote the use of
     renewable energy                         HECO                 Implementer
237. sources and energy   Building Code       DPP                  Regulator/
     conservation                                                  Advocate
     measures.
Solid Waste Handling and Disposal
     Expand recycling
     collection
     facilities and
     services, and public
238. outreach and         Solid Waste         ENV                  Implementer
     education programs   Management Plan
     that promote
     responsible waste
     management and
     source reduction.
     Encourage recycling
     of regional green
     waste by
     establishing green
     waste facilities in  Solid Waste
239. an appropriate       Management Plan     ENV                  Implementer
     location, possibly
     integrated with or
     adjacent to the
     Kawailoa Refuse
     Transfer Station.
     Expand the use of
240. automated refuse     Solid Waste         ENV                  Implementer
     collection in        Management Plan
     residential areas.
     Monitor and regulate
241. illegal dumping and  Solid Waste         ENV                  Implementer
     littering            Management Plan
     activities.
     Require all
     structural and land
     improvements to
     provide adequate     Storm Drainage
242. drainage and flood   Standards,          DPP                  Regulator
     mitigation measures  Project Review
     to reduce storm
     runoff and flood
     hazard.
     Employ retention and
     detention methods
     that allow for the
     gradual release of
     stormwater. Where
     feasible, use open
     spaces, including
     parking lots,
     landscaped areas,    Storm Drainage
243. and parks, to detain Standards,          DPP                  Regulator
     or allow ground      Project Review
     infiltration of
     stormwater flows to
     reduce their volume,
     runoff rates, and
     the amounts of
     sediment and
     pollutants
     transported.
     Use detention/
     retention basins as                      DLNR                 Advocate
     passive recreational Storm Drainage      DPP                  Regulator
244. areas and to provide Standards           DFM                  Implementer
     recreational access                      private entities     Implementer
     for pedestrians and
     bicyclists.
     Retain natural
     gulches as flood
     plains and open
     space resources.     State Land Use Law, DLNR                 Implementer
245. Restrict development Land Use Ordinance  LUC                  Regulator
     within gulches, and                      DPP                  Regulator
     prohibit grading or
     other disturbance of
     gulch walls.
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
     Policies/Guidelines                                                         Program     Agency   Role
Drainage Systems
     Emphasize control and minimization of nonpoint source pollution in drainage             DLNR     Advocate
     system design. Where hardening of stream channels is unavoidable,           Storm       DPP      Regulator
246. improvements should protect habitat, maintain rural character and aesthetic Drainage    DDC      Implementer
     quality, and avoid degradation of coastline and of stream and nearshore     Standards   DFM      Implementer
     water quality, consistent with guidelines stated in Section 3.1.2.4.
     Design drainageways to control 100-year floods. Any future work performed   Grading
247. within the 100-year floodplain shall adhere to the requirements of the      Ordinance,  DPP      Regulator
     Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and meet all flood-proofing      Subdivision
     requirements.                                                               Rules
     Regularly maintain and clean drainageways and flood mitigation structures   Facility
248. of debris to ensure that they achieve the purpose for which they were       Maintenance DFM      Implementer
     designed.                                                                   Plan
     Employ best management practices to minimize runoff from existing           Storm       DLNR     Regulator/
249. conservation and agricultural land uses, and other areas that may generate  Drainage            Advocate
     sediment and debris.                                                        Standards   DOA      Advocate
                                                                                             ENV      Regulator
     Repair and maintain related agricultural irrigation systems and             Facility    DOA      Implementer
250. infrastructure.                                                             Maintenance private  Implementer
                                                                                 Plan        entities
251. Develop a drainage master plan for the Waialua watershed to address erosion TBD         DLNR     Advocate
     and flood protection concerns.                                                          ENV      Implementer
     Conduct public outreach and education programs that explain the potential   Hazard      DOH      Implementer
252. for flooding and efforts to minimize the effects of flooding.               Mitigation  DEM      Implementer
                                                                                 Plan
School Facilities
     Confirm the adequacy of school facilities before approving new residential
     development. Approve new residential developments only after the State      Project     LUC      Regulator
253. Department of Education confirms that adequate school facilities, either at Review      DOE      Advocate
     existing schools or at new school sites, will be available when new                     DPP      Regulator
     residential units are occupied.
254. Design DOE schools as community centers to facilitate community use after   School      DOE      Implementer
     school hours.                                                               Master Plan DPR      Advocate
     Colocate elementary and intermediate schools with parks, and coordinate     School      DOE      Implementer
     facility design with the State DOE and the City DPR whenever possible to    Master      DPP      Regulator/
255. avoid duplication of parking and athletic, recreation, and meeting          Plan,               Advocate
     facilities.                                                                 Project     DPR      Implementer
                                                                                 Review
     Coordinate the development and shared use of athletic facilities such as    Park Master DOE      Implementer
256. swimming pools, gymnasiums, and playfields and courts with the DOE where    Plan,       DPR      Implementer
     the joint use of such facilities would maximize use and reduce duplication  School      DDC      Advocate
     of function without compromising the schools’ athletic programs.          Master Plan
                                                                                 School      DOE      Implementer
     Promote facility design and construction that allows for school buildings   Master      DPP      Advocate
257. to be used as public hurricane shelters.                                    Plan,       DPR      Implementer
                                                                                 Project     DEM      Advocate
                                                                                 Review
     Support the State DOE’s request for school impact fees from developers of             LUC      Regulator/
258. residential projects to ensure that adequate school facilities are in place Project             Advocate
     at the time new residential units are occupied.                             Review      DPP      Regulator/
                                                                                                      Advocate
 
 Policies/Guidelines Program Agency Role
     Policies/Guidelines                                                          Program     Agency Role
Public Safety Facilities
                                                                                  Capital     DES    Implementer
259. Include visitor demands and needs when allocating public safety resources.   Improvement DEM    Implementer
                                                                                  Program     HFD    Implementer
                                                                                              HPD    Implementer
                                                                                              DES    Implementer
260. Sponsor public education programs to increase awareness about public safety  TBD         DEM    Implementer
     issues.                                                                                  HFD    Implementer
                                                                                              HPD    Implementer
     Identify, improve, and service transportation networks (via signage, traffic Capital     DOT    Implementer
261. control personnel, and equipment) to ensure efficient evacuee movement.      Improvement DTS    Implementer
                                                                                  Program     DEM    Advocate
     Support highway improvements that would reduce emergency vehicle response    Capital     DOT    Implementer
262. times and facilitate emergency personnel movement through traffic.           Improvement DTS    Advocate
                                                                                  Program
263. Expand lifeguard services at beaches with high visitor demands, such as      TBD         DES    Implementer
     Laniākea, Chun’s Reef, and Velzyland.
264. Confirm the availability of adequate police and fire protection before       Project     DPP    Regulator
     approving new development.                                                   Review
     Increase police presence, including car and bicycle patrols and community
265. policing efforts, especially in high-theft areas such as beach parks.        TBD         HPD    Implementer
     Support the availability of adequate staffing and funding to enable this.
266. Establish facilities which police officers could use as a local base of      TBD         HPD    Implementer
     operations.
     Support the physical improvements and infrastructure upgrades needed to      Facility
267. ensure adequate fire protection.                                             Master      HFD    Implementer
                                                                                  Plans
                                                                                  Building
268. Use crime-preventive principles in the planning and design of communities,   Code,       DPP    Regulator
     open spaces, circulation networks, and buildings.                            Project
                                                                                  Review
269. Design new public buildings such as schools and recreation centers to serve  Project     DDC    Implementer
     a secondary function as an emergency shelter.                                Review
     Encourage colocation of antennae; towers should host the facilities of more  Land Use
270. than one service provider to minimize their proliferation and reduce visual  Ordinance,  DPP    Regulator
     impacts.                                                                     Project     LUC    Regulator
                                                                                  Review
     Mount antennae onto existing buildings or structures so that public scenic   Land Use
271. views and open spaces will not be negatively affected. However, except for   Ordinance,  DPP    Regulator
     the occupant’s personal use, antennae on single-family dwelling roofs in   Project     LUC    Regulator
     residential districts are not appropriate.                                   Review
     Use “stealth” technology (e.g., towers disguised as trees) especially on Land Use
272. free-standing antenna towers in order to blend in with the surrounding       Ordinance,  DPP    Regulator
     environment and minimize visual impacts.                                     Project     LUC    Regulator
                                                                                  Review
 
 
APPENDIX A: OPEN SPACE, LAND USE, AND PUBLIC FACILITIES MAPS
The North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan includes three colored maps:
   ·   Open Space Map
   ·   Land Use Map
   ·   Public Facilities Map
These maps illustrate the North Shore’s long-range vision for the future and
the major land use, open space, and public facility policies that are
articulated in the plan. In examining them, the reader should keep in mind
that:
   ·   These maps are general and conceptual.
   ·   They are illustrative of the plan’s policy statements, presented in the
text of this report.
These policy statements, which appear in the preceding chapters, are considered
to be the most important elements of the plan. The maps are considered
illustrations of the policies. However, it is recognized that the maps may be
more accessible and more interesting than the written policies. This section of
the plan, therefore, presents a brief explanation of the contents of each of
these maps.
Elements common to each of the three maps include the Community Growth Boundary
and four land use designations: “Preservation,” “Agriculture,” “Parks,” and
“Military.” Descriptions of each are presented below. Common information
particular to each map is presented under each map topic.
These maps are not parcel specific, but illustrate generalized categories or
groups of land uses within the region. Because they are not parcel specific,
the lines depicted by these boundaries do not indicate precise or abrupt
demarcations. Rather, the geographic extent or actual magnitude of permissible
or appropriate uses depicted within these boundaries should be evaluated and
determined in concert with relevant sections of the plan’s text and specific
site characteristics. This is particularly true of land use designations within
a community boundary.
The extent or magnitude of land uses depicted within a boundary may be limited
by actual on-site or adjacent conditions such as slope or other topographic
constraints, soil type, existing drainageways, flood or rockfall hazard, or the
presence of natural or cultural resources. Conversely, the actual appropriate
extent of uses prescribed by a specific boundary may extend beyond the
indicated boundary by virtue of appropriate physical characteristics,
compatibility with adjacent land uses, and physical accessibility, including
access to the site from existing roads. In such cases, the physical extent of
those uses would be defined by actual site constraints similar to those which
would constrain uses within those boundaries.
COMMUNITY GROWTH BOUNDARY
The Community Growth Boundary defines, protects, and contains the intended
extent of the “built-up” or “settled” areas of rural communities. Its purposes
are to provide adequate lands to support established communities, to protect
such communities from more intense form of development, and to preserve lands
outside the boundary for agriculture or other resource or open space values.
Areas within this boundary characteristically consist of relatively small,
dispersed residential communities and towns. In the North Shore Sustainable
Communities Plan area, the Community Growth Boundary includes the built areas
of Mokulē‘ia, Waialua, Hale‘iwa, Kawailoa, and Sunset Beach/Pūpūkea.
At the Mokulē‘ia, Waialua, and Hale‘iwa communities, the Community Growth
Boundary, from west to east, generally follows Crozier Drive and a portion of
Waialua Beach Road encompassing the residential uses of Mokulē‘ia and Waialua.
Thereafter, it follows Farrington Highway to Thompson Corner, encompassing the
adjoining AG-2 General Agricultural District and the Hukilau Loop residential
subdivision. Thereafter, the boundary follows Kaukonahua Road to Weed Junction,
to Kamehameha Highway, the Joseph P. Leong Highway, and then follows the
Hale‘iwa Special District boundary at Hale‘iwa Beach Park.
In the area of Kawailoa, from west to east, the Community Growth Boundary
generally encompasses the residential uses at Papailoa Road, then follows
Kamehameha Highway to and encompassing the residential uses at Punalau Place
and Ikuwai Place, and then along the toe of the slope and including the
residential zoning district mauka of Kamehameha Highway. Thereafter, it follows
Kamehameha Highway and encompasses the residential zoning district at ‘Ili‘ohu
Place.
At the Sunset Beach and Pūpūkea communities, from west to east, the Community
Growth Boundary includes the residential uses north of Waimea Bay, then mauka,
encompassing the Pūpūkea highlands community, then makai to and following the
toe of slope. Thereafter, the Community Growth Boundary encompasses the rural
and residential zoning districts from Sunset Beach to Kaunala Beach.
PRESERVATION
Preservation lands include those lands not valued primarily for agriculture,
but which form an important part of a region’s open space fabric. They possess
natural, cultural, or scenic resource values, and include important wildlife
habitat, cultural sites, significant landforms, views, or hazard areas. They
include the following types of land:
   ·   Land necessary for protecting watersheds, water resources, and water
supplies.
   ·   Lands necessary for the conservation, preservation, and enhancement of
sites with scenic, historic, archaeological, or ecologic significance.
   ·   Lands necessary for providing and preserving parklands, wilderness, and
beach reserves, and for conserving natural ecosystems of endemic plants, fish,
and wildlife, for forestry, and other related activities to these uses.
   ·   Lands having an elevation below the maximum inland line of the zone of
wave action, and marine waters, fishponds, and tide pools of O‘ahu, unless
otherwise designated on the development plan land use map.
   ·   All offshore and outlying islands of O‘ahu unless otherwise classified.
   ·   Lands with topography, soils, climate, or other related environmental
factors that may not be normally adaptable or presently needed for urban,
rural, or agricultural use.
   ·   Lands with general slopes of 20 percent or more which provide for open
space amenities or scenic values, or both.
   ·   Lands susceptible to floods and soil erosion, lands undergoing major
erosion damage and requiring corrective attention by the State or Federal
Government, and lands necessary to the protection of the health, safety, and
welfare of the public by reason of soil instability or the lands’
susceptibility to landslides and/or inundation by tsunami and flooding.
   ·   Lands used for national, State or City parks.
   ·   Lands suitable for growing of commercial timber, grazing, hunting, and
recreation uses, including facilities accessory to such uses when said
facilities are compatible with the natural physical environment.
AGRICULTURE
Lands with agricultural value by virtue of current agricultural use or high
value for future agricultural use, including those areas identified as “Prime,”
“Unique,” or “Other” Important lands on the Agricultural Lands Important to the
State of Hawai‘i (ALISH) maps. “Agriculture” includes lands suitable for crop
growing, grazing and livestock raising, flower cultivation, nurseries,
orchards, aquaculture, or similar activities.
Under the State Constitution, the State is to identify important agricultural
lands (IAL). Once identified, these lands cannot be rezoned except, under a
“super majority” vote. To date, IAL lands have not been identified. In 2005,
Act 183 was adopted to address this mandate. It established a two-step process:
first, incentives to assure the long-term use and protection of IAL. Second,
with adequate state funding, the counties would prepare maps identifying IAL
lands to be adopted by the State Land Use Commission. Act 233, enacted in 2008,
adopted the incentive programs. To date, no state funding has been appropriated
to the counties for the mapping. Lands identified for agricultural purposes by
this SCP can serve as the basis for the county mapping process.
PARK
Public and private parks and recreational facilities, including beach parks,
playgrounds, playfields, and district parks.
MILITARY
Lands for military and military support purposes, excluding military-owned
lands that are leased or licensed to others on a full-time basis for
nonmilitary uses.
A.1   OPEN SPACE MAP
The Open Space Map is intended to illustrate the region’s major open space
patterns and resources as outlined in Chapter 3. It highlights major open space
elements and resources, including agricultural and preservation lands, major
parks, important “panoramic” views, natural stream corridors and drainageways,
and rural communities within the Community Growth Boundary.
A.2   LAND USE MAP
This map illustrates the desired long-range land use pattern for the North
Shore Sustainable Communities Plan area. It supports the plan’s vision and
policies. The map includes the following terms:
A.2.1   Rural
Single-family homes on large lots. On-site development is characteristically
low-intensity, typically consisting of single-family detached home, ancillary
structures, if necessary, low site coverage, nonurban development standards,
and a large predominance of landscaped open space.
A.2.2   Rural Residential
Single-family homes in country settings on medium-sized to large lots, on which
rural development standards are employed and provisions for pedestrian
circulation, landscaping, and open space are emphasized. “Rural Residential”
also includes minor pockets of existing apartment areas in Mokulē‘ia, and
future apartment districts adjacent to Waialua and Hale‘iwa town centers. These
apartment lands are not mapped, but are cited and elaborated in the text.
A.2.3   Rural Community Commercial Center
A small cluster of small-scale, low-rise commercial, and service businesses,
which serve primarily the immediate community. Its primary visual appearance is
rural. Buildings are generally compatible in scale and form with adjacent
residential areas.
A.2.4   Country Town
A small-scale, low-rise, mixed-use center of commerce and community activity in
rural character and setting in which principal establishments are oriented to
the street. Land use mixtures may include retail, office, and dining
establishments, compatible service businesses and light industry, and
residential uses. Commercial activity is concentrated along street frontages in
typically “Mainstreet” settings.
A.2.5   Industrial
Facilities for processing, construction, manufacturing, transportation,
wholesaling, storage, or similar economic activities, and accessory or
supporting facilities which directly enhance their viability.
A.3   PUBLIC FACILITIES MAP
The Public Facilities Map illustrates the major infrastructure needed to
implement the vision for the North Shore. It shows the location of existing
facilities and conceptual location for some of the future required
infrastructure facilities.
It is not meant to be amended between revisions of the Plan and should not be
confused with the Public Infrastructure Map (PIM) used in the Capital
Improvement Program budget process. Major public facilities which are to be
funded through the City Capital Improvement Program budget appropriation must
be shown on the PIM. The PIM is not part of the North Shore Sustainable
Communities Plan, and is adopted and amended by resolution.
Projects which are not listed in the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan
or not shown on the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan maps can still be
added to the PIM by Council resolution if the Council finds them to be
consistent with the vision and policies of the North Shore Sustainable
Communities Plan.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8635.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8633.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8631.png]
 
Notes
2  Department of Planning and Permitting. “Socio-Economic Projections, Year 2035.”
   September 2009.
3  Kamehameha Schools Bishop Estate. North Shore Plan. 2008.
   The most widely quoted definition of sustainable development is from the United
   Nations Brundtland Commission (1987): “development that meets the needs of the
   present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own
4  needs.” It recognizes that development can be broken into three equivalent parts
   (environmental, economic and sociopolitical sustainability) and is based on
   development that balances economic prosperity with the integrity of natural
   ecosystems and social equity.
   As proposed, the Lihi Lani subdivision involved 1,129 acres of land in Pūpūkea-
   Paumalū mauka of Kamehameha Highway behind Sunset Beach Elementary School. The
5  proposed development called for a golf course, equestrian facility, 300 new homes on
   one- to three-acre lots, and related infrastructure systems, including a sewage
   treatment plant.
   The Forest Reserve System was created by the Territorial Government of Hawai‘i
6  through Act 44 on April 25, 1903. Management of the Forest Reserve System is guided
   by the Hawai‘i State Constitution, Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (Chapter 183) and
   associated Hawai‘i Administrative Rules (Chapter 104).
   The Natural Area Reserve System was established by the Hawai‘i State Legislature in
7  1970. Management of the Forest Reserve System is guided by the Hawai‘i State
   Constitution, Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (Chapter 195) and associated Hawai‘i
   Administrative Rules (Chapter 209).
8  Honolulu Board of Realtors. “Annual Residential Resales Data for O‘ahu 1985 - 2007.”
9  Honolulu Board of Realtors. “2009 2nd Quarter Residential Resales Statistics.”
   Released July 1 2008.
   City and County of Honolulu Department of Planning and Permitting. “2009 Affordable
10 Housing Income Limits and Maximum Prices by Income Groups and Household Size.” April
   15, 2009 Memorandum.
   It is assumed that only a small fraction of the 1,504 potential units will be built
   out, as development occurs at different rates in response to changing market
   conditions and housing development on the North Shore is constrained by
11 infrastructure adequacy. In the unlikely event that all potential units are
   constructed, the North Shore’s population for the year 2035 will be more than 1.8
   percent of O‘ahu’s island-wide population, which is above the General Plan’s
   population distribution policy for the North Shore (1.7 percent of the island-wide
   population).
12 Hibbard, Don. Designing Paradise: The Allure of the Hawaiian Resort. New York, 2006.
   State of Hawai‘i Department of Business, Economic Development and Tourism. “Visitor
13 Behavior and Satisfaction O‘ahu’s North Shore: A “Tack On” Survey to the 3rd Quarter
   2005 and 4th Quarter 2003 Visitor Satisfaction Survey.”
   The 2005 Annual Visitor Research Report prepared by the State of Hawai‘i Department
14 of Business, Economic Development and Tourism indicates 4,731,843 visitors to O‘ahu
   in 2005 (Table 37).
   City and County of Honolulu Department of Planning and Permitting. “2000-2030
15 Socioeconomic Projections in 5 Year Intervals by Development Plan Area.” November
   2007.
16 OMPO’s Regional Transportation Plan (ORTP) is currently being updated to the year
   2035. OMPO expects completion of the plan in 2011.
17 C.W. Windstedt was given a contract in 1929 to build Kamehameha Highway from Waimea
   Bay to Kahuku.
   It should be noted that although projects are identified, individually, they may not
18 necessarily be pursued because the actual phase or time frame of a project is not
   strictly defined and may change for various reasons.
19 U.S. Geological Survey. “Groundwater in Hawai‘i: Fact Sheet 126-00.” Prepared by
   Gingerich, S.B. and Oki, D.S.
20 City and County of Honolulu Board of Water Supply. O‘ahu Water Management Plan
   Overview.
21 City and County of Honolulu. Final Environmental Impact Statement for Supplemental
   Waialua-Hale‘iwa Wastewater Facility Plan. 1996.
ARTICLE 9: WAIANAE
Sections
   
24-9.1   Definitions
   
24-9.2   Applicability and intent
   
24-9.3   Adoption of the Waianae sustainable communities plan
   
24-9.4   Existing zoning and subdivision ordinances, approvals, and
applications
   
24-9.5   Consistency
   
24-9.6   Review of development and other applications
   
24-9.7   Zone change applications
   
24-9.8   Annual capital improvement program review
   
24-9.9   Five-year review
   
24-9.10   Authority
   
24-9.11   Severability
   
24-9.12   Conflicting provisions
§ 24-9.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Charter. The Revised Charter of the City and County of Honolulu 1973, as
amended.
City. The City and County of Honolulu.
Council. The city council of the City and County of Honolulu.
County. The City and County of Honolulu.
Department or Department of Planning and Permitting. The department of planning
and permitting of the City and County of Honolulu.
Development. Any public improvement project, or any public or private project
requiring a zoning map amendment.
Development Plan or Sustainable Communities Plan. A plan document for a given
geographic area which consists of conceptual schemes for implementing and
accomplishing the development objectives and policies of the general plan for
the several parts of the City and County of Honolulu.
Director. The director of planning and permitting.
Environmental Assessment or EA. A written evaluation prepared in compliance
with the environmental council’s procedural rules implementing HRS Chapter 343
to determine whether an action may have a significant environmental effect.
Environmental Impact Statement or EIS. An informational document prepared in
compliance with the environmental council’s procedural rules implementing HRS
Chapter 343; and which discloses the environmental effects of a proposed
action, effects of a proposed action on the economic and social welfare of the
community and State, effects of the economic activities arising out of the
proposed action, measures proposed to minimize adverse effects, and
alternatives to the action and their environmental effects.
Finding of No Significant Impact or FONSI. A determination based on an
environmental assessment that the subject action will not have a significant
effect and, therefore, will not require the preparation of an environmental
impact statement.
Functional Plan. The public facility and infrastructure plans prepared by
public agencies to further implement the vision, policies and guidelines set
forth in the Waianae SCP.
General Plan. The general plan of the City and County of Honolulu as defined by
Charter § 6-1508.
Hawaii Revised Statutes or HRS. The Hawaii Revised Statutes, as amended.
Planning Commission. The planning commission of the City and County of
Honolulu.
Project Master Plan. A conceptual plan that covers all phases of a development
project. The “project master plan” describes how the project conforms to the
vision for Waianae, and the relevant policies and guidelines for the site, the
surrounding lands, and the region.
Revised Ordinances of Honolulu or ROH. The Revised Ordinances of Honolulu, as
amended.
Significant Zone Change. A zone change which involves at least one of the
following:
(1)   Changes in zoning of 10 or more acres of land to any zoning district or
combination of zoning districts, excluding preservation or agricultural zoning
districts;
(2)   Any change in zoning of more than five acres to an apartment, resort,
commercial, industrial, or mixed use zoning district; or
(3)   Any development which would have a major social, environmental, or policy
impact, or major cumulative impacts due to a series of applications in the same
area.
Special Area. A designated area within the Waianae Sustainable Communities Plan
area that requires more detailed planning efforts beyond what is contained in
the Waianae SCP.
Special Area Plan. A plan for a special area.
Unilateral Agreement. A conditional zoning agreement made pursuant to §
21-2.80 or any predecessor provision that imposes conditions on a landowner or
developer’s use of the property at the time of the enactment of an ordinance
for a zoning change.
Vision. The future outlook for the Waianae region extending out to the year
2035 and beyond that entails the planning and development of town centers and
community gathering places, improvements of the transportation systems,
restricting coastal urban, suburban, and resort development makai of Farrington
Highway, preservation and restoration of streams, and protection of cultural
sites and landscapes.
Waianae SCP. The Waianae Sustainable Communities Plan attached hereto as
Exhibit A and made a part hereof.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.1) (Ord. 12-3)
§ 24-9.2 Applicability and intent.
(a)   The Waianae SCP area encompasses the leeward coast of Oahu from Nanakuli
to Kaena Point and is enclosed by the Leeward slopes of the Waianae mountain
range.
(b)   It is the intent of the Waianae SCP to provide a guide for orderly and
coordinated public and private sector development in a manner that is
consistent with applicable General Plan provisions, including the designation
of Waianae as a rural area and the agricultural land along the Waianae coast
for farming, livestock production, and other types of diversified agriculture.
(c)   This article and the Waianae SCP are not regulatory. Rather, they are
established with the explicit intent of providing a coherent vision to guide
all new public and private sector development within Waianae. This article
shall guide development for Waianae, public investment in infrastructure,
zoning and other regulatory procedures, and the preparation of the city’s
annual capital improvement program budget.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.2) (Ord. 12-3)
§ 24-9.3 Adoption of the Waianae sustainable communities plan.
(a)   This article is adopted pursuant to Charter § 6-1509 and provides a self-
contained development plan document for Waianae. Upon enactment of this
article, all proposed developments will be evaluated against how well they
fulfill the vision for Waianae enunciated in the Waianae SCP and how closely
they meet the policies and guidelines selected to implement that vision.
(b)   The plan entitled, “Waianae Sustainable Communities Plan,” attached as
Exhibit A is adopted by reference and made a part of
Chapter 24, Article 9, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu.
(c)   
Chapter 24, Article 1, entitled “Development Plan Common Provisions,” in its
entirety is no longer applicable to the Waianae SCP area. This article and the
Waianae SCP, as adopted by reference by this ordinance, supersede any and all
common provisions previously applicable to the Waianae area.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.3) (Ord. 12-3)
§ 24-9.4 Existing zoning and subdivision ordinances, approvals, and
applications.
(a)   All existing subdivisions and zoning approved before March 2, 2012* for
projects, including but not limited to those subject to unilateral agreements,
shall continue to remain in effect following the enactment of this ordinance.
(b)   Subdivision and zoning ordinances applicable to the Waianae SCP area
enacted before March 2, 2012* shall continue to regulate the use of land within
demarcated zones of the Waianae SCP area until such time as the subdivision and
zoning ordinances may be amended to be consistent with the revised Waianae SCP.
(c)   Notwithstanding adoption of the revised Waianae SCP, applications for
subdivision actions and land use permits accepted by the department for
processing before March 2, 2012* shall continue to be subject only to
applicable ordinances and rules in effect when the application is accepted for
processing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.4) (Ord. 12-3)
Editor’s note:
   * “March 2, 2012” is substituted for “the effective date of this ordinance.”
§ 24-9.5 Consistency.
(a)   The performance of prescribed powers, duties, and functions by all city
agencies shall conform to and implement the policies and provisions of this
ordinance. Pursuant to Charter § 6-1511.3, public improvement projects and
subdivision and zoning ordinances shall be consistent with the Waianae SCP, as
adopted.
(b)   Any questions of interpretation regarding the consistency of a proposed
development with the Waianae SCP and the objectives and policies of the general
plan shall ultimately be resolved by the Council.
(c)   In determining whether a proposed development is consistent with the
Waianae SCP, the responsible agency shall primarily take into consideration the
extent to which the development is consistent with the vision, policies, and
guidelines set forth in the Waianae SCP.
(d)   Whenever there is a question regarding consistency between existing
subdivision or zoning ordinances, including any unilateral agreement, and the
Waianae SCP, the existing subdivision or zoning ordinances shall prevail until
such time as they may be amended to be consistent with the Waianae SCP.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.5) (Ord. 12-3)
§ 24-9.6 Review of development and other applications.
   The review of applications for zone changes and other development approvals
will be guided by the vision of the Waianae SCP. Decisions on all proposed
developments shall be based on the extent to which the project enabled by the
development approval supports the policies and guidelines of the Waianae SCP.
   The director may review other applications for improvements to land to help
the responsible agency determine whether a proposed improvement supports the
policies and guidelines of the Waianae SCP.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.6) (Ord. 12-3)
§ 24-9.7 Zone change applications.
(a)   All zone change applications relating to land in the Waianae SCP area
will be reviewed by the department of planning and permitting for consistency
with the general plan, the Waianae SCP, and any applicable special area plan
provisions.
(1)   The director will recommend either approval, approval with changes, or
denial. The director’s written review of the application shall become part of
the zone change report which will be sent to the planning commission and the
city council.
(2)   A project master plan shall be part of an EA or EIS for any project
involving 10 acres or more of land. The director shall review the project
master plan for its consistency with the Waianae SCP.
(3)   Any development or phase of development already covered by a project
master plan which has been fully reviewed under this article shall not require
a new project master plan, provided the director determines that the proposed
zone change is generally consistent with the existing project master plan for
the affected area.
(4)   If a final EIS has already been accepted for a development, including one
accepted before March 2, 2012,* then a subsequent project master plan shall not
be required.
(b)   Projects which involve a significant zone change shall be required to
submit an environmental assessment to the department of planning and permitting
before an application for a zone change being accepted. Any development or
phase of a development which has already been assessed under the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), HRS Chapter 343 (Hawaii Environmental Policy
Act, HEPA), ROH
Chapter 25, or this article, and for which a FONSI has been filed or a required
EIS has been accepted, shall not be subject to further EA or EIS requirements
under this chapter unless otherwise required by NEPA or HEPA.
(c)   The environmental assessment shall be reviewed by the department of
planning and permitting. Based on review of the environmental assessment, the
director will determine whether an environmental impact statement will be
required or whether a FONSI may be issued.
(d)   If an environmental impact statement is required, the environmental
impact statement must be accepted by the director before a zone change
application may be initiated.
(e)   Zone changes must be processed in accordance with this section, Section
5.5 of the Waianae SCP and
Chapter 21.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.7) (Ord. 12-3)
Editor’s note:
   * “March 2, 2012” is substituted for “the effective date of this ordinance.”
§ 24-9.8 Annual capital improvement program review.
   Annually, the director shall work jointly with the director of budget and
fiscal services and the city agencies to review all projects in the city’s
capital improvement program and budget for compliance and consistency with the
general plan, the Waianae SCP and other development plans, any applicable
special area plan provisions, and the appropriate functional plans. The
director of planning and permitting will prepare a written report of findings
to be submitted to the council in accordance with Charter § 6-1503.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.8) (Ord. 12-3)
§ 24-9.9 Five-year review.
(a)   The department of planning and permitting shall conduct a comprehensive
review of the Waianae SCP, adopted by reference in §
24-9.3(b), every five years after the plan’s adoption and shall report its
findings and recommended revisions to the council.
(b)   The Waianae SCP will be evaluated to assess the appropriateness of the
plan’s regional vision, policies, guidelines, and implementing actions, as well
as its consistency with the general plan.
(c)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting the processing
of a revision to the Waianae SCP in the event either the biennial report of the
director or council recommends consideration of such a revision, pursuant to
the Charter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.9) (Ord. 12-3)
§ 24-9.10 Authority.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed as an abridgement or delegation
of the responsibility of the director, or of the inherent legislative power of
the council, to review or revise the Waianae SCP pursuant to the Charter and
the above procedures.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.10) (Ord. 12-3)
§ 24-9.11 Severability.
   If this article or the application thereof to any person or property or
circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this article which can be given effect without
the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this
article are declared to be severable.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.11) (Ord. 12-3)
§ 24-9.12 Conflicting provisions.
   This article shall prevail should there be any conflict with the common
provisions or any other provisions under
Chapter 24.
(1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.12) (Ord. 12-3)
WAI'ANAE SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8637.png]
PREFACE
The Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan has been prepared in accordance with
the Charter-prescribed requirements for Development Plans and is to be accorded
force and effect as such for all Charter- and ordinance- prescribed purposes.
It is one of a set of eight community-oriented plans intended to help guide
public policy, investment, and decision-making over the next 25 years. Each of
the plans addresses one of eight planning regions of O‘ahu, responding to
specific conditions and community values of each region. The map in Chapter 1
illustrates these planning regions.
Of the eight documents, the plans for ‘Ewa and the Primary Urban Center, to
which growth and supporting facilities will be directed over the next 25 years,
have been entitled “Development Plans” (DPs). They will be the policy guide to
development decisions and actions needed to support that growth.
Plans for the remaining six areas, which are envisioned as relatively stable
regions in which public programs will focus on supporting existing populations,
have been entitled “Sustainable Communities Plans” (SCPs) in order to
appropriately indicate their intent.
The Plan for the Wai‘anae District is a Sustainable Communities Plan. This
Plan’s vision statement and supporting provisions are oriented to maintaining
and enhancing the region’s ability to sustain its unique character, current
population, growing families, rural lifestyle, and economic livelihood, all of
which contribute to the region’s vitality and future potential.
There has been a recent surge in widespread community discussions, actions, and
laws adopted to address sustainability. In 2005, the State Legislature convened
a statewide group to draft a Hawai‘i 2050 Plan, whose primary purpose is to
provide policy recommendations for creating a sustainable Hawai‘i. In 2007,
greenhouse gas emissions goals for 2020 were enacted. Public service
announcements dealing with conserving water and electricity abound. The concept
of buildings that are designed, built, and occupied with environmental
considerations at the forefront largely did not exist when the current
Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans were adopted. This setting
raises the question of the role of the Development Plans and Sustainable
Communities Plans. Are they the City’s version of a sustainability plan?
The answer is that they are the land development portion of a larger blueprint
for sustainability. As discussed below, the General Plan sets long term goals
for the City and County of Honolulu, across 11 major elements. Perhaps its most
substantive chapter is the one that deals with population, and hence land
development distribution. It sets the growth management strategy for O‘ahu. The
Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans provide more detail on this
land management strategy, assuring that how we use the land now, and in the
future, responds to the three major elements of a Sustainable Place: economic
health, social equity, and environmental protection.
The issues addressed either directly or indirectly by these regional plans
certainly overlap with other planning responsibilities of other departments,
such as water delivery and consumption, crime reduction, increasing public
health, and developing responsive transportation systems. Collectively, these
efforts comprise the strategy of developing a Sustainable Future for O‘ahu.
INTEGRATING PRINCIPLES OF SUSTAINABILITY INTO DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES
A community that can successfully manage change will flourish and prosper in
the future. For this plan, this means ensuring that planned growth and
development respects and adheres to the principles of sustainability.
These principles of sustainability are intended to promote the long-term health
of the land and its people, and its community resources for current and future
generations:
   ·   Protect agricultural lands, physical and biological resources, and where
appropriate, open spaces and view planes.
   ·   Use resources so they are not depleted, permanently damaged, or
destroyed.
   ·   Encourage planning, development, and construction technologies that
minimize negative environmental impacts.
   ·   Respect the cultural, social, and physical resources that shape and
reinforce residents’ sense of community and quality of life.
   ·   Guide the process of change. Strive to make decisions based on an
understanding of the effects such decision will have on the land and community
resources.
   ·   Strive for balance between economic prosperity, social and community
well-being, and environmental stewardship.
   ·   As an integral part of the planning process, consider the long-term
impact of proposed actions and prepare plans that can accommodate the needs of
future generations accordingly.
P.1   THE SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN PROCESS
This document is the culmination of a planning program led by the City and
County of Honolulu’s department of planning and permitting. This planning
process encouraged and enabled significant involvement from the region’s
neighborhood boards, community associations, business leaders, religious and
cultural organizations, private landowners, institutions, and numerous
individuals.
P.2   THE HONOLULU LAND USE PLANNING AND MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
The City and County of Honolulu guides and directs land use and growth through
a three-tier system of goals, objectives, policies, guidelines, and
regulations. The General Plan forms the first tier of this system. First
adopted by City Council resolution in 1977, the General Plan is a relatively
brief document, consisting primarily of one- sentence statements of goals,
objectives, and policies. It has been amended several times, but the basic
objectives and policies set forth in the 1977 plan remain intact.
The second tier of the system is formed by the Development Plans, which are
adopted and revised by ordinance. These plans address eight geographic regions
of the island, including the Primary Urban Center, East Honolulu, Central
O‘ahu, ‘Ewa, Wai‘anae, North Shore, Ko‘olauloa, and Ko‘olau Poko. Under the
current revision program, the Primary Urban Center and ‘Ewa plans retain the
title “Development Plan.” The plans for the other regions are now referred to
as “Sustainable Communities Plans” to reflect their policy intent.
The third tier of the system is composed of the implementing ordinances,
including the Land Use Ordinance (Honolulu’s zoning code) and the City’s
Capital Improvement Program. Mandated by the City Charter, these ordinances
constitute the principle means for implementing the City’s plans. These
ordinances are required to be consistent with the General Plan, the Development
Plans, and each other.
In addition to these three Charter-mandated tiers, the Development Plans are
supplemented by two planning mechanisms that are not required by the Charter:
the functional planning process and special area planning. Functional planning
activities, some of which are mandated by state or federal regulations, provide
long-range guidance for the development of public facilities such as the water
system, wastewater disposal, and transportation. Special area plans are
intended to give specific guidance for neighborhoods, communities, or
specialized resources.
P.3   AUTHORITY OF THE DEVELOPMENT PLANS AND SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLANS
The authority for the Development Plans and Sustainable Communities Plans
(hereinafter referred to as “Development Plans” for simplicity) is derived from
the City Charter, which mandates preparation of a General Plan and Development
Plans to guide “the development and improvement of the city.” Together with the
General Plan, the Development Plans provide policy guidance for the land use
and budgetary actions of the City.
The Charter provides that “public improvement projects and subdivision and
zoning ordinances shall be consistent with the development plan for that area.”
Although the Development Plans are not themselves regulatory and require
implementing ordinances (the “third tier” discussed in Section P.2 above), they
guide the regulators and decision- makers who are the implementers. They are
policy tools and are to be used, in conjunction with the programs and budgets
of the City, to accomplish the objectives of the City and as guides for
decisions made by the private sector. Consistent with the Charter’s description
of the Development Plans as “conceptual schemes” and “a policy guide,” the
language, maps, and illustrations of the Development Plans should not be
regulatory.
P.4   WHY THE DEVELOPMENT PLANS HAVE BEEN REVISED
As amended in 2000, this Plan is to be reviewed every five years to:
   1.   Measure progress toward achieving the Vision, Policies, and Guidelines,
and determine if they are still appropriate;
   2.   Identify land use development trends and potential new development
proposals that have implications for this Plan and the General Plan;
   3.   Identify relevant, significant issues that the previous Plan did not
adequately address;
   4.   Propose modified or new Policies and Guidelines for those on which
satisfactory progress has not been achieved, and for emerging or new needs that
require attention.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The District of Wai‘anae is characterized by rugged mountains and beautiful
welcoming beaches. Its people have historically been as rugged as its mountains
and as welcoming as its beaches. In times of old and into the present- day, the
people of Wai‘anae have been independent, but have also allowed their home to
be a place of refuge. This Plan seeks to share the people of Wai‘anae’s desire
to maintain their home’s rural character, built upon a Hawaiian cultural
foundation, added to by various immigrant cultures, while allowing minimal
increases of housing, resort, and light industrial development. Future
development in Wai‘anae should encourage agriculture, renewable energy
generation, green technology, ecosystem and cultural site restoration, and
economic development, all for the benefit of future generations. If development
does not meet these criteria, then it should not be approved.
This Plan is organized in five chapters and an appendix, as follows:
Chapter 1: Wai‘anae’s Role in O‘ahu’s Development Pattern defines the region’s
role and identity within the overall framework of islandwide planning and land
management.
Chapter 2: The Vision for the Future of the Wai‘anae District summarizes the
community’s vision for the future of the region, and describes important
elements of that vision.
Chapter 3: Land Use Polices and Guidelines is the Plan’s policy core. It
provides policy guidance for the region’s various land use elements.
Chapter 4: Public Facilities and Infrastructure Policies and Guidelines
provides Policies and Guidelines needed to support the planned land uses.
Chapter 5: Implementation addresses needs for carrying out provisions outlined
by the Plan.
Appendix: The Conceptual Maps illustrate the long-range Vision for the Wai‘anae
District and the major land use, open space, and public facility Policies that
are articulated in the Plan.
   Summarized below are the key recommendations contained in each of these
chapters.
CHAPTER 1: WAI‘ANAE’S ROLE IN O‘AHU’S DEVELOPMENT PATTERN
Consistent with the directed growth policies of the City’s General Plan, the
Wai‘anae District is targeted for very little growth over the 25-year timeline
of this Plan. The focus of the Plan is thus preservation of the rural landscape
and of the rural lifestyle of the Wai‘anae District’s people.
It is also noted in this chapter that land development and population trends in
the Wai‘anae District over the past 40 years are such that “keeping Wai‘anae
country” will be a difficult policy to implement. Since 1950, this District’s
population has increased from only 7,000 people to almost 50,000 people by
2010. Together with this population growth, there has been a tremendous growth
in all forms of urban and suburban development, including residential,
commercial, industrial, and public infrastructure and facilities.
Wai‘anae is the most “developed” of O‘ahu’s rural districts. Without strong
City policies and actions, this District may soon lose its remaining rural
qualities.
CHAPTER 2: THE VISION FOR THE FUTURE OF THE WAI‘ANAE DISTRICT
This chapter presents the overarching concepts and goals of the Wai‘anae
Sustainable Communities Plan. It includes the VISION STATEMENT for the long-
range future of the Wai‘anae District, a brief summary of the COMMUNITY
PARTICIPATION PROCESS by which the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan was
updated from 2007 to 2010, and a description of the 10 VISION ELEMENTS.
The VISION STATEMENT:
THE VISION FOR THE FUTURE OF THE WAI‘ANAE DISTRICT IS THAT ALL MEMBERS OF OUR
COMMUNITY – FROM THE KŪPUNA (GRANDPARENTS/ ELDERS) TO THE MO‘OMO‘O (CHILDREN,
INCLUDING THOSE YET UNBORN) HAVE THEIR ESSENTIAL NEEDS MET.
We envision our physical environment as rural and pristine, protected from
degradation so that we can enjoy her elements: the kai (salt waters), wai
(fresh waters), ea (air, sky and heavens), ‘āina (land, soil), and all of the
animate and inanimate aspects of nature which make up our home. We have access
to our mountains, valleys, and sea. We have a variety of economic
opportunities. Lastly and most importantly, our children are surrounded and
guided by their strong, kind, and loving ‘ohana (family).
The Vision Elements include the following:
   1.   Recognize the traditional ahupua‘a of the Wai‘anae District and adapt
the ahupua‘a concept as a framework for land use and open space planning
   2.   Delineate the four major land use types: Preservation Lands,
Agricultural Lands, Rural Community Areas, and Coastal Lands
   3.   Restrict coastal urban, suburban, or resort development makai of
Farrington Highway
   4.   Preserve all lands north of Kepuhi Point as open space lands
   5.   Preserve and restore streams and stream corridors
   6.   Preserve and protect cultural sites and cultural landscapes
   7.   Improve transportation systems within the District
   8.   Designate, plan, and develop Town Centers and Community Gathering
Places for Wai‘anae, Nānākuli, Lualualei, and Mākaha
   9.   Develop and support community-based businesses
   10.   Government agencies should partner with community-based organizations
in order to better manage Wai‘anae’s natural and cultural resources
CHAPTER 3: LAND USE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
This chapter of the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan presents Policies and
Guidelines for the principal types of land use that should be provided for in
the District. The Vision for the future of the Wai‘anae District described in
Chapter 2 will be implemented through the application of these Policies and
Guidelines.
The first section provides an overview of the existing conditions in the
Wai‘anae District – the land use, population, economics, and environment. The
other 11 sections deal with each of the major types of land use within the
District.
The principal land use Policies are summarized as follows:
   3.2 Open Space and Important Views
      ·   Do Not Allow Significant Negative Impacts on Large Open Spaces
      ·   Address Project Impacts on Open Space
      ·   Do Not Allow Significant Negative Impacts on Important Public Views
      ·   Address Project Impacts on Important Public Views
      ·   Limit Urban Development
      ·   Government Agencies Should Partner with Community-Based Organizations
in order to Better Manage Wai‘anae’s Open Spaces
      ·   Minimize Outdoor Lighting
   3.3 Coastal Lands
      ·   Do Not Allow New Coastal Development
      ·   Incrementally Acquire Coastal Properties
      ·   Discourage Shore Armoring
      ·   Government Agencies Should Partner with Community-Based Organizations
in order to Better Manage Wai‘anae’s Coastal Lands
      ·   Prohibit Projects that Negatively Impact Coastal Lands
      ·   Prevent the Introduction of Alien Species
      ·   Maintain Beaches/Sand
   3.4 Mountain Forest Lands
      ·   Protect Mountain Forest Lands
      ·   Develop Forest Restoration Program
      ·   Do Not Grant Permits that Negatively Impact Mountain Forest Lands
      ·   Government Agencies Should Partner with Community-Based Organizations
in order to Better Manage Wai‘anae’s Mountain Forest Lands
      ·   Protect Rare and Endangered Species
      ·   Prevent the Introduction of Alien Species
      ·   Allow Public Access to Hiking Trails
      ·   Develop Wildfire Management Plan
   3.5 Streams and Floodplains
      ·   Establish Stream Conservation Corridors
      ·   Restrict Uses Within the Stream Conservation Corridors
      ·   Establish Minimum In-Stream Flow Standards
      ·   Government Agencies Should Partner with Community-Based Organizations
in order to Better Manage Wai‘anae’s Streams and Stream Corridors
   3.6 Historic and Cultural Resources
      ·   Preserve Major Concentration of Cultural Sites and Allow Access for
Cultural Practices
      ·   Do Not Allow Development that Negatively Impacts Important Cultural
Sites or Access to such Sites
      ·   Government Agencies Should Partner with Community-Based Organizations
in order to Better Manage Wai‘anae’s Cultural Sites
      ·   Create Signage for Cultural Sites
      ·   Protect and Allow Access for Cultural Practices at Sites on City-
Owned Lands
      ·   Protect and Allow Access for Cultural Practices at Sites on Federal,
State, or Private Lands
      ·   Conduct a Thorough Cultural Survey of the Wai‘anae District
   3.7 Agricultural Lands
      ·   Maintain the Boundary for Agricultural Lands
      ·   Support Agriculture through Zoning Regulations and Tax Assessments
      ·   Limit the use of “Agriculture” Land to Agriculture and other
Compatible Land Uses
      ·   Prohibit Incompatible Land Uses of “Agriculture” Land
      ·   Coordinate Farmer’s Markets and Other Low-Cost Marketing Outlets
   3.8 Residential Land Use
      ·   Do Not Increase Lands Designated “Residential”
      ·   Coordinate with the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands (DHHL)
      ·   Preserve Agricultural Lands
      ·   Support Home-Based Businesses
      ·   Although Allowed to be Exempt by State Law, 201 H Projects Should
Meet Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan Guidelines
   3.9 Commercial and Industrial Uses
      ·   Encourage the Continuation of Existing Commercial Establishments
      ·   Encourage Establishment of Commercial Businesses that Serve the
Community
      ·   Support the Continued Viability of the Mākaha Resort
      ·   Prohibit “Big Box” Stores
      ·   Encourage Light Industrial Businesses
      ·   Do Not Allow Heavy Industry
   3.10 Country Towns, Rural Community Centers and Gathering Places
      ·   Establish a Phased Development Program
   3.11 Parks and Recreational Areas
      ·   Develop Adequate Public Parks
      ·   Prohibit More Golf Courses That Compete with Agriculture or Open
Space Resources
      ·   Plan for a System of Hawaiian Cultural and Educational Parks
   3.12 Military Land Use
      ·   Preserve and Transition Military Lands to Civilian Use
      ·   Organize and Implement Cooperative Programs
CHAPTER 4: PUBLIC FACILITIES AND INFRASTRUCTURE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
This chapter of the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan presents Policies and
Guidelines for the principal infrastructure systems that the Wai‘anae Community
would like to see provided for the District.
The following Policies are overarching to many of the infrastructure systems
included in this chapter:
   ·   The latest technology that allows the Wai‘anae Community to be as
sustainable, or “green” as possible, should be implemented whenever possible
(while remaining consistent with other community objectives).
   ·   Rural Infrastructure Standards should be considered and, where possible,
developed by the City. The goal of this recommendation is to allow the area to
maintain its country feel, with features such as narrower roads, and still
ensure that they would be safe and the City would maintain them.
The principal infrastructure Policies are as follows:
   4.1 Transportation Systems
      ·   Implement Farrington Highway Safety Improvements for Pedestrians and
Motorists
      ·   Beautify Farrington Highway
      ·   Establish an Emergency Bypass Road
      ·   Enhance Public Transportation
      ·   Encourage Other Modes of Transportation
   4.2 Potable and Nonpotable Water Systems
      ·   Implement Watershed Protection Strategies to Improve Forest Health &
Perennial Stream Flows
      ·   Encourage Water Conservation
      ·   Diversify Water Supply, Matching Quality with Use
      ·   Support the Goals and Objectives of the Adopted Wai‘anae Watershed
Management Plan
   4.3 Wastewater Collection and Treatment Systems
      ·   Continue Phased Program for Replacement of Old Sewer Lines
      ·   Improve the Wai‘anae Wastewater Treatment Plant
      ·   Coordinate with DHHL regarding Sewer Connections
   4.4 Electrical Power and Communications
      ·   Reduce the Visual Impact and Improve Safety of Utility Lines and
Poles and Reliability of Service
      ·   Encourage the Development of Alternative Energy Sources
   4.5 Drainage Systems
      ·   Develop Wai‘anae District Local Drainage Improvements Plan and
Program
      ·   Establish a Sediment Control Program
   4.6 Solid Waste Handling and Disposal
      ·   Enforce Anti-Dumping Laws
      ·   Encourage Green Waste Composting
   4.7 Civic, Public Safety and Education Facilities
      ·   Improve Quality of Facilities and Adequacy of Staffing
      ·   Selection of Sites for New Schools should comply with the WSCP
Criteria
      ·   Consider Multi-Purpose Function of Schools
      ·   Encourage Charter Schools
      ·   Increase Ambulance Service
      ·   Provide Adequate Emergency Shelters
   4.8 Health Care Facilities
      ·   Support Quality, Community Health Care Facilities
      ·   Assess the Need for New Health Care Facilities and Services
CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION
This chapter discusses the various measures that support implementation of this
Plan, including the regulatory mechanisms, physical improvements, and other
actions that are needed to realize the Plan’s vision. Section 5.2 presents an
Implementation Matrix to help organize and facilitate plan implementation. The
Implementation Matrix, which is based on the policies and guidelines presented
in Chapters 3 and 4, identifies the specific actions, corresponding plans and/
or codes, and public and private entities responsible for implementation.
APPENDIX: THE CONCEPTUAL MAPS
This appendix contains three colored maps that illustrate some of the Plan’s
Policies and Guidelines. These maps are intended to be illustrations of the
text, and therefore should there be any conflicts between the maps and the
text, the text shall govern.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8639.png]
1.   WAI‘ANAE’S ROLE IN O‘AHU’S DEVELOPMENT PATTERN
The General Plan for the City and County of Honolulu sets forth broad policies
for the future harmonious growth and development of the island of O‘ahu.
Revised in 2002, the General Plan’s section on “Population” establishes several
key growth management policies for the rural districts of O‘ahu, including the
Wai‘anae District:
“ Objective C
To establish a pattern of population distribution that will allow the people of
Oahu to live and work in harmony.
Policy 1:   Facilitate the full development of the primary urban center.
Policy 2:   Encourage the development within the secondary urban center at
Kapolei and the Ewa and Central Oahu urban-fringe areas to relieve development
pressures in the remaining urban-fringe and rural areas and to meet housing
needs not readily provided in the primary urban center.
Policy 3:   Manage physical growth and development in the urban-fringe and
rural areas so that:
a.      An undesirable spreading of development is prevented; and
b.      Their population densities are consistent with the character of
development and environmental qualities desired for such areas.”
The map on the following page demonstrates the General Plan’s intended
development pattern, as well as the boundaries of the eight Development Plan
Areas for O‘ahu.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8641.png]
The 1989 Amendments to the General Plan included some important language on
rural areas that applies to Wai‘anae (Physical Development and Urban Design,
Object D, Policy 4):
“Maintain rural areas which are intended to provide environments supportive of
lifestyle choices which are dependent on the availability of land suitable for
small to moderate size agricultural pursuits, a relatively open and scenic
setting, and/or a small town, country atmosphere consisting of communities
which are small in size, very low density and low rise in character, and may
contain a mixture of uses.”
Or, more simply stated, “keep the country, country.”
Thus, the General Plan sets forth policies that emphasize the preservation of
agriculture and rural land uses in Wai‘anae, as well as in the other rural
districts of the North Shore, Ko‘olauloa, and parts of Ko‘olau Poko. The
General Plan directs that Wai‘anae’s proportional share of O‘ahu’s 2010
population should be 4.0 percent in 2025. However, according to the 2000 U.S.
Census, Wai‘anae’s population was 42,259, which represented 4.8 percent of
O‘ahu’s total population of 876,156. The City and County of Honolulu’s
department of planning and permitting now estimates that Wai‘anae’s proportion
of O‘ahu’s population will be 4.9 percent in 2010, and will remain at 4.7
percent in 2035.
The community has expressed numerous concerns regarding population counts and
projections for Wai‘anae. To begin with, some believe that the most recent U.S.
Census (2000) count for the District was low. This is primarily due to many
homeless people not being counted. During the past five years, there has been a
significant increase in the homeless population in Wai‘anae, many of whom are
from other areas of O‘ahu. There is also a growing number of “hidden homeless”
people – those who are living “doubled up” or “tripled up” with friends or
family. This issue is discussed more in-depth in Chapter 3 (Section 3.1.2).
In addition, some residents have expressed concern with the General Plan’s use
of a distributive percentage for Wai‘anae’s population for two reasons. First,
such population “quotas” have not been achieved and cannot be enforced. Second,
if O‘ahu’s total population eventually reaches 1.5 million, then Wai‘anae’s
“share” at 4 percent would be 60,000. The District’s infrastructure cannot
currently handle 60,000 people, and the rural character of the area would be
lost. Thus, some community members believe that a maximum carrying capacity may
need to be determined for the District. It would still be difficult to enforce
a maximum capacity, but it could drastically limit new housing developments
within the District.
Land development and population trends in the Wai‘anae District over the past
40 years suggest that “keeping Wai‘anae country” will be a difficult policy to
implement. The Farrington Highway corridor in the District, from Nānākuli to
Mākaha, is already heavily developed. This developed coastal zone is about 8
miles long, and varies in width from about 1/4 mile to over 1 mile. Land uses
on the mauka side of Farrington Highway are typically suburban types of use
rather than rural uses: single-family residential small lot development, multi-
family residential development, shopping centers, a scattering of small
commercial and industrial establishments, and various institutional and public
uses including schools, health centers, fire and police stations, and a
regional wastewater treatment plant. The makai side of the highway is dominated
by beaches and beach parks, with some small subdivisions and a few larger
apartment buildings. Recently developed residential subdivisions are expanding
this coastal development strip into the rural farm valleys of the District.
Overall, important parts of the District’s infrastructure are being stressed
and overloaded, especially Farrington Highway, the sewer system, the public
school system, and police and fire protection services.
The Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan addresses these core issues of
preservation, growth, development, population, housing, infrastructure, and
public facilities.
2.   THE VISION FOR THE FUTURE OF THE WAI‘ANAE DISTRICT
The purpose of Chapter 2 is to present the overarching concepts and goals of
the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan. Chapters 3 and 4 then provide the
specific Policies and Guidelines that are intended to implement these ideas.
This Chapter includes the following:
   2.1   VISION STATEMENT for the long-range future of the Wai‘anae District,
   2.2   Summary of the COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION PROCESS by which the Wai‘anae
Sustainable Communities Plan was updated, and
   2.3   Description of the 10 VISION ELEMENTS.
2.1   VISION STATEMENT
THE VISION FOR THE FUTURE OF THE WAI‘ANAE DISTRICT IS THAT ALL MEMBERS OF OUR
COMMUNITY – FROM THE KŪPUNA (GRANDPARENTS/ ELDERS) TO THE MO‘OMO‘O (CHILDREN,
INCLUDING THOSE YET UNBORN) HAVE THEIR ESSENTIAL NEEDS MET. Our physical
environment is rural and pristine, protected from degradation so that we can
enjoy her elements: the kai (salt waters), wai (fresh waters), ea (air, sky and
heavens), ‘āina (land, soil), and all of the animate and inanimate aspects of
nature which make up our home. We have access to our mountains, valleys, and
sea. We have a variety of economic opportunities. Lastly and most importantly,
our children are surrounded and guided by their strong, kind, and loving ‘ohana
(family).
2.1.1   Inside Our Vision
This Vision Statement comes from the longer passage below, which was developed
by a group of Wai‘anae’s long- time community leaders who have been intimately
involved in many of the community’s planning efforts. It explains the deeper
meaning of the Vision Statement and how it relates to the physical planning
Guidelines and Policies found in this Plan:
“THE VISION FOR THE FUTURE OF THE WAI‘ANAE DISTRICT IS THAT OUR MO‘OMO‘O
(CHILDREN INCLUDING THOSE YET UNBORN) WILL BE ABLE TO HAVE THEIR ESSENTIAL
NEEDS MET.
“To fulfill this vision, we are called upon to keep in the forefront of our
planning, the children of our future. All decisions made which impact the
Wai‘anae society, must be made with the children in the forefront of our minds,
including:
“A child must have a safe and healthy physical environment in which to be
raised; we must maintain our environment in as pristine condition as possible.
It therefore behooves us to protect the physical environment from degradation
which would deprive our children of the use and enjoyment of her elements: the
kai (salt waters), wai (fresh waters), ea (air, sky and heavens), ‘āina (land,
soil), and all of the animate and inanimate aspects of nature which make up
this physical environment. Our children must have access to our mountains,
valleys, and sea. Activities that threaten our environmental conditions or
interfere with such access must be treated with the greatest caution, and if
approved due to special circumstances, must have deadlines for which the
activities will be discontinued and reversed in order to return the
environmental conditions and accessibility to its earlier state.
“Interlaced within a child’s physical environment is a social environment
containing cultures, religions, history, family life, educational experiences,
health, and healthy living conditions. Our children must be raised within a
culture of caring which expresses respect for all peoples, encourages
opportunities for love, compassion, kindness, and inclusiveness. Our children
must be raised in environments of peace and righteousness – in pono. These
environments include the child’s needs for healthy relationships within family,
neighborhoods, and wider ahupua‘a.
“Opportunities for our children to have religious or spiritual guidance and the
ability to identify their own chosen religious or spiritual followings (if any)
without undue pressure from peers, institutions, or family members should be
available to every child.
“Our children should be raised with a clear understanding of their history, and
the legacy of the Native Hawaiian people and of the Hawaiian Nation. They must
be given the opportunity to compare people’s histories, to explore their own
visions of their futures, to challenge authority, and to question ‘conventional
wisdom.’
“Our children must be raised in an environment of strong, kind, and loving
families, and larger circles of support in an extended lei of guiding children
by an extended ‘ohana.
“Our children must be given educational opportunities compatible with their
ways or styles of learning. Their educational experiences should include
literacy and oracy. It must include science and art, poetry and politics,
physical and mental development, character building, and responsibility. Every
child’s educational challenge should be met with vigor and determination.
Education must support a full lifetime of learning. Education should be a
community practice and not merely another bureaucratic function of a society.
“Our children should have immediate access to health and food resources:
medicine and food from our environment to meet their physical as well as
spiritual, emotional, and psychological needs. They should have knowledge of
their own conditions, and have experience and opportunity in using a variety of
medical and sustenance methods to meet their needs.
“All changes to the physical environment planned by the society must be done
within this framework of the community vision.”
2.1.2   Native Hawaiian Connection to the Land
The above Vision Statement also demonstrates many Wai‘anae community members’
desire to incorporate Native Hawaiian values into the Wai‘anae Sustainable
Communities Plan. The community contains a large percentage of people who
identify themselves as at least partly Native Hawaiian or other Pacific
Islander (62%), and many others who have lived in the area for a significant
amount of time and have adapted to the local culture. The majority of community
members involved in this Sustainable Communities Plan (SCP) review process
strongly supported the idea of incorporating Native Hawaiian values into the
Plan as much as possible. One long-time resident, who is of Native Hawaiian
ancestry, wrote the following passage to describe the Native Hawaiian
connection to the land and its suggested relation to this SCP:
“In the Native Hawaiian tradition, as shared by many indigenous peoples
throughout the world, the earth is the foundation of life. It is the seat of
spirituality, the source from which indigenous cultures and languages flourish.
In ancient Hawai‘i, the natural resources of the land and the sea provided
food, medicine, shelter, and clothing, and formed the foundation of social and
cultural life. For example, the various landforms found throughout Wai‘anae
have specific place names and mo‘olelo (stories/legends) associated with them
that give meaning to their existence and to those who live here. Thus, in many
ways, natural and cultural resources are one and the same to Native Hawaiians.
“Given the special significance that the land and sea have for the Native
Hawaiian people, and the strong commitment of the Wai‘anae community to pay
special regard to this significance in the planning for a sustainable Wai‘anae
community, the Policies and Guidelines presented in this Plan are intended to
not only protect these resources, but where possible, enhance them.”
2.2   COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION PROCESS
Both the original Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan (2000) and the updated
Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan (2010) emerged through extensive and
intensive Community Participation Processes led by the planning team.
Development of the original Plan involved numerous meetings with various
community groups and individuals. The SCP revision program continued this
community involvement process.
The goal of both processes was to produce a Plan that is based on the
community’s Vision and is implementable, in that it presents realistic Policies
and Guidelines that the various City agencies and private organizations can use
to help make the Vision a reality.
The details of the Original Planning Process (1997 – 2000) and the Planning
Process for the 5 Year Review (2007– 2010) are included in the Technical Report
(2010).
2.3   VISION ELEMENTS
   1.   Recognize the traditional ahupua‘a of the Wai‘anae District and adapt
the ahupua‘a concept as a framework for land use and open space planning
   2.   Delineate the four major land use types: Preservation Lands,
Agricultural Lands, Rural Community Areas, and Coastal Lands
   3.   Restrict coastal urban, suburban, or resort development makai of
Farrington Highway
   4.   Preserve all lands north of Kepuhi Point as open space lands
   5.   Preserve and restore streams and stream corridors
   6.   Preserve and protect cultural sites and cultural landscapes
   7.   Improve transportation systems within the District
   8.   Designate, plan, and develop Town Centers and Community Gathering
Places for Wai‘anae, Nānākuli, Lualualei/Mā‘ili, and Mākaha
   9.   Develop and support community-based businesses
   10.   Government agencies should partner with community-based organizations
in order to better manage Wai‘anae’s natural and cultural resources
These 10 Vision Elements emphasize some of the key goals of this Wai‘anae SCP.
Each of these Vision Elements is explained in the following pages:
2.3.1   Recognize the traditional ahupua‘a of the Wai‘anae District and adapt
the ahupua‘a concept as a framework for land use and open space planning
In traditional Hawaiian culture, the ahupua‘a – a division of land that usually
stretched from the fishing and gathering waters of the sea to the top of the
mountains – provided the principal physical and social structure for the
society. Each ahupua‘a had its own name and carefully defined boundary lines.
The ahupua‘a boundaries were important and were respected.
To many Wai‘anae residents, the ahupua‘a land division system is primarily
about values, about man living in nature and taking care of the land and the
natural resources within their ahupua‘a, also known as mālama ‘Āina. Native
Hawaiian communities fed and housed themselves with that which they harvested
from the ocean, agricultural fields, and forests within their ahupua‘a. Thus,
the ahupua‘a is the ideal model of sustainability and self-sufficiency.
Wai‘anae residents want to make sure that the values and lessons of this
ancient system and their ancestors are not lost, but are instead remembered and
applied to their modern-day planning.
Contemporary regional planning concepts and methods that could incorporate
these lessons include: Watershed Planning, Ecosystem Planning, and Town Center
Planning. As such, ahupua‘a planning could be a powerful tool for physical
planning for areas such as Wai‘anae, where the ahupua‘a are strongly defined
and still recognized by many of the residents. There are nine ahupua‘a in the
Wai‘anae District, which are shown on the map on page 24-68.26:
   ·   Nānākuli
   ·   Lualualei
   ·   Wai‘anae
   ·   Mākaha
   ·   Kea‘au
   ·   ‘Ohikilolo
   ·   Mākua
   ·   Kahanahāiki
   ·   Keawa‘ula
The ahupua‘a of the Wai‘anae Coast range in size from the great valley of
Lualualei, which covers some 10,000 acres, to the relatively small ahupua‘a of
‘Ohikilolo, which is about 250 acres. It should also be noted that the Wai‘anae
“moku” extended across the Wahiawa plain and up to the ridgeline of the Ko‘olau
Mountains. During the 19th century ranching era and the early 20th century
sugar plantation era in Wai‘anae, the principal ahupua‘a in terms of economic
activity and population were Lualualei, Wai‘anae, Mākaha, and Mākua.
Archaeological research and oral histories indicate that all of the nine
ahupua‘a were settled by the early Hawaiians. Today, the four major populated
ahupua‘a include Nānākuli, Lualualei, Wai‘anae, and Mākaha. It is interesting
to consider the following:
   ·   The major ahupua‘a in the Wai‘anae District are all physically distinct
valleys with associated ridges and mountain areas, and are at the same time
distinct and separate stream watersheds.
   ·   Each of the major ahupua‘a has a similar range of topographic/climatic
zones that support similar ecosystems: a coastal/beach zone, a lower valley
zone, an upper valley zone, dry valley walls, moister mountain slopes at the
backs of the valleys.
   ·   The major ahupua‘a are to some degree identified with a particular
subcommunity. This seems to be especially true of Nānākuli and is somewhat the
case for Wai‘anae, with its identifiable town center. The Lualualei ahupua‘a
has a diversity of development, including the village of Mā‘ili, the farmlot
communities along Hakimo Road and Lualualei Valley Road, and the two large U.S.
Navy installations. Mākaha includes residential subdivisions near Farrington
Highway, farmlots in the lower part of the valley, and the Mākaha Resort,
Mākaha Towers, and Mākaha Estates developments in the central part of the
valley.
The four major ahupua‘a have different concerns and needs, and thus, the
Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan must be flexible enough to take this into
account. For example, the current land use and economic opportunities in Mākaha
Valley are very different from the circumstances in the Lualualei and Nānākuli
ahupua‘a. As such, the land use policies and guidelines must allow for variance
among the different ahupua‘a.
The awareness and respect for boundaries continues to be an important part of
the Wai‘anae Coast culture even today. Many of the local people feel a strong
identity with their ahupua‘a, and its distinct community fabric. In 1994, the
Wai‘anae Coast Coalition, with the support of Queen Liliuokalani Children’s
Center Nānākuli Unit, began to organize “Ahupua‘a Councils” for the four major
populated valleys: Nānākuli, Lualualei, Wai‘anae, and Mākaha. Throughout the
initial years of formation, these Councils developed a way of working together
through the “Wai‘anae Coast Coalition,” a community-based organization that
consisted of representatives from many of the principal community groups and
social service agencies in the District. However, since that time they have
waned in membership and activities. It is recommended that these Councils be
re-established and continue their important community connecting work.
Clearly then, the concept of the ahupua‘a has great significance and importance
in the Wai‘anae District – in terms of natural landscape, historical patterns
of land use, traditional social and cultural practices, contemporary customs,
and recent community organization. It is thus important to adapt the ahupua‘a
concept into the land use planning process for the Wai‘anae Coast. The primary
way in which this concept could be implemented is through organizing residents
of each ahupua‘a by re-establishing the Ahupua‘a Councils, and using their
mana‘o (knowledge, advice) for deciding the future of their community.
Additionally, all land use, town center, and environmental planning should use
the values of the Ahupua‘a Concept as a guide or framework for planning.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8643.png]
2.3.2   Delineate the four major land use types: Preservation Lands,
Agricultural Lands, Rural Communities Areas, and Coastal Lands
The Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan establishes the following four
principal land use types:
   ·   The PRESERVATION LANDS consist generally of the steeper lands,
mountainous lands, coastal ridges, and pu‘u, including such prominent coastal
features as Pu‘u Heleakalā, Pu‘u o Hulu, Pu‘u Mā‘ili‘ili‘i, Pu‘u Pāhe‘ehe‘e,
Pu‘u Kamaile‘unu, and Mauna Lahilahi. Land uses within these areas should be
limited to those uses that are compatible with the preservation and
conservation of natural ecosystems and traditional and cultural sites and
resources. Access to preservation lands should be ensured for cultural
practices.
   ·   The AGRICULTURAL LANDS should encompass the farmlands and undeveloped
valley lands in the ten ahupua‘a of the Wai‘anae Coast. Agricultural land uses
within these areas, including commercial farms, family farms, and family
gardens, should be preserved and encouraged. Land uses within these areas
should be limited to agriculture and other uses that are compatible with a
rural landscape and country lifestyle. These compatible uses include farm
dwellings, small country stores, agricultural support facilities including
storage and small-scale processing of farm products, and cultural places and
preserves. Residential subdivisions, including large acreage “gentlemen
estates,” public or private schools, and golf courses are not compatible uses.
   ·   RURAL COMMUNITY AREAS are defined by a line that generally follows the
limits of the Community Growth Boundary, which consists of existing urban and
suburban development along the Farrington Highway corridor. Within the Rural
Community areas, there is some acreage for infill residential and commercial
development. With the exception of a small number of isolated farm lots that
are already surrounded by housing development, no other agricultural lands
should be included within these development areas. Continued small-scale
agricultural uses on these farm lots should be encouraged.
   ·   COASTAL LANDS include the surf zone, the beaches, and lands just inland
of the beaches, generally all lands makai of Farrington Highway. Coastal lands
should be preserved and protected for open space, beach parks, and public
access. New residential, commercial, or resort development should generally not
be permitted makai of Farrington Highway. Over time, inappropriate coastal
development, including mid- rise condominium buildings, should be phased out
and these sites should be restored to public use. Access to coastal lands
should be ensured for cultural practices.
In addition to establishing and recognizing these four land and resource types,
the Wai‘anae community has been adamant in their desire to keep Wai‘anae as
RURAL as possible overall. Although their population has increased
significantly in recent times (from approximately 7,000 in 1950, to almost
50,000 in 2010), they still believe their community has retained their RURAL
VALUES, which are expressed and exemplified by:
   ·   The small farms, many of them family-owned and operated that grow
various crops. These farms are found primarily in Lualualei and Wai‘anae
Valleys;
   ·   The extensive open spaces and special visual and cultural qualities of
the principal valleys of the District: Nānākuli, Lualualei, Wai‘anae, Mākaha,
and Mākua;
   ·   The rugged beauty of the Wai‘anae Mountains that shape and define the
District;
   ·   The miles of shoreline, sandy beaches, and beach parks;
   ·   The “small town values” of many of Wai‘anae’s people, who are open,
friendly, family- oriented, and strongly attached to the land and the sea.
Population growth and land development in the Wai‘anae District over the past
50+ years have been more typical of a suburbanizing urban fringe community than
that of a stable rural community. These growth and development trends are
likely to continue unless the City implements a strong “growth control” plan
for the District. Continued urban and suburban development will consume open
agricultural lands and add more demand on Wai‘anae’s roads, schools, parks, and
other facilities, which are already overcrowded. The country values and
lifestyle that are of such great importance to the Wai‘anae community will be
further eroded and undermined.
2.3.3   Restrict coastal urban, suburban, and resort development makai of
Farrington Highway
Lands makai of Farrington Highway are at present mostly beach parks and
undeveloped shore lands. There are also a number of small lot subdivisions, a
few apartment buildings in Wai‘anae and Mākaha, the former Nānāikapono
Elementary School site in Nānākuli, some small commercial buildings in Wai‘anae
Town, Wai‘anae High School, and the Wai‘anae Small Boat Harbor.
Further development encroachment on these coastal lands should not be
permitted, with the exception of some very limited redevelopment of small
commercial properties in Wai‘anae town. The long-range goal should be to return
developed coastal lands to public use. Toward that end, the City should act on
opportunities to purchase coastal properties when such uses become nonviable
due to economic conditions, storm damage, or other causes.
One other possible use of coastal lands is for a walking/jogging/biking path
and Community Gathering Places. In Section 3.11 of this Wai‘anae Sustainable
Communities Plan, there is a program for such a path that would run along the
coast, connecting the various ahupua‘a. The program also calls for four
Community Gathering Places to be located just off of the path in four of the
District’s beach parks, one in each of the major ahupua‘a. The Wai‘anae
Sustainable Communities Plan supports this limited development makai of
Farrington Highway since it would serve the community’s daily needs.
2.3.4   Preserve all lands north of Kepuhi Point as open space lands
The Land Use Map demonstrates a general policy that there should be NO urban,
suburban, resort, or golf course development, or any other type of commercial
land development, or landfills, permitted or approved north of Kepuhi Point and
north of Mākaha Valley. There is strong community consensus that no highway be
built around Ka‘ena Point due to its environmental sensitivity and cultural
status. There is general consensus among State and City agencies that these
lands should be preserved and protected for open space, environmental
preservation, and cultural and religious practices.
The present use of Mākua Valley by the U.S. Army for live fire combat training
is not in keeping with this general resource preservation policy. The Army’s
use of Mākua in recent years has been minimal, due to environmental and
cultural concerns. Many in Wai‘anae believe that the Army has demonstrated its
ability to train at alternate locations, thus negating the need for Mākua
Valley as a training area. The community is particularly concerned with the
restrictions placed on access for cultural and religious practices at sites on
these lands that the Army controls. Military land uses within the Wai‘anae
District are addressed in detail in Section 3.12.
2.3.5   Preserve and restore streams and stream corridors
The major streams and stream corridors of Wai‘anae’s valleys are very important
elements of the landscape and the natural ecology of the region, as well as of
the Native Hawaiian heritage. Some of these streams are perennial streams near
their origins high in the Wai‘anae Mountains, but all are intermittent, or
“interrupted,” streams as they flow down through the valleys. Hundreds of years
ago, when the Hawaiian people first began to settle in the ahupua‘a of the
Wai‘anae Coast, they located themselves near the streams with year-round flows
and tapped these streams for water for extensive terraced lo‘i kalo (taro
patches), located in the upper sections of the larger valleys: Nānākuli,
Lualualei, Wai‘anae, Mākaha, and Mākua. The streams were also essential as a
source of drinking water, and for their natural plants and freshwater fish.
“Modern” development practices have severely impacted many of these streams.
Impacts include alteration of stream channels through grading operations for
roads and houselots, siltation from eroding farm fields and residential
subdivisions, trash and debris dumped into stream channels, and “improvement”
of major stream channels near the coast by means of concrete-lined, engineered
channels.
A coordinated City/State/Federal and Private landowners program is needed for
the protection and restoration of Wai‘anae’s natural streams and stream
corridors. The Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan designates all important
perennial and intermittent streams and stream channels as special STREAM
CONSERVATION CORRIDORS. The purpose of such a designation is to prompt
appropriate State and City agencies to initiate a program that will enhance
stream flow and protect the natural ecology of Wai‘anae’s streams, stream
floodplains, and associated plants and animals. This program should include a
“no dumping” rule within the Stream Conservation Corridor, requirements for
siltation basins or other means of controlling urban and agricultural
stormwater runoff, and a program for the restoration of natural vegetation
within stream floodplain areas. A community-based “adopt-a-stream” program
could be an important part of this overall stream conservation program. More
details are included in Chapter 3, Section 3.5.
2.3.6   Preserve and protect cultural sites and cultural landscapes
The entire Wai‘anae Coast is considered by many residents to be a “cultural
landscape.” It is widely acknowledged that the District is filled with
important cultural sites, such as house sites, heiau (temples/shrines), ko‘a
(fishing shrines), and agricultural terraces. To Native Hawaiians, natural
resources are considered cultural resources as well, including the pu‘u
(hills), pōhaku (stones), kai (ocean), streams, coastline, and more. Considered
all together, these cultural and natural features were the components of the
community’s original infrastructure. Today, they form one of the most intact
cultural landscapes on the island of O‘ahu.
Almost every valley in the District contains extensive cultural sites
associated with the region’s history. Many of these sites are important to
local people as cultural sites and are frequently visited, where possible. The
upper valleys, beyond the limits of today’s housing developments and small
farms, have numerous cultural sites. The coastal dunes contain sites and
burials that are hidden beneath the surface of the ground. Some sites even
survive under existing buildings. Heiau and ko‘a are also scattered throughout
the area.
The first step to protecting this cultural landscape is to do a complete
archaeological survey of the area. The only fairly complete surveys that have
been done were for upper Nānākuli, upper Lualualei, mid-to-upper Mākaha, and on
the coastal flats of Kea‘au. Many areas have had little or no surveying.
In addition, the community would like to see community-based groups eventually
take over responsibility and management of important cultural sites. The end
goal is to both preserve the sites and to allow appropriate levels of access.
This is a difficult balance to achieve, since unlimited access can lead to more
visitors going to a site, and can sometimes result in vandalism. More
discussion on the responsibilities of such groups is included in Section 3.6.2.
2.3.7   Improve transportation systems within the District
One way in which the lives of Wai‘anae residents could be greatly improved is
through the enhancement and improvement of the District’s transportation
systems. Currently, Farrington Highway is the only public road that leads into
and out of the Wai‘anae District, as well as the main route for travel within
the District. There have been several times over the years that the highway has
been closed due to downed utility lines and poles, automobile accidents, and
other situations. In each incident, residents have been unable to travel –
meaning some could not get home to their children, others could not get to
work, and other critical needs could not be met. To prevent this problem from
re-occurring, the community would like to have a road that provides an
alternative way in and out. Many would like to see a full-fledged second access
highway. However, the cost of building such a road is estimated to be too high
to be feasible for the foreseeable future. Thus, most residents agree that
their first priority is to open an emergency bypass road, possibly through the
Kolekole Pass, and to continue to plan for a second access highway.
In addition to improving access and traffic flow within the District for
private vehicles, Wai‘anae residents would also like to see the enhancement of
alternative transportation modes, such as public transportation, including
boats/ferries and rail, as well as paths for walking, jogging, and biking.
Lastly, residents support HECO’s plans to under-ground the utility lines that
run along Farrington Highway. The communication and power lines pose a
significant threat to drivers, since they have the potential to blow over and
block the highway, as has happened in the past (including in December 2007).
2.3.8   Designate, plan, and develop Town Centers and Community Gathering
Places for Wai‘anae, Nānākuli, Lualualei, and Mākaha
Related to Vision Element #1, ahupua‘a planning, this Element recognizes the
need for each of the principal ahupua‘a to have fully functioning Town Centers
– to allow people to carry out their daily tasks largely within their ahupua‘a,
and Community Gathering Places – to encourage community members to spend time
together participating in cultural activities with their ‘ohana.
Within the Rural Community areas of each of the principal developed ahupua‘a –
Nānākuli, Lualualei, Wai‘anae, and Mākaha – there is the need for the
development of more strongly defined commercial and service centers.
This concept includes the proposed designation of Wai‘anae town center as a
“Country Town” commercial and service center. Historically, at least from the
mid-19th century, Wai‘anae Town was the most important settlement in the
District. Today, with Wai‘anae Mall and the mix of small older buildings and
newer buildings in the vicinity of Pōka‘i Bay, Wai‘anae Town Center is the area
of the District that is recognized as the largest concentration of commercial
and services facilities. Smaller “Village Centers” are schematically shown on
the Land Use Map for the communities of Nānākuli, Lualualei, and Mākaha. These
smaller commercial centers would provide shops, stores, restaurants, and social
service offices for the residents, as well as a stronger physical identity and
an enhanced sense of community. Such developments would also reduce traffic in
the District.
The Nānākuli Hawaiian Homestead Community Association (NHHCA) has taken the
initiative to develop such a Center – the “Nānākuli Village Center”, which is
currently under construction. When it is completed in 2012, it will include a
multi-purpose cultural center, an affordable housing rental complex, commercial
rental spaces, and the International Surfing Hall of Fame.
For both the Wai‘anae Country Town and the Village Centers of Māili and Mākaha,
a phased action program for capital improvements and investment needs to be
developed. More details on the Nānākuli Village Center and the needs of these
other areas are included in Section 3.10.
Similarly, Community Gathering Places, of several acres each, are needed within
each of the major ahupua‘a (Nānākuli, Lualualei, Wai‘anae, and Mākaha). These
Gathering Places would be quite different from the Country Town and Village
Centers. As envisioned by the community, the Gathering Places are open areas
with perhaps a few small buildings where people can gather informally to visit
and talk story; have celebrations; stage festivals and special events; teach
and learn traditional crafts, music, and dance; buy, sell, and barter homegrown
produce and homemade items; and generally renew contact with friends and
neighbors.
One plan for these Gathering Places is to locate them in the beach parks of the
four major ahupua‘a, and connect them by a walking/jogging/biking path that
extends along the entire Wai‘anae Coast. The path would be wide enough for
Police Cushmans to utilize for patrolling. It could also provide photovoltaic-
powered lights, safety phones, and water fountains. The major benefits of this
plan include: allowing people to utilize the beaches and feel safe doing so,
providing a venue for exercise and possible sporting events, allowing people to
get around the District by bike safely, among others. More details are included
in Section 3.11.
2.3.9   Develop and support community-based businesses
In order to create a community that is more self-sufficient, members of the
community have expressed a strong interest in developing more employment
opportunities within their District, including fewer restrictions on working
from home. Such a situation would also allow people to work closer to where
they live, which would reduce commute time and increase their time at home with
their families.
The sector with the most community support for expansion is agriculture, for
several reasons. First, Wai‘anae has a history rooted in agriculture, from
ancient Hawaiians growing kalo (taro) and ‘uala (sweet potato), to more recent
times, when the District was a leader in the state in production of many
vegetable and animal food products, such as pork, chicken, eggs, milk, and
various truck crops. In addition to historical reasons, the expansion of
agriculture would allow the community to protect significant amounts of land
from development.
There is also substantial interest in increasing cultural, educational, and
healthcare facilities and job opportunities. Some possibilities include
expanding the hands-on educational programs, such as those offered by Ka‘ala
Farm and MA‘O Organic Farm (Mala Ai ‘Opio Organic Farm). There is currently one
charter school in the District, and more could be created. In addition, various
community members brought up the idea of creating a place to train teachers,
for which there is a huge demand. Also, the Wai‘anae Coast Comprehensive Health
Center is currently expanding its facilities in order to increase its training
capabilities.
Other economic opportunities discussed include expansion of retail and
commercial centers in the four major ahupua‘a and the creation of a light
industrial park in Lualualei. Similar to the other sectors, it is recommended
that locally-owned businesses be given priority, and that they hire residents
as much as possible.
Another employment possibility along these lines is the formation and
development of the recommended community-based groups to help manage the
District’s natural and cultural resources (see Vision Element #10).
2.3.10   Government agencies should partner with community-based organizations
in order to better manage Wai‘anae’s natural and cultural resources
There are a number of community-based organizations in Wai‘anae that are
actively engaged in caring for important cultural and natural resources, both
mauka and makai. The number of these community organizations, and their range
of interests and activities, is likely to continue to expand in the future. By
partnering with these community entities, city, state, and federal agencies
that have natural and cultural resources management responsibilities can
benefit from local knowledge and community energies, and thus develop stronger
and deeper resource management programs.
3.   LAND USE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
This chapter of the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan presents Policies and
Guidelines for the principal types of land use that should be provided for in
the District. The Vision for the future of the Wai‘anae District described in
Chapter 2 will be implemented through the application of these Policies and
Guidelines.
The first section provides an overview of the existing conditions in the
Wai‘anae District – the land use, population, economics, and environment. The
other 11 sections deal with each of the major types of land use within the
District. The Chapter includes the following sections:
   3.1   Overview of Land Use, Population, Economics, and Environmental
Conditions
   3.2   Open Space and Important Views
   3.3   Coastal Lands
   3.4   Mountain Forest Land
   3.5   Streams and Floodplains
   3.6   Historical and Cultural Resources
   3.7   Agricultural Lands
   3.8   Residential Land Use
   3.9   Commercial and Industrial Uses
   3.10   Country Towns, Rural Community Commercial Centers and Gathering
Places
   3.11   Parks and Recreational Areas
   3.12   Military Land Use
Each section contains Policies, which are statements that express the Wai‘anae
community’s overall philosophy and the City’s long-range planning intent with
regard to particular land uses. The Guidelines are more specific statements
that are meant to provide guidance to City agencies and other public and
private entities in relation to how the planning, design, and implementation of
various types of programs and projects should be achieved. Guidelines have been
provided for those land uses with more detailed physical planning concepts
(Sections 3.8 through 3.11).
For each major land use type, the presentation of Policies and Guidelines is
preceded by an “Overview” section that provides a summary of important facts
and trends relating to that land use type.
3.1   OVERVIEW OF LAND USE, POPULATION, ECONOMICS, AND ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
Before proceeding with detailed policies and guidelines for the Wai‘anae
District, this section summarizes the key facts pertaining to existing land
use, including State and City land use designations, population growth trends,
and economic and environmental conditions.
3.1.1   General Physical Setting
Wai‘anae is an area of great physical beauty. The overall form of the landscape
consists of white sand beaches along the coast, a narrow coastal plain, large
valleys that extend from 3 to 5 miles inland, and the dramatically eroded,
steep walls of the Wai‘anae Mountains. The major valleys – Nānākuli, Lualualei,
Wai‘anae, Mākaha, and Mākua – are defined and separated from each other by
steep-sided basalt ridges, the remnants of the flanks of the great volcano that
emerged from the ocean some 3 million years ago. The waters of the Pacific
Ocean here are a deep blue, and the offshore currents are strong and often
treacherous.
The area included in the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan consists of
38,089 acres, which is about 59.5 square miles, slightly less than 10 percent
of O‘ahu’s 602 square miles. Of the eight Development Plan/Sustainable
Communities Plan Districts, Wai‘anae ranks 5th in size – between Ko‘olau Poko
(41,279 acres) and Ko‘olauloa (37,060 acres).
The climate of Wai‘anae is generally hot and dry along the coastal areas and in
the lower sections of the valleys. Cooler and wetter conditions prevail in the
upper sections of the valleys and up into the Wai‘anae Mountains. Average
annual rainfall ranges from less than 20 inches along the coast to more than 75
inches near the summit of Mount Ka‘ala.
Mount Ka‘ala, the highest peak on O‘ahu at 4,025 feet (USGS), is visible
(clouds permitting) from much of the coastal area of Wai‘anae.
This landscape is one of unique grandeur and beauty. Many of Wai‘anae’s
residents, especially the Native Hawaiian population, also have a much deeper
appreciation of and connection to the land based on their culture.
3.1.2   Population
The table below shows the recent and projected trends in Wai‘anae’s population.
Table 3-1: Population Trends for Wai‘anae
Year Population Percentage of O‘ahu Total
Table 3-1: Population Trends for Wai‘anae
Year Population Percentage of O‘ahu Total
1950 7,024      1.99%
1960 16,452     3.29%
1970 24,077     3.82%
1980 31,487     4.13%
1990 37,411     4.47%
2000 42,259     4.82%
2010 44,490     4.88%
2020 46,776     4.83%
2030 48,667     4.78%
2035 49,217     4.74%
Source: US Census, 2000 and DPP, 2009
(Note: Numbers for years 2010 through 2035 are projections from DPP, 2009)
 
The community has expressed concern regarding population counts and projections
for Wai‘anae. To begin with, some believe that the most recent U.S. Census
(2000) count for the District was low. This is due primarily to the recent
increase in homelessness, since government population surveys usually do not
count individuals without addresses. It is estimated that in 2008 there were
over 6,000 homeless individuals in Wai‘anae. This figure includes the following
estimates:
   ·   2,675 people living on the Leeward Coast beaches (Wai‘anae Community
Outreach, 2008)
   ·   3,230 “hidden homeless” – individuals who are currently living “doubled
up” with friends or family members (SMS, 2006)
   ·   594 living in transitional shelters located within the District
(information gathered from various shelters)
(Note: some of those counted as living on beaches could have transitioned into
family homes or shelters. To account for this, the total of 6,500 was rounded
down to 6,000)
This total (6,000) added to the 2007 population estimate of 43,655 (DBEDT,
2007), brings the current population estimate for Wai‘anae up to well over
49,000 people.
Thus, the projections for the future population of Wai‘anae may be low as well.
DPP currently projects that the Wai‘anae District will have 46,776 people
living there by 2020, but the figures noted above indicate that the population
may already have been over 49,000 in 2010.
Overall, these findings have serious implications for the Wai‘anae District,
especially when combined with the economic data in Section 3.1.3. Namely, the
District’s poverty and homelessness may continue to worsen. These social and
economic trends indicate that there is a need for more social services, from
both private/non-profit and public service providers.
The chart below shows the racial distribution within the Wai‘anae District as
of the 2000 Census. One key statistic to note is that the largest racial group
was “Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islanders” (28.7 percent). When
residents were asked to indicate their race alone or in combination with other
races, over 62 percent identified themselves as at least partly Native Hawaiian
or other Pacific Islander, compared to 21.6 percent for all of O‘ahu (US
Census, 2000).
Exhibit 3-1: Wai‘anae’s Racial Distribution
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8645.png]
3.1.3   Economics
Overall, the Wai‘anae community has ‘lagged’ behind the rest of O‘ahu in terms
of economic development and employment opportunities for its residents.
The following information is contained in the Draft Leeward Coast Initiative
Inventory Report (August 31, 2007):
   ·   In 2000, the per capita income of Wai‘anae community residents was about
61 percent of the State average.
   ·   In 2000, more Wai‘anae community households were in low-income
categories than the State average.
   ·   In 2000, the percentage of Wai‘anae community individuals below the
poverty level was much higher than the State average.
   ·   The average wage gap has been widening. In 2004, the Wai‘anae community
wages were 20 percent less than the State average wage.
   ·   According to the U.S. Census Bureau, it was found that in 2000 most of
the workers in the Leeward Coast work elsewhere and that Wai‘anae community
workers spend 16 more minutes traveling to work than the State average.
   ·   The unemployment rate in the Wai‘anae community has been much higher
than the State average and the gap has widened over the past twenty years.
Also, economic data and reports from other sources, including the following,
urge the need for immediate action to stimulate economic growth and to create
new jobs directly within the Wai‘anae community:
   ·   The Wai‘anae community has poverty levels near 20 percent, with some
census tracts exceeding a 50 percent poverty level. Over 90 percent of
households in the district earn less than $50,000 per year. The median
household income is $25,638. Historically, all of the communities along the
Wai‘anae community have been economically depressed. Unemployment is estimated
to be twice the national average (Mr. Michael Pecsok, Vice Chancellor for
Academic Services, Leeward Community College, May 4, 2005).
   ·   The Wai‘anae community is ranked first in unemployment and poverty, with
an average per capita income of $13,348, compared to Honolulu County’s per
capita income of $21,998. The Wai‘anae community’s unemployment rate is 8.6
percent, which is more than double that of Honolulu County’s average of 3.8
percent. The poverty rate is 21.9 percent, compared to Honolulu County’s
average of 9.9 percent. (University of Hawai‘i – West O‘ahu, December 13,
2005).
In addition, the economic data and reports indicate that the economic gap
between the Wai‘anae community residents and the rest of O‘ahu has been
widening since 1980 (DBEDT, 2007).
Finally, the 2007 Annual Report on the Status of Land Use on O‘ahu, prepared by
the department of planning and permitting, reveals that the Wai‘anae community
is projected to be the only area on O‘ahu that will be experiencing a decrease
in the total number of jobs from 2000 to 2030. This decline in jobs projected
for this 30-year period is especially alarming when considered together with
the existing economic conditions as reported in the studies cited above.
3.1.4   Existing Land Use
Most of the existing urban and suburban development in the Wai‘anae District is
clustered along the Farrington Highway corridor, in a developed strip that
varies from about 1/4 mile to 1 mile in width. The valleys are largely
agricultural or military lands, and the steeper ridges and mountains are
generally undeveloped grasslands and forest lands.
Recent City data indicate the following land uses, as permitted by the current
City and County Zoning:
Table 3-2: Land Use Permitted by Current City & County Zoning
Land Use Acreage
Table 3-2: Land Use Permitted by Current City & County Zoning
Land Use     Acreage
Agriculture  8,578
Residential  2,260
Apartment    78
Industrial   79
Resort       97
Preservation 19,561
Military     7,148
*Other       288
TOTAL:       38,089
Source: DPP, 2008
(*Other acreage is primarily in Business and Country zoning)
 
3.1.5   Potential Developments
In 2008, approximately 20 transitional shelters and affordable housing projects
were proposed for the Wai‘anae District. Several of these project plans have
since been terminated. However, the District has a significant amount of land
currently permitted for such developments. Residents have expressed concern
that allowing such developments could increase the District population. Details
of developments that are still planned for the District are included in Section
3.8.
3.1.6   Environmental Conditions and Implications for Planning
The overview of Wai‘anae’s environmental resources presented in the Wai‘anae
Sustainable Communities Plan Background Report (1999) provided some strong
guidelines for land use and development planning for the District. These
environmental conditions are still generally applicable today and may be
summarized as follows:
   ·   Wai‘anae’s climate is very favorable for many types of agriculture. The
District also has large acreages of good soils, especially in Lualualei Valley,
the largest valley of the moku. Much of the soil found in Lualualei is from the
vertisol series, which is regarded as fertile soil that makes excellent
agricultural land when it occurs in large, level tracts, such as in Lualualei
(CTAHR, 2008). However, only a limited area of Lualualei is available for
agricultural uses, since most of the valley is occupied by the U.S. military.
   ·   Expansive Soils are a constraint. Some of the soils in the valleys, and
most of the soils on the lower slopes of the ridges and mountains are highly
expansive clay soils that are not good for construction of foundations for
homes and other structures. These expansive soils can be built on – with
special foundation construction techniques – on relatively level sites.
However, steeper sites are subject to slumping and sliding, and should not be
developed.
   ·   The District’s aquifers have a very small sustainable yield. The
sustainable yield of the Wai‘anae and Mākaha Aquifer System Areas, where active
Board of Water Supply (BWS) wells are located, is only about 6 million gallons
per day (mgd) combined. In the year 2000, the City pumped about 4.9 mgd from
these wells. This volume of water was less than the CY2000 District demand of
approximately 11.1 mgd. The balance of about 6.2 mgd was imported into the
District from the much larger Pearl Harbor Aquifer Sector Area.
The Wai‘anae District’s limited groundwater resources suggest that major water
users like golf courses should not be developed here. Further, since all new
development will increase the amount of potable water that will have to be
imported, and since the long-range prospect for potable water on O‘ahu is for a
continued future increase in both demand and cost, significant growth of
housing and commercial uses in Wai‘anae should not be encouraged. Nonpotable
water sources, including reclaimed water, will need to be further developed so
that the limited local supply of potable water can be put to best use.
   ·   There are large natural and cultural resource areas in the Wai‘anae
District that should be protected and managed so that the resources are
preserved or enhanced. These important areas include the higher elevations of
the Wai‘anae Range, where there are important plant and animal ecosystems, and
the undeveloped upper valley areas of Nānākuli, Lualualei, Wai‘anae, Mākaha,
and Mākua, where there are extensive cultural sites.
Consideration is given to identifying areas that need special resource
protection or resource management zones in this Wai‘anae Sustainable
Communities Plan’s graphic plans and policy statements.
   ·   Special attention should be given to the protection and preservation of
Wai‘anae’s coastal resources, including the District’s beaches, coral reefs,
and estuaries. There should be no further commercial or residential development
on the makai side of Farrington Highway. The construction of “shore armoring”
structures should be discouraged. There should be no coastal development at all
beyond Mākaha. A long- range program for the control of nonpoint source
pollution of nearshore waters needs to be developed.
   ·   A comprehensive plan needs to be developed for specific drainage and
roadway improvements to alleviate local flooding problems. An emergency roadway
route needs to be created so that people have an alternate means of moving into
and out of the district when Farrington Highway is blocked by storm flooding or
other problems.
3.1.7   Wai‘anae Watershed Management Plan (BWS, 2010)
The Wai‘anae Watershed Management Plan (WWMP) provides a long-range plan for
the preservation, restoration, and balanced management of ground water, surface
water, and related watershed resources in the Wai‘anae District. The City and
County of Honolulu Board of Water Supply (BWS) began developing the WWMP in
collaboration with the City and County of Honolulu department of planning and
permitting, the State’s Commission on Water Resource Management, and the
Wai‘anae community, in 2004. The Public Review Draft was submitted in June
2006, and the Plan was adopted by City Council in 2010.
Clearly, management of land and water is interrelated, since the majority of
“developed” land uses, such as residential, commercial, industrial, and even
agricultural, result in an increased demand for water. Thus, BWS has made
extensive efforts to ensure that the WWMP is in alignment with the Policies and
Guidelines of the original Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan (2000).
Likewise, the process of updating this SCP has included reviewing the WWMP and
ensuring that the SCP is in alignment with the Watershed Plan’s Goals and
Objectives. Please refer to the WWMP (BWS, 2010) for details.
3.2   OPEN SPACE AND IMPORTANT VIEWS
3.2.1   Overview of Open Spaces and Important Views
Wai‘anae is considered by many people, including both residents and visitors,
to be one of the most scenic regions of the island of O‘ahu.
The Wai‘anae landscape is a large-scale, bold landscape. The major elements of
this landscape are the deep blue of the ocean; the long ribbons of white sand
beach; the green valleys; the rugged pu‘u and ridges along the coast, including
Pu‘u Heleakalā, Pu‘u O Hulu, Pu‘u Mā‘ili‘ili‘i, and Pāhe‘ehe‘e Ridge; the
steep, harsh side walls of the valleys, and the greener, softer walls at the
backs of the valleys; the high peaks of the Wai‘anae Range, including Pu‘u Kaua
at 3,127 feet, Pu‘u Kalena at 3,504 feet, and Mount Ka‘ala at 4,025 feet.
The large-scale open spaces of the region are not immediately apparent from
Farrington Highway, the main coastal roadway. Along most of the highway,
residential and commercial development blocks the driver’s view of the great
valleys of the region. Once people leave the highway and turn up into the
valleys, they are greeted with dramatic views of open valley lands and the
steep-walled ridges and mountains beyond.
The Coastal View Study commissioned by the City department of land utilization
and published in 1987 identifies a number of “Significant Stationary Views”:
from Mākaha Beach Park, Mauna Lahilahi Beach Park, Pōka‘i Bay Beach Park, and
Mā‘ili Beach Park. The Study also lists “Significant Road Views.” In addition,
there are many dramatic mauka views, and special views from higher elevations
looking toward the coast, including spectacular views from the scenic overlook
near Kolekole Pass. The views from the Coastal View Study are documented with
recent photographs in the Technical Report (2010).
Open space and views across open spaces are cultural resources, and should be
protected as such. Various mo‘olelo talk about specific place names, as well as
the relation between, and views of, the places. Thus, the views referenced
above are significant to Wai‘anae residents and should be protected. This means
that no development should be allowed that negatively impacts these views.
Lands north of Kepuhi Point, which marks the northern coastal limits of Mākaha
Valley, are largely undeveloped lands. Land uses include beach parks, ranch
lands, the Army’s training area at Mākua Valley, and extensive areas of State-
owned forest lands. The undeveloped, rugged beauty of this part of the Wai‘anae
coast still provides a sense of what most of the leeward coast once looked
like. The ahupua‘a of Kea‘au, ‘Ōhikilolo, Koiahi, Mākua, Kahanahaiki, and
Keawaula are of great cultural importance to the Native Hawaiian community, as
is open space in general.
In contrast to the dramatic natural beauty of the area, much of the residential
and commercial development along Farrington Highway is run down and
dilapidated. These man-made elements detract from the scenic qualities of this
coastal highway.
Certain types of potential future development would also have an adverse impact
on the visual quality of the district, including any further commercial or
multifamily housing development on the makai side of Farrington Highway,
residential subdivisions replacing valley farmlands, or large lot subdivisions
being developed on the lower slopes of the Wai‘anae Range.
Types of land uses and activities that are supported in these large open spaces
include farming, ranching, gathering, and other cultural activities. In
addition, Wai‘anae residents have expressed their desire to have a cemetery in
their District. This is another possible use of open space.
The open space character and the dramatic views of Wai‘anae’s shorelands,
valleys, and mountains must be preserved and protected for the enjoyment of
many generations to come.
3.2.2   Polices Pertaining to Open Spaces and Important Views
3.2.2.1   Do Not Allow Significant Negative Impacts on Large Open Spaces
The preservation of open space and scenic beauty should be a high priority
consideration for all public and private programs and projects that may affect
the coastal lands, valleys, and mountains of the Wai‘anae District. Any
proposed project that would have a significant negative impact on a large open
space within the District should not be allowed.
3.2.2.2   Address Project Impacts on Open Space
The environmental impact analysis for any large proposed project, whether
public or private, that may be planned for coastal, valley, or mountain sites
within the Wai‘anae District shall include a detailed analysis of the project’s
potential impact on open space and scenic beauty.
3.2.2.3   Do Not Allow Significant Negative Impacts on Important Public Views
The preservation of all important public views shall be a high priority
consideration for all public and private programs and projects. Any proposed
project that may affect any significant view, including but not limited to the
views noted in the “Coastal View Study,” should not be allowed.
3.2.2.4   Address Project Impacts on Important Public Views
The environmental impact analysis for any large proposed project, whether
public or private, that may be planned for coastal, valley, or mountain sites
within the Wai‘anae District shall include a detailed analysis of the project’s
potential impact on important public views, as described above.
3.2.2.5   Limit Urban Development
Future urban and suburban development in the Wai‘anae District shall be limited
to the Rural Residential areas, and shall not be allowed to intrude into the
Agricultural area or the Preservation area (see Land Use Map in Appendix A),
nor makai of Farrington Highway. The undeveloped open spaces north of Kepuhi
Point shall be protected and preserved as open space lands in perpetuity. Uses
of lands north of Kepuhi Point shall be limited to cultural and religious uses,
conservation uses, beach parks, limited ranching and low-impact public
recreational uses.
3.2.2.6   Government Agencies Should Partner with Community-based Organizations
in order to Better Manage Wai‘anae’s Open Spaces
Government agencies should partner with community-based organizations to better
manage open spaces and their natural and cultural resources, as described in
Section 2.3.10. Specific to the management of open spaces, the groups should
oversee the appropriate gathering of various natural resources – only certain
resources should be allowed to be gathered at certain times. One of the
greatest potential challenges for these groups will be dealing with property
rights and working with land-owners.
3.2.2.7   Minimize Outdoor Lighting
Outdoor lighting should be the minimum necessary for public safety, home
security, and community aesthetics, while maintaining consistency with the
goals of energy conservation and environmental protection. Specifically,
artificial lighting should not negatively impact wildlife, nor should it
disrupt the large, unlit open spaces in the back of the District’s valleys.
3.2.3   Guidelines Pertaining to Open Spaces and Important Views
3.2.3.1   Minimize Adverse Effects of Artificial Lighting
Minimize the adverse effects of artificial lighting on wildlife and human
health by balancing the need of outdoor lighting for night utility, security,
and desire for reasonable architectural expression with the need to conserve
energy and protect the natural environment.
3.2.3.2   Adopt Outdoor Night Lighting Standards
Adopt outdoor night lighting standards that encourage efforts to minimize glare
and stray light, as well as reinforce the differences between the urban and the
rural areas.
3.2.4   Relation to Open Space Map
Areas shown as “Agricultural” and as “Preservation” on the Open Space Map
generally include the District’s large- scale open space resources.
3.3   COASTAL LANDS
3.3.1   Overview of Coastal Lands
The Wai‘anae District has about 20 miles of coastline, measured from the
beginning of the District about 1/2 mile south of Piliokahi Avenue in Nānākuli
to the northern end of the District near Ka‘ena Point.
About 18 miles of the District’s 20-mile coastline are beaches, and most of the
beaches are City beach parks with some facilities for beach users. The
remaining 2 miles of coastline are rocky ledges and residential coastal
development. From south to north, the beach parks and coastal access areas are:
   ·   Nānākuli Beach Park
   ·   Ulehawa Beach Park
   ·   Mā‘ili Beach Park
   ·   Lualualei Beach Park
   ·   Pōka‘i Bay Beach Park
   ·   Wai‘anae Kai Military Reservation Beach (U.S. Army)
   ·   Wai‘anae Boat Harbor
   ·   Mauna Lahilahi Beach Park
   ·   Mākaha Beach Park
   ·   Kea‘au Beach Park
   ·   Mākua Beach Park (state-owned)
   ·   Ka‘ena Natural Area Reserve
There are at least four sections of the Wai‘anae shore zone that are
experiencing significant chronic erosion: Mā‘ili Beach, Mauna Lahilahi Beach
Park, Mākaha Beach, and Keawa‘ula Bay. The erosion of shores and beaches is a
natural process that affects certain coastal areas. Generally, “shore armoring”
devices such as seawalls and rock groins are not appropriate solutions to these
erosion problems. Shore armoring often results in still more severe shore
erosion in areas near the “armored” site.
In addition, these coastal areas may eventually be affected by sea level rise.
In response, all planning for these areas should consider both the known and
potential effects of sea level rise.
Overall, the coastal lands of the Wai‘anae District are important cultural,
scenic, and recreational resources, and must be preserved and protected for the
benefit of present and future generations.
3.3.2   Policies Pertaining to Coastal Lands
3.3.2.1   Do Not Allow New Coastal Development
There should be no new residential, commercial, industrial, resort, or other
urban or suburban type of development makai of Farrington Highway, with the
exception of new development or redevelopment of low-rise commercial and public
buildings associated with the development of Wai‘anae Country Town and future
improvements to the Wai‘anae Boat Harbor.
3.3.2.2   Incrementally Acquire Coastal Properties
The long-range goal for the coastal lands of the Wai‘anae District should be
the establishment of a coastal zone that is free of urban or suburban
development and that is open to public access and public recreation. In working
toward this goal, opportunities to acquire parcels or rights-of-way in coastal
areas for public use should be pursued, especially for lands adjacent to public
parks. Any such acquired parcels should be restored to open space and made
available to public access and/or public recreational use.
The acquisition of land for the expansion and improvement of Pōka‘i Bay Beach
Park should be a top priority. The U.S. Army Rest Camp should be programmed for
eventual return to the general public.
3.3.2.3   Discourage Shore Armoring
Shore armoring along any beaches of the Wai‘anae District, including seawalls,
groins, and breakwaters, should generally be discouraged.
3.3.2.4   Government Agencies Should Partner with Community-based Organizations
in order to Better Manage Wai‘anae’s Coastal Lands
Government agencies should partner with community-based organizations to better
manage coastal lands and their natural and cultural resources, as described in
Section 2.3.10. Specific to the management of coastal lands, these groups
should educate and monitor the community on using best fishing and gathering
practices along the coast, such as the prohibition of laying net and leaving it
unattended.
3.3.2.5   Prohibit Projects that Negatively Impact Coastal Lands
Approvals should not be granted for uses or projects that may negatively impact
the natural ecology, scenic beauty, or cultural practices on coastal lands, or
that may increase user conflicts on the beach or in nearshore waters.
3.3.2.6   Prevent the Introduction of Alien Species
Every effort should be made to prevent the introduction of marine alien
species.
3.3.2.7   Maintain Beaches/Sand
All sand that is found along the Wai‘anae Coast, whether it is part of a
formally recognized beach or not, should be maintained as much as possible. Any
proposed projects along the coast should not significantly impact the sand
found there naturally.
3.3.3   Relation to Land Use and Open Space Maps
Coastal Preservation lands are shown on the Land Use and Open Space Maps in
Appendix A.
3.4   MOUNTAIN FOREST LANDS
3.4.1   Overview of Mountain Forest Lands
The important forest lands of the Wai‘anae District include the steep ridges
and pu‘u near the coast and the slopes and peaks of the Wai‘anae Mountains that
form the backbone and scenic backdrop of the region.
Botanical historians believe that Wai‘anae once supported a dryland forest in
the lower coastal plain area, grading gradually to wetter forest types in the
upper parts of the valleys and the slopes of the mountains, and finally
culminating in the wetland forest of the high elevations, with abundant ohia
lehua, sandalwood, and associated native plant species.
The natural landscape began to change with the first settlements of Native
Hawaiian people here some 800 to 1,000 years ago (Cordy, 1998). Today, little
of these natural forest communities remain, except in the highest elevations of
the Wai‘anae Mountains. The higher elevations of the mountains are still
important habitat for rare and endangered plants, as well as for endangered
animal species like the Elepaio, a rare forest bird, and the Achatinella tree
snail.
Preservation and restoration of these upper mountain forest lands, the lowland
forests, the forest resources, and their cultural uses are of great importance
to the Native Hawaiian people, to the Wai‘anae community, and to the people of
O‘ahu.
These forests and the resources found there are of great cultural, historical,
and medicinal importance to Native Hawaiians. The forests are tied to religious
beliefs and are referenced in various mo‘olelo as places where the mo‘o
(lizard) and other aumakua (deified ancestors) live. Numerous herbs and plants
have long been gathered from the forests for a variety of uses, including
medicinal, as well as for special items used in hula (traditional Hawaiian
dance) and lua (Hawaiian martial art). Those plants used for these purposes
should be protected, and in some cases, re-planted. The existence of these
forest resources is inextricably connected to the health and wellness of
Wai‘anae residents, especially the Native Hawaiian population. An issue related
to the protection of mountain forest resources is access to these resources.
Access should be ensured for such gathering purposes.
Another use of these lands is hiking. There are numerous hiking trails that
lead into the mountains, and some along the dramatic ridgelines. This Plan
advocates for public access to existing hiking trails, including those that
require passage through residential areas, as well as through military and
agricultural lands.
Lastly, it should be noted that these forest areas can become extremely dry,
especially during the summer months, and hence, are prone to wildfires.
Accordingly, a wildfire prevention plan should be developed to prevent future
fires.
3.4.2   Policies Pertaining to Mountain Forest Lands
3.4.2.1   Protect Mountain Forest Lands
Preserve and protect the Mountain Forest Lands of the Wai‘anae District in
their natural state – both the upper and lowland forests.
3.4.2.2   Develop Forest Restoration Program
Coordinate plans and programs towards the restoration of endemic and indigenous
forest plants and animals in the Forest Lands of the Wai‘anae District.
Examples of appropriate native trees to plant include: Kamani, Ulu, Ohi‘a‘ai,
Lama, Kawila, Iliahi, Koae‘a, and the Hala bush. Additionally, the herbs and
plants used for Native Hawaiian medicinal and cultural practices should be
identified, protected, and re-planted where needed.
3.4.2.3   Do Not Grant Permits that Negatively Impact Mountain Forest Lands
Land use permits should not be granted to any uses of the District’s forest
lands that may degrade the natural ecology, scenic beauty, or restrict access
to Native Hawaiian cultural practices carried out on these lands.
3.4.2.4   Government Agencies Should Partner with Community-based Organizations
in order to Better Manage Wai‘anae’s Mountain Forest Lands
Government agencies should partner with community-based organizations to better
manage Wai‘anae’s mountain forest lands and their natural and cultural
resources, as described in Section 2.3.10. Specific to the management of forest
lands, these groups should develop a list of appropriate native trees, plants,
and herbs that should be protected and re-planted, and where. They should also
educate the community about the amount and seasonal times that the various
resources can be gathered, and monitor the gathering activities. One of the
greatest potential challenges for these groups could be dealing with property
rights and working with land-owners.
3.4.2.5   Protect Rare and Endangered Species
Avoid or minimize development and human impacts in areas known to provide
important habitat for rare species, especially those that are listed as
threatened or endangered species. The Wai‘anae SCP Background Report (1999)
contains information from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) on such
species.
3.4.2.6   Prevent the Introduction of Alien Species
Prevent the introduction of alien plant, mammal, bird, and insect species that
could compete with, prey upon, or hybridize with native species. Additionally,
alien or invasive species should be eradicated, or at least controlled. The
current control measures for goats and pigs, including fencing and hunting,
should be enhanced.
3.4.2.7   Allow Public Access to Hiking Trails
The public should be allowed to access existing hiking trails, including those
that require passage through residential, military, and agricultural lands.
3.4.2.8   Develop Wildfire Management Plan
A wildfire management plan should be developed for the Wai‘anae District.
3.4.3   Relation to Land Use and Open Space Maps
Mountain Forest Lands to be preserved are designated as “Preservation” on the
Land Use and Open Space Maps.
3.5   STREAMS AND FLOODPLAINS
3.5.1   Overview of Streams, Stream Systems, and Floodplains
The streams of the major valleys of the Wai‘anae Coast have always been
considered a sacred part of the natural landscape. The streams traditionally
provided precious fresh water for drinking, agriculture, production of special
marine life, cultural practices, as well as for other daily uses, including
bathing and washing.
The major valleys – Nānākuli, Lualualei, Wai‘anae, Mākaha, and Mākua – have
well-articulated systems of intermittent streams: Nānākuli Stream, Ulehawa
Stream and Mā‘ili‘ili‘i Stream in Lualualei Valley, Kaupuni Stream and Kawiwi
Stream in Wai‘anae Valley, Mākaha Stream, and Mākua Stream. In recent years,
the makai sections of the streams in Lualualei and Wai‘anae Valleys have been
replaced with concrete drainage channels.
Descriptions of these streams in the source material label them as “perennial”
(flowing all year round) in the upper reaches of Wai‘anae Valley and Mākaha
Valley, and “intermittent” (flowing only after significant rainfalls) in the
lower parts of these two valleys and in the other valleys of the region.
Groundwater stored in the high elevation dike-structure of volcanic rocks
discharges as seeps and springs that form the “base flow” – the fair weather
flow – of the higher level perennial streams. The relative absence of perennial
streams here is a reflection of the generally arid climate and the alluvial
soils of the valleys, through which the streams become nonvisible “underflow.”
The point at which a particular Wai‘anae stream changes from perennial flow to
intermittent flow depends on a number of natural factors, including:
   ·   The season: with flows stronger during the wetter winter months;
   ·   The year: with flows stronger during wetter years.
During the past 1 million+ years, the region’s streams have accomplished the
immense job of sculpting the slopes of the Wai‘anae volcano and forming the
deep valleys that we see today. Thus we can see that these streams are powerful
shapers of the landscape. However, these streams are relatively small water
features, and are vulnerable to the negative impacts of human development.
Negative impacts include runoff from agricultural lands, with sometimes high
concentrations of silt, herbicides, pesticides, and farm animal wastes; runoff
from urban lands, with herbicides, oils, grease, paint products, and other
harmful and toxic substances; dumping of trash, broken appliances, old cars,
etc.; and various acts of grading and filling that result in faster runoff into
area streams, with attendant erosion of natural stream banks. Unfortunately,
development which results in damage to natural streambeds often eventually
requires the construction of concrete channels to “manage” the urban runoff.
The net result: the natural stream channel and flood plain are completely
obliterated.
Wai‘anae’s streams are important elements of the landscape. They are the
natural “arteries” of the valleys, bringing water down into the valleys from
the mountains. They are a special environment for fresh water plants and
animals, and also provide ribbons of fertile floodplain soils through the
predominantly plastic and sticky soils of the alluvial valleys. Healthy streams
are an indicator of a healthy landscape; sick streams indicate poor land use
practices and uncontrolled agricultural and urban runoff.
3.5.2   Polices Pertaining to Streams and Floodplains
3.5.2.1   Establish Stream Conservation Corridors
Stream Conservation Corridors should be established where feasible as an
element of the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan. These Stream Conservation
Corridors are illustrated on the “Open Space Map” in Appendix A.
Appropriate City, State, and Federal agencies should work with the community to
establish a strong, pro-active program for the detailed delineation of Stream
Conservation Corridors and the establishment of appropriate and enforceable
rules, regulations, fines, penalties, and community monitoring and oversight
programs for the protection of streams and stream floodplains.
Streams where Stream Conservation Corridors should be established include the
following:
   ·   Nānākuli Stream
   ·   Ulehawa Stream
   ·   Mā‘ili‘ili‘i Stream
   ·   Kaupuni Stream
   ·   Kawiwi Stream
   ·   Mākaha Stream
   ·   Mākua Stream
Existing residential and other development may limit the delineation of Stream
Conservation Corridors in some areas. However, these corridors should be
established to the fullest extent possible.
3.5.2.2   Restrict Uses Within the Stream Conservation Corridors
Uses and activities within these Stream Conservation Corridors should be
restricted to natural resources conservation uses and programs, compatible
recreational uses such as walking and gathering of native plants and stream
animals, and controlled diversion of stream waters for agricultural purposes.
Other compatible uses should be permitted as may be defined by the agency with
jurisdiction. There should be no dumping, littering, disposal of toxic or
hazardous materials, disposal of animal or human wastes, or other activities
that may be deleterious to stream quality and stream ecosystems. There should
also be no filling, grading, or other significant changes to the natural
contours within a Stream Conservation Corridor unless there is an overriding
need for such action that relates to public health, safety, or welfare.
3.5.2.3 Establish Minimum In-Stream Flow Standards
There is a need to develop a cooperative government-community program toward
the establishment of minimum in-stream flow standards for the perennial streams
of the upper valleys of Wai‘anae, Mākaha, Mākua, Lualualei, and Nānākuli. The
overall objective of such a program would be to adequately protect fishery,
wildlife, recreational, aesthetic, scenic, and other beneficial in-stream uses.
The setting of instream flow standards would weigh the benefits of instream and
noninstream uses of water resources, including the economic impact of
restrictions of such uses. The establishment of flow standards is a
scientifically and culturally complex process that will require a significant
amount of time.
3.5.2.4   Government Agencies Should Partner with Community-based Organizations
in order to Better Manage Wai‘anae’s Streams and Stream Corridors
Government agencies should partner with community-based organizations to better
manage Wai‘anae’s Streams and stream corridors, as described in Section 2.3.10.
One of the greatest potential challenges for these groups will be dealing with
property rights and working with land-owners.
3.5.3   Relation to Open Space Map
Stream Conservation Corridors are schematically shown on the Open Space Map.
3.6   HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
3.6.1   Overview of Historic and Cultural Resources
The Wai‘anae Coast, from Honouliuli to Ka‘ena, is a geographical area that is
known for its religious and spiritual significance. Kuilioloa, Puehu, Keaupuni,
Kahoali‘i, Haua, Haena, Malaihakoa, Kamaile, Punanaula, Kaneaki, and Laukinui
are just some of the na heiau (ancient temples) that were used and designated
for war, agriculture, astronomy, navigation, and religious purposes. Numerous
places on land and in the ocean have historic and religious significances that
are still being handed down from generation to generation, including land
areas, rocks (such as Leina A Ka‘uhane – from where spirits leaped into the
nether world at Ka‘ena), cliffs, and reefs.
The Wai‘anae area was first settled by Hawaiians about 800 to 1,000 years ago.
Current models of Hawaiian history have permanent settlement on O‘ahu being
focused on the wet, windward sides of the island from perhaps A.D. 0 to A.D.
900. During those years, residents of that side of the island often visited the
leeward sides to use various resources – fishing areas, bird colonies, the
shellfish of Pearl Harbor, etc. to sustain themselves. Small campsites
associated with those visits may be found throughout the leeward area. In the
Wai‘anae District, such a site appears to have been present in Wai‘anae Valley
along Pōkai Bay in the Wai‘anae Army Recreation Center.
Beginning about A.D. 1000, it appears that the population spread over into the
leeward areas of O‘ahu, and people settled the lower valleys of leeward O‘ahu
from the 1000s-1300s. Dates from Pearl Harbor, Kalihi, and Mākaha and Wai‘anae
Valleys all show people were residing in coastal areas and farming the lower
valleys.
In the 1300s, oral histories indicate larger moku formed on O‘ahu – apparently
Kona district (Honolulu), Ko‘olau Poko/Ko‘olau Loa, and ‘Ewa (with Wai‘anae and
Waialua) were the three moku which formed. This marked the start of more
complex and more stratified societies. By the 1400s, the entire island was
unified. Large heiau in the islands started to be built in the 1400s, based on
archaeological information, and large fishponds also began to be built by this
time – all evidence of more stratification and countries with larger
populations. From the 1400s - 1700s, population grew on the island. People
spread up into the upper valleys, where scattered houses and fields were
established. In the 1700s, oral histories show that O‘ahu expanded to control
all of Molokai and parts of Kauai. However, the O‘ahu kingdom fell to Maui in
1783, and Maui fell to the Hawai‘i Kingdom in 1795.
Throughout these years, the Wai‘anae District was distant from the ruling
centers of the O‘ahu and later kingdoms– which were primarily in Waikiki, the
‘Ewa area, and in Kailua. Within the Wai‘anae District, Wai‘anae Valley was the
political and religious center of the area. The high chief controlling much of
the area had a residence in Wai‘anae Valley (where the ruler resided when
passing through) and large sacrificial temples (luakini) were present in
Wai‘anae, with one also in Mākaha. All of the Wai‘anae lands filled in during
these years, with farms covering the land up into the uppermost valleys, and
with houses scattered among these farms.
Almost every valley in Wai‘anae District today still contains archaeological
sites associated with O‘ahu’s and Wai‘anae’s history. Many of these sites are
important to local people as traditional and cultural sites. The upper valleys,
beyond the limits of contemporary development, are nearly all covered with
archaeological sites. The coastal dunes contain sites (including burials),
which are hidden under the ground surface. Sometimes these sites survive under
existing buildings, and scattered heiau also still survive.
Based on archaeological studies completed to date, the Historic Preservation
Division of the State Department of Land and Natural Resources provided a
summary of the important cultural sites and resources of the Wai‘anae district,
as follows:
“Information on archaeological properties in the Wai‘anae District varies with
survey coverage. Since 1987, most developments have been preceded by an
archaeological survey (if needed) as part of the historic preservation laws’
review process. Also, the Army and Navy have conducted surveys of their lands.
Lands that were developed for housing, schools, businesses, etc., prior to 1987
often were not surveyed, and information on archaeological sites in those areas
comes from older 1930 or earlier archaeological studies which usually simply
identified heiau. Copies of these reports are on file in the library at the
State Historic Preservation Division (Department of Land and Natural Resources,
State of Hawai‘i).”
The only fairly complete large archaeological surveys that have been done are
in upper Nānākuli (done by the State Historic Preservation Division), in upper
Lualualei (done by the Bishop Museum), in mid to upper Mākaha (done by the
Bishop Museum), and on the coastal flats of Kea‘au (done by International
Archaeological Research Institute, Inc.). Other areas of the district have much
smaller areas that have received complete coverage, or areas where only initial
reconnaissance information is available. Many areas of the district have yet to
undergo archaeological survey.
Many of these historical and cultural sites and concentrations of sites are of
great importance to the community, including those that have not yet been
officially documented. The community would like to see funds dedicated to
archaeological surveys of areas not yet surveyed, and to the creation of a
cultural resource map that more thoroughly shows the extensive number of
cultural sites located in the area.
The following map shows only a small percentage of the numerous sites located
within the District.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8647.png]
3.6.2   Policies Pertaining to Historic and Cultural Sites
3.6.2.1   Preserve Major Concentrations of Cultural Sites and Allow Access for
Cultural Practices
The large concentrations of historical and cultural sites found in the upper
reaches of the valleys of the Wai‘anae District are included in the
Preservation areas. These important cultural landscapes should be preserved and
protected for the benefit of the community and of future generations. Careful
restoration of important sites should be undertaken by qualified professionals.
3.6.2.2   Do Not Allow Development that Negatively Impacts Important Cultural
Sites or Access to such Sites
Other important historical and cultural sites not located within the
Preservation areas should also be recognized and protected wherever possible.
Urban or agricultural development projects should not be permitted to degrade
or destroy important historical or cultural sites. “Important historical and
cultural sites” should be determined by the State Historic Preservation
Division in collaboration with the community.
3.6.2.3   Government Agencies Should Partner with Community-based Organizations
in order to Better Manage Wai‘anae’s Cultural Sites
Government agencies should partner with community-based organizations to better
manage Wai‘anae’s cultural sites, as described in Section 2.3.10. Such
management will include preservation, restoration, and monitoring of cultural
sites. One of the greatest potential challenges for these groups will be
dealing with property rights and working with land-owners.
3.6.2.4   Create Signage for Cultural Sites
Many of the cultural sites within the District are in need of signage that
displays the proper Hawaiian place name, as well as the mo‘olelo associated
with it. Such an undertaking should be overseen by the community-based group
discussed above. Funding should come from a variety of sources, including City,
State, and Federal sources, especially when they are the land-owners of the
site.
3.6.2.5   Protect and Allow Access for Cultural Practices at Sites on City-
Owned Lands
Plans and programs are needed for the protection of important historical and
cultural sites found on City-owned land within the District – which is
primarily in Mākaha Valley. These programs should include provisions for
community access to important sites for the observance of cultural practices,
and involvement of members of the community in the protection and preservation
program.
3.6.2.6   Protect and Allow Access for Cultural Practices at Sites on Federal,
State, or Private Lands
For lands owned by Federal or State agencies, or owned by private parties, the
appropriate public agencies should develop pro-active and cooperative efforts
to preserve and protect these important sites and provide for community access.
The State department of land and natural resources is developing a community-
based management program to better protect resources of the Wai‘anae Kai Forest
Reserve. Similar community access and forest management programs involving the
U.S. Navy for sites in Lualualei Valley, the State department of land and
natural resources for sites in Ohikilolo Valley and other state-owned areas,
and the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands in Nānākuli need to be developed.
3.6.2.7   Conduct a Thorough Cultural Survey of the Wai‘anae District
Residents recommend that the District be more thoroughly surveyed, and that
associated cultural maps be created. It is accepted that these maps will not
include every cultural site, due to funding limits, knowledge limits, as well
as the fact that often times, cultural practitioners do not want every site to
be public knowledge. Thus, the outcome should be maps that show numerous
cultural sites and a boundary around areas that should be considered cultural
landscapes – or areas with numerous sites that are both important in themselves
and in their relation to each other.
It is also possible to create a map that shows cultural uses that should be
protected from destruction. Examples of what such a map could demonstrate
include:
   a)   areas of traditional use by Native Hawaiians, such as for fishing,
conducting cultural practices [uniki (graduation from cultural practices), kapu
kai (ceremonial seabath), etc.], recreating, and temporarily residing;
   b)   places for observation of historic/cultural significance, such as the
resurrection or re-enactment of Makahiki activities; and
   c)   accesses to resources for cultural, sustenance, and traditional
economic purposes, along with the appropriate protection of the areas where
these resources are found, for the use by future generations.
3.6.3 Relation to Open Space Map
Major concentrations of archaeological sites are shown with a “dot screen”
texture on the Open Space Map.
3.7   AGRICULTURAL LANDS
3.7.1   Overview of Agricultural Lands in the Wai‘anae District
Although the Wai‘anae District’s climate is very favorable for many types of
agriculture, and the district has large acreages of good soils, the amount of
agricultural activity is on the decline. A few decades ago, Wai‘anae hosted 12
dairy farms, the last of which (Pacific Dairy) closed in January 2008. In 2004,
the Kakazu and Shigeta families closed O‘ahu’s last broiler chicken farms,
which were located in Nānākuli.
In 2007, the National Agricultural Statistics Service listed 172 farms in the
Wai‘anae zip code, with only 9 farms over 50 acres in size. The farms included
a handful of livestock operations (pig, egg layer, and goat), orchid growers,
and vegetable growers. Many of these listed farms are small-scale family farms,
and not working commercial farms. Increasing costs for land, transportation,
feed and fertilizers from the mainland are factors in the feasibility of farm
operations. According to local farmers, Wai‘anae lacks large, contiguous open
spaces that would allow larger-scale farms. Wai‘anae farmers may need to find
ways to combine adjacent parcels. Although there is land available for small
farm operations, such farms have a difficult time competing, due to economies
of scale. Also, many of the older farms that have gone out of business used to
raise livestock, which means the soil may not be good for growing crops.
Lualualei Valley, the largest valley of the moku, is particularly well-suited
for agriculture, since it is flat, there are a number of wells for irrigation
purposes, and the soil type is the unique vertisol series soil. CTAHR’s Soils
of Hawai‘i states that, “Vertisols are fertile soils. Their dark color is often
mistakenly attributed to organic matter, but our Vertisols have lower organic
matter contents than most other soils in the state. When they occur in large,
level tracts of land as in Lualualei Valley on O‘ahu, they make excellent
agricultural land.”
If agriculture is to grow and expand here, most local market studies point to
sustainable agriculture, indigenous crops, and a diversity of premium quality
products that can take advantage of the favorable climate. Organic fruit and
vegetable production fits well with both the climate and soil, especially as it
relies heavily on feeding the soil to increase organic matter content (through
such methods as use of compost and animal manure, cover cropping, and green
manures), and because there is high demand for organic products, it could bring
in revenue and create jobs in the community.
The preservation of agricultural lands – both lands currently in agricultural
use as well as fallow land that has agricultural use potential – is of critical
importance to the Wai‘anae community.
Agricultural uses of the land are important in Wai‘anae for both commercial
agriculture and part- time family farming. The continued protection and
availability of agricultural lands for commercial farms, family farms, part-
time farmers, and rural homesteads with backyard gardens are essential if the
Wai‘anae community is to preserve its rural lifestyle. The perpetuation of
agriculture is also important for providing jobs within the District, as well
as for increasing the level of self-sufficiency.
Various issues that present challenges to the long-term protection of
agricultural lands and the development of diversified agriculture, along with
proposed solutions, are included in the Technical Report (2010).
3.7.2   Policies Pertaining to the Agricultural Lands
3.7.2.1   Maintain the Boundary for Agricultural Lands
The Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan Land Use Map includes “Agriculture”
lands. The agricultural lands generally lie between the coastal “Rural
Residential” areas and the steep lands of the “Preservation” areas. The intent
is to preserve active farms as well as agricultural lands that contribute to
the open space and rural character of Wai‘anae and provide areas for the
potential expansion of agricultural activity. The Community Growth Boundary
should serve to limit urban development and prevent the encroachment of
residential and commercial development into agricultural areas.
3.7.2.2   Support Agriculture through Zoning Regulations and Tax Assessments
The City should use its powers of zoning and real property tax assessments in a
manner that will support the preservation of agricultural lands and
agricultural uses in the Wai‘anae District.
3.7.2.3   Limit the use of “Agriculture” Land to Agriculture and other
Compatible Land Uses
Land uses within the Agriculture area shall be limited to agriculture and other
uses that are compatible with a rural landscape and country lifestyle.
Compatible uses include uses such as farm dwellings, existing small country
stores, small-scale facilities for the storage or processing of farm products,
and cultural places and preserves. The more detailed Land Use Ordinance (LUO)
should govern the detailed determination of compatible and incompatible uses in
Agriculture areas. Other potentially appropriate uses include recreational or
educational programs or other uses consistent with the character of a rural
agricultural area, which provide supplemental income necessary to sustain the
primary agricultural activity. There should be a direct connection between
those activities and the maintenance of agricultural uses on the same or nearby
properties.
3.7.2.4   Prohibit Incompatible Land Uses of “Agriculture” Land
New residential subdivisions with lot sizes less than two acres, new commercial
uses, public and private schools, congregate housing or elderly care homes,
golf courses, resorts, theme parks, and other forms of large-scale commercial
or industrial development should generally not be permitted in the agricultural
area. Large lot subdivisions intended for luxury homes with no bona fide
agricultural activities are also not a compatible land use.
3.7.2.5   Coordinate Farmer’s Markets and Other Low-Cost Marketing Outlets
Various public and private entities should coordinate their efforts and
resources with community groups to create more opportunities for local family
farmers to get their farm products to market at the lowest possible cost. The
larger commercial farmers that are active in the Wai‘anae District have well
established marketing channels for their products. The small farmers and family
farmers, however, have fewer opportunities to market their products. Local
“Farmers’ Markets,” if well organized and held regularly, could provide low-
cost marketing opportunities for small farmers. Other low-cost marketing
concepts, including co-operatives, should also be explored.
3.7.3   Relation to Land Use and Open Space Maps
Agricultural land that should be protected and preserved is shown as
“Agriculture” on the Land Use and Open Space Maps. Included in this land use
category are most of Lualualei, Wai‘anae, and ‘Ohikilolo Valleys, and portions
of Nānākuli and Mākua Valleys.
3.8   RESIDENTIAL LAND USE
3.8.1   Overview of Existing and Planned Residential Uses
Existing residential land uses in the Wai‘anae District consist of about 2,144
acres of land zoned for residential use. These developed lands support a total
of an estimated 12,356 dwelling units, mostly clustered along the Farrington
Highway coastal corridor. “Medium Density” residential development is found on
two sites in Mākaha Valley: Mākaha Valley Towers condominiums and Mākaha Valley
Plantation townhouses. The residential acreage of 2,144 acres, computed against
the 12,356 dwelling units, yields an average density of 5.76 units per
residential acre, which is relatively high for a “rural” district like
Wai‘anae. As a comparison, the overall gross density of the Villages of Kapolei
planned community in the ‘Ewa District, with about 3,500 single-family homes
and 1,500 multifamily units, is about 10 units per residential acre.
Year 2000 Census data for housing units in the Wai‘anae District showed that
the Median Year Built for the District’s homes was 1974, the median value was
$158,700, as compared to the O‘ahu median value of $309,000 and the median
gross rent was $680 a month, as compared to O‘ahu at $802/month. About half of
the units were owned and half were rented. Since 2000, home prices have
continued to increase dramatically. The “2008 Second Quarter Residential
Resales Statistics” showed the median sales price for a single family home on
the Leeward Coast was $399,000 (compared to $636,000 for O‘ahu), and $170,000
for a condominium (compared to $330,000 for O‘ahu) (Hawai‘i Real Estate
Central, 2008).
Table 3-3: Housing Trends in the Wai‘anae District: 1980 to 2000
Housing Data Category Wai‘anae 198Wai‘anae 199Wai‘anae 2000
Table 3-3: Housing Trends in the Wai‘anae District: 1980 to 2000
Housing Data Category      Wai‘anae 198Wai‘anae 199Wai‘anae 2000
Occupied Units             9,528         10,680        10,562
Owner Units                4,090         4,879         6,098
Renter Units               3,874         4,538         4,464
Median Year Built          1974          1971          1974
Median House Value         $77,000       $136,200      $158,700
Median Gross Monthly Rent  $264          $602          $680
Median Rent as % of Income 20.0          30.1          33.5
Source: U.S. Census
 
An analysis of housing data from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Census’ shows some
alarming trends. Wai‘anae’s population during this period increased by 4,848
people. However, the number of occupied housing units actually declined during
this time, by 118. This disparity between population growth and the decline in
the number of occupied units suggests a trend towards larger households – and
more overcrowding – and/or more homeless people.
In 2000, Wai‘anae had a slightly higher percentage of homeowner units and a
slightly lower percentage of renter units when compared with O‘ahu overall.
Housing units in Wai‘anae were slightly “newer” than the O‘ahu average, and
median rents were slightly lower. However, median rent as a percent of income
was somewhat higher for Wai‘anae than for O‘ahu. The median house value in
Wai‘anae was much lower than the O‘ahu median.
Table 3-4: Housing Data for 2000: O‘ahu vs. Wai‘anae
Housing Data Category O‘ahu 200Wai‘anae 2000
Table 3-4: Housing Data for 2000: O‘ahu vs. Wai‘anae
Housing Data Category      O‘ahu 200Wai‘anae 2000
Occupied Units             286,450    10,562
Owner Units                156,233    6,098
Renter Units               130,217    4,464
Median Year Built          1972       1974
Median House Value         $274,600   $158,700
Median Gross Monthly Rent  $802       $680
Median Rent as % of Income 27.5%      33.5%
Source: U.S. Census
 
The Annual Report on the Status of Land Use on O‘ahu (DPP, FY 2007) showed the
following planned developments for the Wai‘anae District:
Table 3-5: Planned Developments for the Wai‘anae District
Project Name Year Built Out % Built Total Units Units Completed  Units to be
                                                (as of 6/30/07)  Built
Table 3-5: Planned Developments for the Wai‘anae District
                                                     Units         Units to be
Project Name      Year Built Out % Built Total Units Completed (as Built
                                                     of 6/30/07)
Hale Wai Vista    2010           0%      215         0             215
Kahikulo Ohana    2008           u.c.    88          0             88
Hale O Wai‘anae
Keola O Pokai Bay 2009           u.c.    125         0             125
Maili Kai, Phase  2014           51%     838         430           408
II
Maili III Self-   2009           0%      77          0             77
Help
Nanaikeola Senior 2009           u.c.    70          0             70
Apts
Nanaikeola        2011           0%      142         0             142
Village
Seawinds Apts     2008           0%      50          0             50
TOTAL UNITS                                                        1,175
PLANNED:
Source: DPP, 2007
(“u.c.” = under construction)
 
   Given past owner/renter trends in Wai‘anae, it appears that about one-half
of any new units should be for owner occupants and about one-half should be for
renters. Affordable house prices and affordable rentals will be needed.
According to affordability numbers provided by the Hawai‘i Housing Finance
Development Corporation (HHFDC) and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) for 2009, an “affordable home” for a family of 4 persons with
an income of 50 percent of the O‘ahu median income, assuming financing at 6.0
percent, would be priced at $194,800. Affordable Rentals, based on 30 percent
of income and including utilities, for a family with an income of 50 percent of
the O‘ahu median, would be $1,236/month for a 3-bedroom unit.
For Wai‘anae, the typical 2008 for-sale house price, including land, was in the
range of $350,000 to $400,000 and the typical rent for a 3-bedroom unit was in
the range of $1,000 to $1,200 (Honolulu Board of Realtors). Thus, for Wai‘anae,
house prices were higher than HHFDC/HUD’s affordability guidelines, but rents
were slightly lower. For many Wai‘anae families, however, these rent levels
were still very high.
Housing affordability is a critical issue throughout the State of Hawai‘i, and
the need for affordable housing is especially acute in lower income areas like
Wai‘anae. The 1980's were a period of accelerating housing prices throughout
the State. By 1990, the median price for a single-family home on O‘ahu was over
300 percent of the national median price. The 1990's brought a period of
economic stagnation for Hawai‘i, and housing prices declined from the peak
levels of 1989-1990. However, housing costs have risen dramatically since 2000,
and there is little likelihood that these high prices will become significantly
lower in the future.
One major factor that could substantially affect the future population growth
of the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan area – and thus affect all aspects
of the District’s development, including housing – is the development of the
“Second Urban Center” in the ‘Ewa District.
‘Ewa and Kapolei
The neighboring district of ‘Ewa, and the planned development of the City of
Kapolei may have a major impact on the Wai‘anae District’s population, housing
resources, and land use. The City government is strongly committed to the
development of the City of Kapolei, especially in terms of the creation of new
jobs at Kapolei, with hopefully an accompanying easing of commuter traffic to
downtown Honolulu. However, assuming that the City of Kapolei does develop as
planned, housing prices there will probably escalate faster than the O‘ahu
average, and more pressure will be brought to bear on nearby, lower cost
housing markets like Waipahu to the east and Wai‘anae to the west. It is likely
that there will be many more “affordable” housing projects like the Māili Kai
project proposed for development. Wai‘anae could thus become the “low cost”
bedroom community for the City of Kapolei.
Mākaha Valley
Lastly, there are approximately 450 acres of undeveloped State “Urban”
designated lands in Mākaha. According to one recent conceptual planning study,
as many as 1,830 new units could be constructed on these lands. There are about
3,334 housing units in Mākaha. Additional development under the current zoning
could thus raise the number of units to 5,000+ units. Existing City zoning
would allow for single-family and duplex units, condominium-hotel, club house,
ranch/farms, additional golf courses, recreation, grocery stores, and group
living facilities.
The Mākaha Special Area Plan (SAP), completed in early 2009, provides
guidelines for accommodating future development while preserving the rural
character of Mākaha Valley. It presents a “Mākaha Rural Development Plan” that
includes:
   ·   Mākaha Vision
   ·   Rural Development Concept
   ·   Rural Development Policy Framework
   ·   Rural Development Guidelines
The “Rural Development Policy Framework” provides the following guidance for
future planning and development for Mākaha:
“Guiding Principle:
Land located in the rural development area shall be compatible with, or provide
protection for, the natural environment and shall be designed to integrate with
the existing rural settlement patterns.
The framework for the Mākaha Rural Development Concept supports the Wai‘anae
Sustainable Communities Plan theme of ‘keeping the Country – Country’ through
the following policies:
   ·   Future developments, i.e., resort and residential, should promote rural
character in terms of scale and physical design, i.e., relatively low density,
low building heights, informal landscaping, and lots of open space.
   ·   Energy and water conservation measures should be applied to all future
developments in Mākaha Valley.
   ·   Preserve mauka and makai view planes and open space.
   ·   Preserve natural stream banks and waterways.
   ·   Provide opportunities for small-scale farming.
   ·   A roadway circulation plan should address pedestrian safety and
movement, especially in the existing residential areas.
   ·   Private roadway maintenance should be enforced with City oversight.
   ·   Some affordable housing should be provided in all future development
proposals that involve residential housing.
   ·   Some local small businesses should be provided for, as well as small-
scale farming and possibly retirement residential units.”
3.8.2   Policies Pertaining to Residential Lands
3.8.2.1   Do Not Increase Lands Designated “Residential”
For the foreseeable future, there should be no increase in lands designated for
Sustainable Communities Plan “Residential” in the Wai‘anae District. Existing
undeveloped lands within the Community Growth Boundary should be sufficient to
accommodate infill housing development that may be needed over the next 25+
years (see Land Use Map in Appendix A).
3.8.2.2   Coordinate with the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands (DHHL)
The City and the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands should establish an ongoing
dialogue, with the objective of coordinating the City’s General Plan and the
Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan with DHHL’s Regional Plans for the
District. The City’s focus should be on minimizing adverse impacts on the
Wai‘anae District from potential major DHHL housing developments. DHHL should
develop agricultural lots and sustainable farming practices that are compatible
with the City’s General Plan and the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan. The
City recognizes DHHL’s plans and DHHL’s right to develop residential
subdivisions in their lands located in the rural areas of Wai‘anae Valley and
Nānākuli Valley. However, DHHL should concentrate home building within the
Community Growth Boundary (see Land Use Map in Appendix A).
Overall, the timing and conditions of the development of DHHL’s Wai‘anae lands
are not subject to the Policies of the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan,
nor to review and approval by the City Council because DHHL is exempt from City
and County zoning and land use regulations.
3.8.2.3   Preserve Agricultural Lands
Future housing development should be limited to undeveloped lands that are
designated by the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan for urban use, and
should not be allowed to encroach upon agricultural lands.
3.8.2.4   Support Home-Based Businesses
Many Wai‘anae residents currently work from home, and many more are interested
in doing so. However, they are limited in the types of activities they can
carry out, and in the number of people they can have working there. While it is
recognized that there are some occupations that are not compatible with
residential neighborhoods (i.e., vehicle repair), there are others that are.
Home-based businesses should be supported in Wai‘anae to help increase the
number of local jobs, and decrease people’s commute time to jobs outside of the
District.
3.8.2.5   Although Allowed to be Exempt by State Law, 201H Projects Should Meet
Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan Guidelines
A relatively high proportion of the island’s affordable housing projects have
been built in the Wai‘anae District. Although they are often built with the
intention of helping the District’s residents, there are significant negative
impacts, such as increased population and higher demand on infrastructure and
public facilities. Therefore, the Wai‘anae community is not opposed to new
affordable housing projects, but they would like to see them distributed more
equally around the island. In addition, if they are built in Wai‘anae, they
should follow the guidelines listed in Guideline 3.8.3.1.
3.8.3   Guidelines for Residential Development
3.8.3.1   Follow Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan Affordable Housing
Guidelines
Proposed new affordable housing projects should meet the following criteria:
   ·   Affordable housing projects should be distributed equally around the
island (i.e., Wai‘anae should not have a significantly higher proportion of
affordable housing units than the other Districts).
   ·   The project needs to address the needs of the community, such as new
and/or improved infrastructure and facilities. These needs should be discussed
and decided upon through extensive community outreach and collaboration
initiated by the proposed developer.
   ·   201 H projects should conform to the Policies and Guidelines within the
Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan.
3.8.3.2   Limit the Height of Residential Structures
Residential building heights should generally not exceed two stories or 30
feet, including the roof form, with heights above 30 feet allowed only when
necessary due to the required flood elevation, steep slope of the site, or the
desire to protect important natural features.
3.8.3.3   Encourage Clustered Housing in Wai‘anae Country Town
Encourage the development of clustered housing in the vicinity of the
designated Wai‘anae Country Town. Public agencies could provide incentives to
landowners in the form of infrastructure improvements in the Country Town; the
provision of public amenities including parks, gathering places, and main
street landscaping; and special abatements for real property taxes. Clustered
housing would help to create a people- oriented Country Town, where more
residents could easily walk to local shops, stores, and service businesses. In
the context of the Wai‘anae District, “clustered housing” does not mean high-
rise or even mid-rise structures. Small lot single-family housing, duplex
homes, townhomes, and other types of residential structures can be constructed
at densities from 10 to 20 units per acre. The traditional configuration of
apartments over first floor commercial spaces should be brought back to the
Wai‘anae Country Town. These somewhat higher densities could result in housing
for a population of up to several thousand people within a 10-minute walk of
the Town Center.
3.8.4   Relation to Land Use Map
Residential lands are part of the Rural Residential lands illustrated on the
Land Use Map (Exhibit A-1). These development lands are bounded by the
Community Growth Boundary, and include existing residential uses, small- scale
commercial and industrial uses, institutional uses, and undeveloped
residentially-zoned lands suitable for “infill” development. Also included in
this land use designation are as yet undeveloped residentially-zoned lands in
Mākaha Valley. The Mākaha Special Area Plan recommends that these parcels be
developed at a lower density than their current zoning allows.
3.9   COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES
3.9.1   Overview of Commercial and Industrial Uses
Wai‘anae’s retail commercial and industrial areas generally serve the needs of
the resident population: Wai‘anae does not contain “destination retail” centers
like the Waikele Power Center in Central O‘ahu or Ala Moana Center in Honolulu,
or “regional industrial” centers like Campbell Industrial Park in ‘Ewa. Mākaha
Resort is the area’s only significant destination resort area. During the
1970's and 1980's, this resort provided as many as 300 jobs, many of them
filled by Wai‘anae residents. The Resort closed in 1996 due to low occupancy
levels. It has since re-opened, but the number of jobs it provides is
significantly lower than at its peak.
In keeping with the overall theme of a “rural Wai‘anae,” the General Plan does
not foresee significant growth in commercial or industrial land use for this
area. There is general community support for the development of more strongly
defined local commercial and service centers (discussed more in Section 3.10),
although recent trends indicate a shifting of shopping habits away from local
stores to the larger commercial centers in the ‘Ewa District.
Regarding industrial uses, the Wai‘anae community agrees that their District
needs local jobs, including industrial jobs within a light industrial park with
moderately priced lease rents or fee simple prices for industrial lots.
However, there has not been community-wide consensus on the most appropriate
size or location for such industrial activities.
Local small businesses and light industrial operations are an important source
of jobs for Wai‘anae’s people. A healthy level of small local businesses is
essential for the local economy and also lessens the volume of commuter traffic
that causes severe congestion on Farrington Highway during morning peak traffic
periods.
3.9.2   Policies Pertaining to Commercial and Industrial Uses
3.9.2.1   Encourage the Continuation of Existing Commercial Establishments
Encourage the continued viability of the District’s existing commercial
businesses, including the many small neighborhood retail stores and restaurants
as well as the larger commercial centers like Wai‘anae Mall and Nānākuli
Shopping Center. Parcels already zoned for commercial use should continue to be
zoned commercial.
3.9.2.2   Encourage Establishment of Commercial Businesses that Serve the
Community
Encourage the establishment of appropriate commercial businesses that will
provide jobs and goods and services in the Wai‘anae District, especially within
the designated Country Town and Village Center areas. Public agency actions in
this area may include the approval of appropriate commercial zoning, provision
of infrastructure, beautification of main streets, tax abatements, technical
assistance, training in small business management, grants, and loans.
Commercial businesses should be allowed only in the Rural Residential areas,
except for those small- scale country businesses that are compatible with
agricultural land uses (see Land Use Map in Appendix A).
3.9.2.3   Support the Continued Viability of the Mākaha Resort
The Mākaha Resort has been an important resource for the Wai‘anae community –
as an employer, a community gathering place, and a resort where visitors can
enjoy the beauty of the Wai‘anae coast. The continued economic viability of
this resort, including the possibility of some expansion of its facilities, is
thus very desirable. However, the development of new resorts in Wai‘anae may
not be economically or environmentally feasible. Therefore, no other land in
the district is designated for new resort development.
3.9.2.4   Prohibit “Big Box” Stores
Prohibit the building of any “big box” stores in the Wai‘anae District. In
commercial development terminology, “big box” generally refers to a physically
large chain store, with more than 50,000 square feet of retail space, as well
as to those company names that are commonly known as such. The terms
superstore, megastore, and supercenter also refer to these types of retail
establishments.
3.9.2.5   Encourage Light Industrial Businesses
Encourage the establishment of light industrial businesses that provide jobs
for local people, and that are generally compatible with the predominantly
residential uses of the Rural Residential areas along the coast, but not in
Mākaha Valley. Light industrial uses should be allowed only in the existing
Industrial areas in Wai‘anae and Lualualei Valley, as shown on the Land Use Map
(Exhibit A-1).
The Industrial site in Lualualei Valley is intended for light industrial uses
that are not noxious or socially objectionable in nature. Light industrial lots
at this location should be affordably priced for Wai‘anae businesses, and
include vocational training and other facilities that will benefit the Wai‘anae
community.
Special areas such as the Wai‘anae Small Boat Harbor may also provide
opportunities for ocean-related light industrial and research uses.
3.9.2.6   Do Not Allow Heavy Industry
New heavy industrial uses should not be permitted in the Wai‘anae District.
Such uses should be sited in the Campbell Industrial Park in ‘Ewa.
3.9.3   Guidelines for Commercial and Industrial Uses
3.9.3.1   Design Guidelines for Neighborhood Commercial Establishments
Neighborhood commercial establishments in the Wai‘anae District typically
consist of one to several buildings that are one or two stories in height, with
associated parking areas. The two main shopping centers, Nānākuli Shopping
Center and Wai‘anae Mall, are not included in this classification of
“Neighborhood Commercial.” The scale of neighborhood commercial buildings is
generally compatible with the surrounding residential land uses. Design
guidelines for any future new neighborhood commercial buildings thus include
the following:
   ·   Buildings should be residential in scale: Height, size, and massing of
the building should be compatible with adjacent residential structures.
   ·   Total floor area of any building should not exceed 10,000 square feet.
   ·   Building forms and roof lines should incorporate some design variation
in order to avoid large uniform walls or large roof plates.
   ·   Exterior materials and colors should be compatible with those used in
adjacent residences.
   ·   Access to parking and loading areas should be from an arterial or
collector street.
   ·   Storefronts should be oriented to pedestrian ways, with parking in the
rear of the commercial buildings.
   ·   Parking and loading areas should be screened from nearby residential
areas and from the street.
   ·   Lighting and signage should be relatively low key so as to avoid
conflict with nearby residential areas.
3.9.4   Relation to Land Use Map
Most of the District’s existing commercial and industrial uses are small in
scale and are included within the Community Growth Boundary. One significant
industrial-zoned area is in the vicinity of the Wai‘anae Wastewater Treatment
Plant. The other is in Lualualei Valley.
3.10   COUNTRY TOWNS, RURAL COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL CENTERS, AND GATHERING PLACES
3.10.1   Overview of Concepts for Country Towns, Rural Community Commercial
Centers, and Gathering Places
Within the “Rural Residential” areas for each of the subcommunities of
Nānākuli, Lualualei, Wai‘anae, and Mākaha, there is the need for the
development of more strongly defined local commercial and service centers.
These Centers should contain a concentration of small retail businesses,
restaurants, professional offices, medical clinics, and social services
centers. They should also contain some clustered housing units, including
second-story housing units above ground-level commercial space. Structures
would be one or two stories in height. This more compact development pattern
would provide for a stronger local community identity, further reinforce the
concept of the ahupua‘a, encourage more pedestrian traffic and less dependence
on cars, support small local businesses, and potentially alleviate the strong
“strip mall” development pattern that presently exists along Farrington
Highway.
After several years of intensive community-based planning, the Nānākuli
Hawaiian Homestead Community Association (NHHCA) has taken the initiative to
develop such a village center project. It will include a multi- purpose
cultural center (The Agnes K. Cope Cultural Center), an affordable housing
rental complex, commercial retail spaces, and the International Surfing Hall of
Fame. The project, which has a total estimated development cost of nearly $70
million, will be located on a 13.57-acre site centrally located within the
Nānākuli community (adjacent to the Nānāikapono elementary school). NHHCA was
awarded a long-term 65 year lease from the DHHL. The Nānākuli Village Center
will be completed in 2 phases over the next 2-3 years.
There is also a need for the development of Community Gathering Places. These
Gathering Places should be park-like areas of several acres that would be
managed and maintained by a community organization. People would gather here
informally to visit and talk story; have parties and celebrations; stage
festivals and special events; teach and learn traditional crafts, music, and
dance; buy, sell, and barter homegrown produce and homemade items; and renew
contact and communication with friends and neighbors.
Originally, the community discussed developing these Community Gathering Places
mauka of Farrington Highway, relatively close to the town centers. More
recently, residents discussed the possibility of instead putting the Community
Gathering Places on the beaches, one in each of the major ahupua‘a. The idea
was that these gathering places could help bring the community back to the
beaches. They also envisioned connecting these areas by a paved walking/
jogging/biking path that extends along the entire Wai‘anae Coast. The path
would be wide enough for Police Cushmans to utilize for patrolling. It could
also be lit by photovoltaic-powered lights, and provide safety phones and water
fountains.
The major benefits of this concept include: allowing people to utilize the
beaches and feel safe doing so, providing a venue for exercise and sporting
events, and allowing people to get around the District by bike safely, which
could also help to reduce traffic within the District.
The existing commercial center of Wai‘anae Town is designated a “Country Town.”
Smaller “Rural Community Commercial Centers” are designated for the communities
of Nānākuli, Lualualei, and Mākaha. Community Gathering Places are also
schematically shown on the Land Use Map for all of these communities.
3.10.2   Policies Pertaining to Country Towns, Rural Community Commercial
Centers and Gathering Places
3.10.2.1   Establish a Phased Development Program
A program should be established for the phased development and improvement of
Community Commercial Centers and Community Gathering Places for Nānākuli,
Lualualei, Wai‘anae and Mākaha (note: as of 2010, the Nānākuli Village Center
has been planned, but is still under development). The development program
should include the coordination of various public planning and financial
resources and partnering with local landowners and local businesses. The
overall goal of the phased development program should be to establish: (1)
physically distinct and economically viable Rural Community Commercial Centers
that will serve local commercial needs, provide local jobs, encourage
pedestrian and bicycle circulation, and foster a spirit of community identity
and community pride, and (2) Community Gathering Places that will provide a
setting for cultural, educational, and social activities.
Actions toward the achievement of these objectives should include the
appropriate use of zoning, special tax abatements, provision of infrastructure,
beautification of main streets, construction of mini-parks and gathering
places, technical assistance, training in small business management, clustering
of public structures and services, and the provision of grants, loans, and loan
guarantees.
3.10.3   Guidelines for Country Towns, Rural Community Commercial Centers and
Gathering Places
3.10.3.1   Geographic Size of the Centers
As a general guide, the geographic extent of the commercial and residential
land uses that make up the Centers should be relatively small in scale.
Thus, the area to be developed as “Wai‘anae Country Town” could extend from
Wai‘anae Mall to Old Government Road, and from Pōka‘i Bay Beach Park to the
vicinity of Wai‘anae Elementary School. This area is about 4/5 mile long by
about 1/4 mile wide, or about 100 acres in area. Walking time at a reasonable
pace from the farthest edges of Wai‘anae Country Town to the commercial
establishments in the middle of the Center would be about 5 minutes.
The focal concept for Wai‘anae Town Center is the improvement and expansion of
Pōka‘i Bay Beach Park, including the development of a Community Gathering Place
there, and the revitalization of traditional “town center” commercial
properties located on both sides of Farrington Highway. Ideally, improvements
to the Park would include bringing park greenery and open space up to the
Farrington Highway corridor, such that the Park and Pōka‘i Bay are visible from
the highway. More detailed plans for Wai‘anae Country Town should be developed
in the near future.
The Rural Community Commercial Centers would range in size from about three to
five acres. Nearby homes would be within a reasonable walking distance of
Center commercial establishments.
3.10.3.2   Commercial Establishments in the Centers
Commercial buildings located within the Country Town and Rural Community
Commercial Centers should be low- rise one-, two-, or at most three-story
buildings. Where possible, existing older buildings that have some
architectural interest should be preserved. New buildings should be designed
and sited to create a strong building line along the main street. Parking lots
should generally be located behind the buildings. The typical configuration for
strip commercial development, with a large parking lot fronting the street and
the commercial building located at the back of the parking lot, should not be
allowed. A limited amount of “fast turnover” parking stalls could be located in
front of new commercial buildings. The design of new buildings should
incorporate elements and materials from traditional local architectural styles.
Where possible, commercial buildings should be designed as multipurpose
structures, with retail commercial space on the ground floor, and space for
professional offices or residential apartments on the second floor.
3.10.3.3   Residential Structures in the Centers
The proposed Wai‘anae Country Town should be developed incrementally. There are
some vacant commercial and residential lots along Farrington Highway between
Wai‘anae Mall and the Wai‘anae Community Center. Over time, there will be more
opportunities to replace obsolete structures.
New residential development within Wai‘anae Country Town should be built at a
higher density than the typical local housing that has been developed along the
Farrington Highway corridor, which usually has minimum lot sizes of 5,000
square feet. Although it is recognized that many residents would prefer to have
larger lots – 10,000 or 20,000 or more square feet – clustered housing is
important for the overall design and commercial success of these Centers. Thus,
the suggested housing types are 2-story townhomes, duplex units, and clustered
single-family homes that may have average lot sizes of about 4,000 square feet.
High-rise and mid-rise apartment and condominium buildings are not appropriate
for the Wai‘anae Coast. These kinds of structures are urban in character and
are not compatible with the character of the Wai‘anae District.
If the redeveloped Wai‘anae Country Town eventually has about 40 gross acres of
clustered residential use, and the average density is about 10 units per acre,
the Country Town would have about 400 homes. This would mean that about 1,600
people would be within a few minutes walk of essential shopping and services.
3.10.3.4   Center Amenities
The Country Town and Rural Community Commercial Centers should be landscaped
and contain other amenities to identify them as special places for people to
frequent. These amenities could include:
   ·   Street trees along the main streets of the Center;
   ·   Mini-parks and gathering places;
   ·   Wider sidewalks to accommodate outdoor cafes and sidewalk displays of
merchandise;
   ·   Pedestrian-scale street lights;
   ·   Street furniture at appropriate places: benches, trash receptacles, bike
racks, planters with flowering plants.
3.10.3.5   Guidelines for Community Gathering Places Connected by a Walking/
Jogging/Biking Path Located along the Coast
Wai‘anae residents would like to create four Community Gathering Places, one in
each of the major ahupua‘a (Nānākuli, Lualualei, Wai‘anae, and Mākaha), in
their beach parks. The Gathering Places should be connected by a walking/
jogging/biking path that would be constructed from Mākaha to Nānākuli. The
Gathering Places should reflect the needs and preferences of the community that
it serves. As a general guide, the following facilities should be considered:
   ·   One or more acres of park-like space. This open space would be used for
informal gatherings, games, parties, and performances
   ·   A hula mound
   ·   A picnic area
   ·   Restrooms
   ·   A multipurpose building that could be used for community meetings,
indoor classes, and storage of materials and equipment
   ·   Adequate parking
   ·   Signage, lighting and landscaping
The walking/jogging/biking path should have the following characteristics and
amenities:
   ·   ADA compliant
   ·   Wide enough for Police Cushmans to utilize for patrolling the area
   ·   Lit by photovoltaic-powered lights
   ·   Safety phones
   ·   Water fountains
Land acquisition and capital funding for the development of the Community
Gathering Places will be a challenge. A combination of City, private sector,
and community resources will probably be needed. The management and maintenance
of a Gathering Place should be the responsibility of the local community. A
system of volunteer labor for routine maintenance chores will be needed. Some
funds will also be needed for maintenance materials and supplies.
3.10.4   Relation to Land Use and Open Space Maps
Wai‘anae Country Town and Rural Community Commercial Centers for Nānākuli,
Mā‘ili, and Mākaha are schematically shown on the Land Use Map. Community
Gathering Places for Nānākuli, Mā‘ili, Wai‘anae, and Mākaha are schematically
located on the Open Space Map.
3.11   PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS
3.11.1   Overview of Existing Parks and Recreational Areas
The Wai‘anae District has a diverse number of parks as shown in
Table 3-6, and contains the world-renowned Mākaha Beach for surfing
competitions. The District has one (undeveloped) Regional park, eight Beach
Parks, one District Park, four Community Parks, one Neighborhood Park, one
Cultural Park, and four Beach/Shoreline Access Points. The location of these
parks is shown in Exhibit 3-3.
One of the last semi-wilderness areas on O‘ahu, Ka‘ena Point State Park,
consisting of approximately 2,236 acres, encompasses rugged lava shorelines,
large white sand beaches, cliffs, gorges and valleys as well as forested
mountain regions that contribute to a wide variety of recreational,
educational, and cultural opportunities.
Overall, there are two major issues currently associated with the District’s
parks. First, there is a significant shortfall in the number of community-based
parks and in the total acreage of park lands. This shortfall was pointed out in
the original Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan, but has still not been
addressed. (The details are in the subsequent pages of this chapter.) The
second major issue related to Wai‘anae’s parks is the large number of homeless
living on the beaches. Many of these areas are City Beach Parks, which normally
offer camping through the Parks Permitting System.
There is no simple solution to this difficult situation. The Wai‘anae
Sustainable Communities Plan recognizes that this “user conflict” further
aggravates the shortfall of parks.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8649.png]
Table 3-6: City Parks and Park Acreage
Park Name (and type) Acreage
Table 3-6: City Parks and Park Acreage
Park Name (and type)                       Acreage
Regional Park
Nānākuli Regional Park (proposed)        (50)
Beach Parks
Kea‘au Beach Park                        38.05
Lualualei Beach Park                       17.75
Mā‘ili Beach Park                       39.56
Mākaha Beach Park                         20.62
Mauna Lahilahi Beach Park                  8.74
Nānākuli Beach Park                      39.63
Poka‘i Bay Beach Park                    15.49
Ulehawa Beach Park (1 and 2)               57.65
District Park
Wai‘anae District Park                   22.92
Community Parks
Mā‘ili Community Park                   3.68
Mākaha Valley Community Park              4.32
Herbert K. Pilila‘au Community Park      10.44
Pu‘u o Hulu (or Mā‘ili Kai) Community 11rk
Neighborhood Park
Kaupuni Neighborhood Park                  7.51
Others:
Mauna Lahilahi Cultural Garden             14.3
Makau Street A Beach Right-of-Way          0.02
Makau Street B Beach Right-of-Way          0.02
Moua Street Beach Right-of-Way             0.02
   Total Acreage:                       331.29
Source: DPR, 2008
(Note: the acreage from the proposed Nānākuli Regional Park was not added into
the total.)
 
The City and County of Honolulu parks department has plans to expand the Mākaha
Beach Park by adding lands mauka of Farrington Highway. The plan is to reroute
a portion of Farrington Highway mauka to allow for this expansion. However,
because rerouting of Farrington Highway will be a major undertaking, controlled
by the State DOT, the expansion will occur in phases. The Wai‘anae community is
generally in favor of rerouting the highway mauka, to allow people safer access
to the restrooms, shower, and paddling halau wa‘a (canoe storage).
There are two 18-hole golf courses in the Wai‘anae District: 1) Mākaha Valley
Country Club and 2) Mākaha Golf Club. These courses are privately owned, but
open to the public.
The City’s community-based park standards for the various types of parks are:
   ·   Neighborhood Parks (4 to 6 acres):   one per 5,000 population   Service
Area 1/2 Mile
   ·   Community Parks (10 acres):      one per 10,000 population   Service
Area 1 Mile
   ·   District Parks (20 acres):         one per 25,000 population   Service
Area 2 Miles
 
Table 3-7: City Park Requirement per City Standards for 2009 Wai‘anae District
Population (+/- 45,000)
             Current: City’s Park Standards per 45,000 (approximate 2009 Shortfall:
Park Type    Number/  population)                                          Number/
             Acreage                                                       Acreage
Neighborhood 1 / 7.5  9 / 45 acres                                         8 / 37.5
             acres                                                         acres
Community    4 / 29.4 4 / 40 acres                                         0 / 10.6
             acres                                                         acres
District     1 / 22.9 2 / 40 acres                                         1 / 17.1
             acres                                                         acres
TOTAL:       6 / 59.8 15 / 125 acres                                       9 / 65.2
             acres                                                         acres
Source: DPR, 2008
 
As shown in the table above, the total park acreage requirement for the
Wai‘anae District is 125 acres based on an estimated population of 45,000
people. In 2009, there were still just under 60 acres of these parks, which is
a shortfall of approximately 65 acres of park space. Most notably, the Wai‘anae
District has a shortfall of eight Neighborhood Parks.
It should also be noted that two of the four existing Community Parks are
substandard in size: Māili Community Park at 3.68 acres, and Mākaha Community
Park at 4.32 acres. The City’s creation of Mā‘ili Kai Community Park fulfilled
the need for a fourth Community Park in the District, however, it is not yet
fully developed.
In addition, a Nānākuli Regional Park was proposed in May 2010. It replaces the
previously planned Wai‘anae Regional Park, and will be the District’s first
Regional Park, consisting of 50 acres. It will provide facilities for active
recreational sports activities such as baseball, softball, football, tennis,
basketball, and volleyball.
3.11.2   Policies Pertaining to Parks and Recreational Facilities
3.11.2.1   Develop Adequate Public Parks
Parks and recreational facilities are of great importance to the health and
welfare of the Wai‘anae community, and are especially important to the health
and well-being of Wai‘anae’s children and young people. At least the minimum
number and size of community-based parks should be developed by the Year 2020.
According to
Table 3-7, in 2009, the District had a shortfall of eight Neighborhood Parks,
one District Park, and 10 acres of Community Parks. By 2020, the District will
need at least one more Neighborhood Park (total requirement of 9 parks) and one
additional Community Park (total requirement of 1 park and 20.6 acres). The
development of the Nānākuli Regional Park should also be a high priority. In
addition, at least some of the parks in the District should be “dog-friendly.”
3.11.2.2   Prohibit More Golf Courses That Compete with Agriculture or Open
Space Resources
There is no land available within the Rural Residential areas of the Wai‘anae
Land Use Map (Exhibit A-1) that would be large enough for a golf course. Golf
courses may be incompatible with Agricultural lands or Preservation lands of
the Wai‘anae District. Therefore, public agencies should discourage new golf
courses within the Wai‘anae District that compete with Agricultural and
Preservation land to the detriment of agricultural or open space resources.
3.11.2.3   Plan for a System of Hawaiian Cultural and Educational Parks
The Wai‘anae community would greatly benefit from the development of numerous
Hawaiian Cultural and Educational Parks throughout the District.
3.11.3   Guidelines for Parks and Recreational Facilities
3.11.3.1   Increase Neighborhood Parks Based on City’s Park Standards
In the Wai‘anae District, there is a shortfall of 8 Neighborhood Parks based on
the City’s park standards. This shortfall should be addressed through an
incremental park development program. Generally, there should be two
neighborhood parks for each of the main settlement areas of the District:
Nānākuli, Mā‘ili/Lualualei, Wai‘anae, and Mākaha. There are some but not many
undeveloped lands within these Rural Residential areas. The needed acreage for
park development should be secured before infill residential development of
vacant/residentially zoned lands precludes the location of neighborhood parks
in close proximity to these developed areas.
There is a recognized deficiency in the number and acreage of active,
community-based public parks. It is a condition that exists across the entire
island and because park development standards were only adopted about 30 years
ago, although much of the residential development occurred earlier. Also, City
park dedication requirements were included in its subdivision ordinance about
the same time – in 1976. At locations where the military or other institutions
will eventually vacate substantial land areas of six acres or more, these will
present opportunities for the City to consider, as funds permit, developing new
public parks with active-type recreational facilities.
3.11.3.2   Create Flexible Criteria for Recreational Facilities
In developing neighborhood parks, there is a need for more flexibility within
the criteria for “allowed” recreational facilities. For example, current City
standards specify the development of a comfort station for a neighborhood park,
but a “recreation building” is not included. However, depending on the service
population, the location of the neighborhood park, and the distance to a
community park that provides a recreation building, a recreation building or
multi-purpose building should be provided for a neighborhood park if there is a
clear need for one. Since building maintenance and supervision services are
always an issue – in terms of both personnel and overall cost – a cooperative
program utilizing the department of parks and recreation’s Adopt-a-Park Program
could be established at parks where there is community interest whereby a
community organization could share in supervision responsibilities and
maintenance costs of a recreation building.
3.11.4   Relation to Open Space Map
Existing beach parks and active recreation parks are schematically shown on the
Open Space Map.
3.12   MILITARY LAND USE
3.12.1   Overview of Military Land Use in the Wai‘anae District
The U.S. Navy obtained, via Executive Order, 7,498 acres of Lualualei Valley –
“Naval Magazine Lualualei Headquarter Branch” – which the Navy uses for the
storage of various kinds of ordnance needed for the different branches of the
U.S. Military in Hawai‘i. The Navy also obtained, via Executive Order, and
controls an additional 1,729 acres of Lualualei – “NCTAMS EASTPAC, RFT
Lualualei” – which is used for high and low frequency radio signal
transmissions.
The U.S. Army uses a portion of the 4,130 acres of Mākua Valley, although on a
limited basis, due to community concerns on environmental issues. The Army’s
Mākua lands consist of 170 acres of “fee simple” land, 782 acres of land leased
from the State of Hawai‘i, and 3,237 acres of ceded lands, also leased from the
State. The leases expire in the year 2029. The Army’s use of Mākua for live
fire training dates back to World War II. Prior to that time, Mākua lands had
been used for ranching, fishing, and farming. In earlier times, Mākua Valley
and its sister valleys, Kahanahāiki and Koiahi were home to a large Native
Hawaiian population.
There has been considerable discussion in recent years about the return of some
Military controlled lands to public use. About 1,000 acres of the Navy’s Radio
communications installation at Lualualei was identified by the Federal
Government as possibly excess. The Navy has a long range plan for the
relocation of its stored ordnance from Lualualei to the Naval Magazine at West
Loch. The Wai‘anae community looks forward to the return of these lands and has
many concerns about the health impacts of the communication towers at Lualualei
and the cumulative impacts of storing ordnance upwind of the community.
The Army’s use of Mākua Valley is controversial and has been so from the time
that the Army took control of the Valley. For many members of the Wai‘anae
community, Mākua Valley has a special cultural and religious significance. This
significance predates the Army’s presence and use of Mākua Valley. There are a
number of important heiau and other significant cultural and religious sites
found there. Many in the Wai‘anae community advocate for the return of Mākua
Valley. The Army’s use of Mākua in recent years has been minimal, due to
environmental and cultural concerns. Many in Wai‘anae believe that the Army has
demonstrated its ability to train at alternate locations, thus negating the
need for Mākua Valley as a training area.
3.12.2   Policies Pertaining to Military Lands
3.12.2.1 Preserve and Transition Military Lands to Civilian Use
In keeping with the Wai‘anae Concept Map, the overall long-range land use
policy for the military lands at Lualualei and at Mākua Valley is that these
lands should be preserved as agricultural/open space and returned to public
use. These lands should also be preserved for cultural uses, and not be used
for any other purposes, such as the creation of a new landfill or new private
or public development.
The importance of U.S. military uses of lands at Lualualei and in Mākua Valley
is controversial and debatable.
Therefore, the continued use of these lands for military purposes should be
debated, and transition to public use should be pursued. Access to certain
sites for cultural and religious practices should be allowed as per existing
Federal Statutes and Rules. Upon such a time that Mākua Valley is released from
military use, there should be a community participation process to plan for its
re-use.
3.12.2.2 Organize and Implement Cooperative Programs
The City is committed to working with the community and with the Army and Navy
to organize and implement programs for the ongoing protection and preservation
of important cultural and natural resources found on the military lands of the
Wai‘anae District.
3.12.3   Relation to Land Use Map
The two Navy installations at Lualualei and the Army’s Mākua Training Area are
shown on the Land Use Map by a “dot screen” pattern that allows the overall
land use designation colors for “Agriculture” and “Preservation” to be seen.
4.   PUBLIC FACILITIES AND INFRASTRUCTURE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
This chapter of the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan presents Policies and
Guidelines for the principal infrastructure systems that the Wai‘anae Community
would like to see provided for the District.
The infrastructure issues presented here include the standard systems that the
various City agencies are in charge of constructing and maintaining. The
Wai‘anae Planning Advisory Committee has also discussed the importance of
recognizing their community’s “original infrastructure” – the landscape and
cultural resources, such as the pu‘u and heiau that the ancient Hawaiians
living here used. They would like to ensure that this cultural infrastructure
is recognized and preserved as much as possible.
The following are General Policies that are overarching to many of the
infrastructure systems included in this chapter:
   ·   The latest technology that allows the Wai‘anae Community to be as
sustainable, or “green” as possible, should be implemented, while remaining
consistent with other community objectives.
   ·   Rural Infrastructure Standards should be considered and, where possible,
developed by the City and State to maintain and reinforce a country feel and
character. Standards would consider less impervious surfaces, attention to
roadway quality of service – in addition to level of service, preference for
bioretention solutions for storm waters, and alternative landscaping
requirement for street trees. These standards would need to be such that they
would not result in potentially hazardous conditions for vehicular or
pedestrian traffic, or negatively impact abutting private property.
This Chapter includes the following sections:
   4.1   Transportation Systems
   4.2   Potable and Nonpotable Water Systems
   4.3   Wastewater Collection and Treatment Systems
   4.4   Electrical Power and Communications
   4.5   Drainage Systems
   4.6   Solid Waste Handling and Disposal
   4.7   Civic, Public Safety, and Education Facilities
   4.8   Health Care Facilities
4.1   TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
4.1.1   Overview of Transportation Systems in the Wai‘anae District
ROADWAYS
The major roadway in Wai‘anae is Farrington Highway. In the “old days,”
Farrington Highway was a narrow, dusty track. Paved roads ended in Waipahu, and
the ride out to the Wai‘anae Coast was a long haul. Then as now, Farrington
Highway was the only road linking the Wai‘anae District to ‘Ewa and to Honolulu
beyond. During the heyday of rail transportation on O‘ahu, a single track ran
along the Wai‘anae Coast to Ka‘ena Point, and around to Mokuleia and Waialua on
the North Shore. The embankment for this old railroad right-of-way still exists
along a portion of the coast.
Today in 2010, Farrington Highway in the Wai‘anae District has four travel
lanes as far as Mākaha Valley Road, and thereafter two lanes to its terminus at
Keawaula. It serves as both the local coastal road for trips within the
District as well as the only commuter highway for trips outside of Wai‘anae.
During peak traffic, Farrington Highway is heavily congested, especially
between Wai‘anae Town Center and Nānākuli. Important local collector roadways
include Nānākuli Avenue, Heleakala Avenue, Lualualei Naval Road, Hakimo Road,
Pa‘akea Road, Wai‘anae Valley Road, and Mākaha Valley Road (Exhibit 4-1).
The 2020 O‘ahu Regional Transportation Plan (ORTP) recommended safety and
operational improvements for Farrington Highway in the 1995 to 2000 time frame,
including sidewalks, pedestrian crosswalks or bridges, additional traffic
signals, and continuous left-turn lanes. The O‘ahu Transportation Improvement
Program (TIP) for FY 2006 through FY 2008 included bridge replacements and
intersection improvements at numerous locations on Farrington Highway. The 2030
ORTP recommends congestion relief projects for Farrington Highway, consisting
mostly of highway widening.
In the 2006-2020 time period, the ORTP recommends that Farrington Highway be
widened to 6 lanes from Kapolei to Nānākuli. This would improve the highway
level of service (LOS) to a projected LOS “C.”
In recent years, with the increase in the Wai‘anae District’s population, and
the general trend of more automobile use by most citizens, traffic congestion
on Farrington Highway has grown progressively worse. Congestion during the peak
traffic period for morning commuters – about 5:00 to 7:00 a.m. – has been
aggravated by the addition of unsynchronized traffic signals, which the State
department of transportation has had some success in remedying. In the 8 miles
between Mākaha Valley Road and Nānākuli Valley Road, there are 27 signalized
intersections. That 8-mile drive can take up to 45 minutes during the morning
peak period. However, commuters headed for jobs in the downtown Honolulu or
Waikiki area are still faced with another 1 to 1-1/2 hour drive, which
continues to worsen with increased development in the ‘Ewa and Kapolei areas.
As a possible solution to this increasingly severe commuter problem, some area
residents have advocated the construction of a Second Access Highway. This is
different from the Emergency Bypass Road, which would only be opened in times
of emergency. It is also different from the Wai‘anae Coast Emergency Access
Road. The three projects are described briefly here for clarification/
distinction:
   ·   The Emergency Bypass Road would go from Farrington Highway, up Lualualei
Naval Road, and through the Kolekole Pass to Kunia Road. It would only be
opened in times of emergency.
   ·   The Wai‘anae Coast Emergency Access Road was completed in 2009. This
project connects existing roads mauka of Farrington Highway to provide an
alternate way in and out of the District during those emergency situations when
Farrington Highway is closed.
   ·   In contrast, the concept for the Second Access Highway is to provide an
alternate route to commute into and out of the District – at all times, not
just during emergencies. The proposed alignment for a Second Access Highway is
from Farrington Highway, up Lualualei Naval Road, through the Wai‘anae Mountain
Range at Pōhakea Pass, to connect to Kunia Road in the ‘Ewa District. In 2001,
the City’s department of transportation services published the Lualualei Naval
Road/Kunia Road Connector Road Concept Study. This report estimated the cost of
building the road, which would include a tunnel, to be approximately $250
million. More recent estimates put the cost closer to $500 million.
The Second Access Highway concept raises some difficult and fundamental issues
concerning regional transportation systems and regional growth management.
Traffic congestion on Farrington Highway is severe, and will probably grow
worse. However, the construction of a major new commuter roadway that would
ease traffic congestion and shorten commuting time to areas outside of the
District will facilitate urban growth and development. The fundamental policies
of preservation of agricultural lands and support of a rural lifestyle for the
Wai‘anae community will be more difficult to sustain if major new
infrastructure projects like a new highway are implemented.
Overall, most of the community agrees that the first priority is the opening of
the Emergency Bypass Road for emergency situations, and continue to discuss
options for a Second Access Highway for the future. The Emergency Bypass Road,
of course, would not help the issue of lengthy commuting times to downtown
Honolulu. Since the Second Access Highway will not be developed in the
foreseeable future, public transportation options are encouraged.
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
Traffic congestion could be alleviated through an enhanced public
transportation system for the Wai‘anae District. Recent improvements to TheBus
system include the completion of Phase 1 of the Wai‘anae Community Transit
Center, consisting of a transit station with bus stops and shelters. There is
also adjacent land available for a future park-and-ride lot. This would
increase residents’ ability to utilize TheBus services.
There are currently several bus routes and shuttle services in operation in the
Wai‘anae community. Routes C, 40, 40A, 93, and 93A offer regional service,
while Routes 401, 402, and 403 operate as a neighborhood shuttle service.
In addition, the Honolulu Rail Transit Project has plans to run buses along the
Wai‘anae Coast to connect with a rail station at Kapolei. TheBus connection to
the planned Honolulu Rail Transit Project has the potential to decrease commute
time and increase transportation options for residents who commute to Honolulu
regularly.
BIKEWAYS, SIDEWALKS, AND REDEVELOPMENT OF TOWN AND VILLAGE CENTERS
The development of more and safer bikeways and sidewalks, along with the
redevelopment of Town and Village Centers, could decrease automobile use within
the District. There is a need for a safe bicycle route along the entire
Wai‘anae Coast, and up some of the major valley roads, at least as far as the
concentrations of urban/suburban development. Farrington Highway and the major
valley roads also need safe sidewalks for pedestrian use. The provisions for
the creation of more local jobs and the clustering of homes near Town Centers
and Village Centers, as discussed earlier in this Plan, and thus less
dependence on out-of-District commuting, would also be beneficial.
One specific idea is the development of a bike path on the old railroad right-
of-way. Part of the right-of-way is under DOT jurisdiction, and part is
incorporated within City park areas. The old railroad right-of-way has also
been proposed for use by “antique trains” that would bring tourists into
Wai‘anae to shop. This concept may have some appeal to local business people,
but such a use would not alleviate the traffic problem. In contrast, developing
a bikeway along this route could help the situation.
In addition, residents are advocating for the creation of a walking/jogging/
biking path along the coast (see Section 3.10.3.5).
COMPLETE STREETS
Act 54 (May 2009), requires State and County transportation departments to
adopt and implement a complete streets policy and establishes a task force to
determine necessary standards and guidelines. The intent of a complete streets
policy is to create and configure a connected street system that provides for
all users; including, but not limited to, pedestrians, bicyclists, and transit
passengers of all ages and abilities.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8651.png]
4.1.2   Policies Pertaining to Transportation Systems
4.1.2.1   Implement Farrington Highway Safety Improvements for Pedestrians and
Motorists
A thorough study of safety improvements should be undertaken for Farrington
Highway in Wai‘anae, and needed safety measures should be implemented in a
timely manner. Safety improvements to be considered should include:
   ·   Sidewalks, dedicated bike lanes, improved lighting, relocating utility
poles, and fire hydrants that are too close to the edge of the travelway, left
turn lanes, deceleration and acceleration lands, bus pull-outs, traffic
signals, traffic islands, median strip, pedestrian overpasses, and signalized
pedestrian crosswalks.
   ·   Use of a contra-flow system during the A.M. peak period and
synchronization of traffic signals would also improve traffic flow and traffic
safety.
To the extent possible, these safety measures should not impede the movement of
vehicles on Farrington Highway, but where there is a conflict between
pedestrian safety and vehicular flow, pedestrian safety should be the primary
concern.
4.1.2.2   Beautify Farrington Highway
A comprehensive program for the incremental beautification of Farrington
Highway in Wai‘anae should be established by the State DOT with community
involvement. The program should consider undergrounding of overhead wires and
elimination of utility poles, the planting of shade trees and other
landscaping, with an emphasis on native, drought-tolerant plants; attractive
signage announcing the entrance to the Wai‘anae District and the entrance into
the subcommunities of Nānākuli, Mā‘ili, Lualualei, Wai‘anae, and Mākaha; and
special design elements within the Country Town and Village Centers, including
planting, lighting, signage, paving, and street furniture. Curb to curb
pavement width could also be reduced. The overall objective should be to return
at least parts of Farrington Highway to a more human and pedestrian-friendly
scale.
Action should be taken to screen visually unattractive industrial facilities
such as the Wai‘anae Wastewater Treatment Plant and the Department of
Transportation’s Base Yard. Eventual relocation of the Base Yard should also be
considered.
4.1.2.3   Establish an Emergency Bypass Road
There is a need to establish an Emergency Bypass Road that can be used as an
alternate to Farrington Highway for those times when one or more sections of
Farrington Highway may be impassable due to storm damage, a severe vehicular
accident, or some other cause. The recommended alignment is from Farrington
Highway up the Lualualei Naval Road through the Kolekole Pass to Kunia Road.
This should begin with an analysis of upgrading the Kolekole Pass.
4.1.2.4   Enhance Public Transportation
TheBus has made recent improvements within the District, including the
completion of Phase 1 of the Wai‘anae Community Transit Center, consisting of a
transit station with bus stops and shelters. There is also adjacent land
available for a future park-and-ride lot. The construction of the park-and-ride
is recommended, since it would increase residents’ ability to utilize TheBus
services.
In addition, the Honolulu Rail Transit Project has plans to run buses along the
Wai‘anae Coast to connect with a rail station at Kapolei. This SCP supports
TheBus connections to the planned Honolulu Rail Transit Project, since it has
the potential to decrease commute time and increase transportation options for
residents who commute to Honolulu.
4.1.2.5   Encourage Other Modes of Transportation
Encourage plans and programs for other modes of transportation, including
bikeways, pedestrian walkways and paths, and creative use of existing
unutilized transportation corridors such as the old OR&L railroad right-of-way
(ROW). This ROW could be used for a multiuse path for bikers, roller bladers,
skateboarders, personal transportation vehicles, and pedestrians that would be
safe from vehicular traffic. The community also supports the development of a
walking/jogging/biking path along the coast.
4.2   POTABLE AND NON POTABLE WATER SYSTEMS
4.2.1   Overview of Potable Water Systems
The potable water system currently servicing the area consists of seven source
wells in Mākaha, the Mākaha shaft, three wells in Wai‘anae Valley, the Wai‘anae
Tunnel, and the Plantation Tunnel.
The sustainable yield of the Wai‘anae and Mākaha Aquifer System Areas, where
active BWS sources are allocated, is only about 3 mgd each, as adopted by the
State Commission on Water Resource Management (CWRM) in the August 2008 Water
Resource Protection Plan. In the year 2005, the City produced about 4.9 mgd
from these sources. This volume of water was less than the 2005 District demand
of approximately 11.1 mgd. The balance of about 6.2 mgd is currently imported
into the District from the much larger Pearl Harbor Aquifer Sector Area.
Additionally, Wai‘anae is supplied by small, in-district Federal, State, and
private sources.
The Wai‘anae Watershed Management Plan (BWS, 2010), described in Section 3.1.7,
indicates that the District will need to diversify its water supply sources in
the future, since there will be competing demands for currently undeveloped
water from the Pearl Harbor Aquifer Sector Area, and Wai‘anae’s ground water
withdrawals are already maximized.
BWS projections for the year 2030 indicate that the Wai‘anae District will
consume 13.37 mgd of potable water. These projections are based on a BWS-served
population of 50,616, and DPP estimated growth in jobs. It is projected that
the Wai‘anae District will have to import approximately 7.21 mgd to provide for
this projected 2030 scenario.
Potable water is conveyed to users through a system of water mains that follow
the major roads in the District: Farrington Highway, Nānākuli Avenue, Heleakala
Avenue, Hakimo Road, Kaukama Road, Pa‘akea Road, Mā‘ili‘ili‘i Road, Lualualei
Homestead Road, Wai‘anae Valley Road, and most of the major roads in Mākaha
Valley. The water distribution system along Farrington Highway ends at the last
1-acre lot just past Kepuhi Point.
The cost of installing water service, especially for irrigation of crops on a
small family farm, is an issue in Wai‘anae. These charges are large capital
outlays for the small family farms of the Wai‘anae Coast. Federal and State
assistance could help farmers offset infrastructure costs.
4.2.2   Overview of Nonpotable Water Systems
Regarding the use of nonpotable water in Wai‘anae, there is some potential, but
it is limited. As of 2009, BWS only provided nonpotable water from Glover
Tunnel in Mākaha, with water from this system directed into the Mauna Olu
Nonpotable Open Reservoir, which stores irrigation water for the Mākaha
Resort’s West Golf Course. Additionally, there are two existing unused brackish
water sources that, in the past, supplied drinking water to the old suburban
water supply company, which served the Nānākuli and Lualualei area. The two
sources that could possibly be rehabilitated for brackish water irrigation are
the Nānākuli Shaft, State Well No. 2308-01, and the Lualualei Shaft, State Well
No. 2508-02.
In addition, the BWS conducted a feasibility study on water re-use. It found
that the water is too brackish for re-use due to seawater intrusion into the
District’s sewer lines. In order to re-use Wai‘anae’s wastewater, the sewer
lines would need to be upgraded to reduce/eliminate seawater intrusion. One
possible alternative would be the use of Membrane Bioreactor units (MBRs). MBRs
provide an alternative method of producing recycled water adjacent to the areas
of use for irrigating golf courses and landscaped areas (R-1 quality). More
details on this technology and other alternatives can be found in the Wai‘anae
Watershed Management Plan (BWS, 2010).
4.2.3   Water Conservation in the Wai‘anae District
The O‘ahu Watershed Management Plan encourages water conservation. In Wai‘anae,
water conservation is especially important, since the community has expressed
the desire to be as self-sufficient as possible. Thus, the Wai‘anae Watershed
Management Plan (WWMP) includes numerous strategies to reduce water use and
extend existing supplies. Those strategies are incorporated into the following
Policies regarding both potable and nonpotable water systems.
4.2.4   Policies Pertaining to Potable and Nonpotable Water Systems
4.2.4.1   Implement Watershed Protection Strategies to Improve Forest Health &
Perennial Stream Flows
Watershed protection is essential, since healthy forests sustain streams and
groundwater aquifers. They provide a buffer for drought mitigation, as well as
educational and vocational opportunities. Two critical watershed protection
strategies include: (1) Restoration of natural watershed structure and
functions, and (2) Preservation of species and habitat biodiversity by
assessing and restoring critical water-related habitats. Details of these
strategies are included in the WWMP.
4.2.4.2   Encourage Water Conservation
Public education and coordination to develop conservation programs to
efficiently utilize potable water are needed to reduce the District’s reliance
on imported Pearl Harbor aquifer water. Some conservation measures include:
leak detection/repair, low-flow fixtures, and use of rain catchments.
4.2.4.3   Diversify Water Supply, Matching Quality with Use
The Wai‘anae water supply should be diversified, so nonpotable water use can be
maximized, and potable water can be reserved for potable uses. Brackish sources
should be developed and innovative new technologies like Membrane Bioreactors
should be utilized to produce recycled water. In addition, The Wai‘anae water
system infrastructure should be expanded to allow this diversification, as well
as to improve adequacy and dependability of the supply, transmission, and
storage.
4.2.4.4   Support the Goals and Objectives of the Adopted Wai‘anae Watershed
Management Plan
The five major objectives are: (1) Promote sustainable watersheds; (2) Protect
and enhance water quality and quantity; (3) Respect Native Hawaiian rights and
traditional and customary practices; (4) Facilitate public participation,
education, and project implementation; and (5) Meet future water demands at
reasonable costs. The specific details of how to implement those objectives are
included in that Plan.
4.3   WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEMS
4.3.1   Overview of Wastewater Collection and Treatment Systems
Wastewater for the Wai‘anae District is collected at the Wai‘anae Wastewater
Treatment Plant (WWTP) located north of Pu‘u Mā‘ili‘ili‘i and south of Wai‘anae
Mall. The treatment plant has been designed for average dry weather flows of
5.2 mgd with a peak flow of 13.8 mgd. 2007 average flows to the treatment plant
were approximately 3.5 mgd, an increase of 0.3 mgd since 1997. Thus, the plant
still has excess capacity to handle additional flows.
Based on 80 gallons per capita per day, the current design capacity of the
wastewater treatment plant could handle an additional 18,750 people, or an
additional 4,688 households (based on an average of 4 persons per household)
tied into the system.
The location of the WWTP – fronting on Farrington Highway and next to Wai‘anae
Mall, the largest shopping center in the Wai‘anae District – is less than
ideal. A community landscaping project has helped to screen the WWTP.
The major sewer lines generally follow Farrington Highway and the major valley
roads, with the exception of Lualualei Valley, where the sewer lines do not
extend beyond the more densely developed coastal zone.
Although the treatment plant has excess capacity to handle new flows, many of
the existing residences that were initially developed with cesspools have not
yet connected to the wastewater system. The Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities
Plan (2000) estimated that approximately 1,180 residences that are near
existing sewer lines were not yet connected.
Based on City records from the 1990s, approximately 20 percent of the
residences in the Wai‘anae District were not hooked up to the wastewater
collection system. Many of these residences are on property that was developed
by the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands. The responsibility for tying into the
wastewater collection system lies with the residents. The sewer lines have been
sized to handle these house lots. However, since many people have not connected
to the system, low flows in the lines cause septic conditions in the sewer
lines, which often result in odors.
The Wai‘anae Wastewater Treatment Facility was recently upgraded to secondary
level treatment. The ocean outfall was also extended to a greater depth.
Although the wastewater treatment plant has adequate capacity to handle
additional flows, sewer lines in the District may need to be upgraded,
depending on where and when new development occurs. The first sewer lines were
installed during the 1950s, and some of these lines may be nearing the end of
their useful lives.
4.3.2   Policies Pertaining to Wastewater Collection and Treatment
4.3.2.1   Continue Phased Program for Replacement of Old Sewer Lines
The program for the phased replacement of old sewer lines in Farrington Highway
and in the main valley roadways should be continued.
4.3.2.2   Improve the Wai‘anae Wastewater Treatment Plant
Implement landscaping improvements to the Wai‘anae WWTP to minimize this
facility’s visual impact on the community. Monitoring of the operations that
contribute to odor problems should be continued and operational improvements
should be implemented if needed to minimize odor impacts.
4.3.2.3   Coordinate with DHHL Regarding Sewer Connections
Develop a strategy to assist Hawaiian Homesteads homeowners to connect to the
City’s wastewater collection system. The cooperating entities should seek
federal, state, and local assistance in establishing a program of small grants
and low interest loans that can be made available to lower income families to
finance these hookups.
4.4   ELECTRICAL POWER AND COMMUNICATIONS
4.4.1   Overview of Electrical Power and Communications Systems
The Wai‘anae District is at present adequately served in terms of electrical
power, and both telephone and cable television systems. Hawaiian Electric
Company is planning a new electrical substation in the vicinity of Wai‘anae
Valley Road/Plantation Road to provide a more reliable system. As relatively
little growth is planned for this District to the Year 2035, upgrading these
systems is not a significant issue for the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities
Plan.
Renewable Energy
Hawaiian Electric Company continues to engage in a broad spectrum of renewable
energy related initiatives and activities, including projects that will occur
in Wai‘anae. They include:
   ·   Solar Water Heating
Since commencing in 1996, Hawaiian Electric’s residential solar water heating
program has resulted in more than $34 million in rebates to help over 39,000
Hawai‘i households statewide to install rooftop solar water heating systems.
Hawaiian Electric continues to advocate maintaining demand-side management
programs, including solar water- heating.
   ·   Bio fuels
Hawaiian Electric provides research funding for biofuels crop research
conducted with the University of Hawai‘i. Some of this research includes the
evaluation of promising oil producing crops.
   ·   Photovoltaics
The number of photovoltaic (PV) systems installed under net energy metering
continues to grow in Hawai‘i. Hawaiian Electric expects continued interest in
PV by both residential and business customers.
In addition, Hawaiian Electric is developing a program that will offer its
customers another option to install PV systems at customer sites.
Hawaiian Electric is in its 12th year of the Sun Power for Schools program with
the State of Hawai‘i department of education. Through the Sun Power for Schools
program, it continues to install PV systems at Hawai‘i public schools using
voluntary customer contributions and in-kind utility contributions, including
engineering, project management, administration, advertising, and marketing. To
date, 30 public schools have received PV systems totaling over 38 kilowatts.
Three of them, Wa’ianae High School, Wai‘anae Intermediate, and Nānākuli High
and Intermediate are in the Wai‘anae District.
Antennas
Antennas have been around as long as we have had radio and television services.
Antennas associated with communication purposes have grown tremendously
especially since the U.S. introduction of mobile communication devices in the
early 1980s. While the telecommunication industry has provided more convenient
communication capabilities for individuals, it has also increased the public
agencies’ ability to provide faster and more efficient response to those in
need, particularly on an emergency basis.
While the benefits of the telecommunications industry cannot be disputed,
communities have opposed the antennas due to aesthetic impacts, particularly on
public views and on neighborhood character. Their visibility has increased,
especially where antennas are mounted on free-standing towers.
The general public has also raised concerns about the environmental effects of
electromagnetic field exposure associated with radio transmissions, as
evidenced by the presence of antennas. However, the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) is responsible for evaluating the human environmental effects
of radio frequency (RF) emissions from FCC-regulated transmitters. The federal
guidelines specifically preclude local decisions affecting environmental
effects of radio frequency emissions, assuming that the provider is in
compliance with the Commission’s RF rules.
The following are general principles governing utilization of antennas, to be
applied to telecommunications providers and not to personal use antennas:
   ·   Encourage co-location of antennas: towers should host the facilities of
more than one service provider to minimize their proliferation and reduce
visual impacts.
   ·   Mount antennas onto existing buildings or structures so that public
scenic views and open spaces will not be negatively affected. However, except
for the occupant’s personal use, antennas on single-family dwelling roofs in
residential districts are not appropriate.
   ·   Use stealth technology (e.g. towers disguised as trees) especially on
free-standing antenna towers in order to blend in with the surrounding
environment and minimize visual impacts.
4.4.2   Policies Pertaining to Electrical Power and Communications
4.4.2.1   Reduce the Visual Impact and Improve Safety of Utility Lines and
Poles and Reliability of Service
As discussed in the section on Transportation and the policies relating to the
beautification of Farrington Highway, there is a need for a phased program of
under-grounding utility lines that now severely impact the scenic quality of
the District’s main coastal roadway. The utility lines also pose a safety
threat to drivers on Farrington Highway, as they sometimes get knocked down by
car accidents or severe weather. In addition, any new transmission line
corridors for electricity or communications should be located with care so that
scenic qualities are not adversely impacted.
4.4.2.2   Encourage the Development of Alternative Energy Sources
The City and State should provide incentives for the use of alternative energy
sources in the building of new developments.
4.4.3   Guidelines Pertaining to Electrical Power and Communications
4.4.3.1   Require New Developments to be Powered by Alternative Energy
Require all new developments proposed for the Wai‘anae District to be powered
at least 50 percent by alternative energy sources.
4.5   DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
4.5.1   Overview of Drainage Systems
There are no perennial streams in the coastal areas of the Wai‘anae District,
and the average annual rainfall in the coastal plain is less than 20 inches.
However, because of flood damage that has occurred in the area from severe
storms, such as Kona storms, studies were performed in the late 1950s by the
West O‘ahu Soil Conservation District and the City and County of Honolulu.
These studies were performed to determine what drainage facilities would be
needed to handle the one percent event or the 100-year storm.
As a result of these studies, four large concrete-lined drainage channels were
constructed to discharge stormwater runoff into the ocean. These channels are:
1) Kaupuni Stream Channel in Wai‘anae that discharges into the northwestern
side of Pōka‘i Bay; 2) Mā‘ili‘ili‘i Stream Channel that discharges into the
ocean between Lualualei Beach Park and Mā‘ili Beach Park at Pu‘u Mā‘ili‘ili‘i;
3) Mā‘ili Channel that discharges into the ocean north of Mā‘ili Point; and 4)
Ulehawa Stream Channel that discharges into the ocean south of Pu‘u o Hulu Kai.
These “improvements” notwithstanding, Wai‘anae still has localized flooding and
drainage problems. These problems are caused by the lack of adequate drainage
facilities in existing subdivisions, residents building walls around their
property to divert stormwater, and people filling in natural drainage swales
and ditches. In addition, certain sections of Farrington Highway were
constructed at a higher elevation than areas mauka of the road and the highway
thus acts like a dam.
The City is currently designing a project for a new drain line on Lahaina
Street and conducting a study for potential drainage improvements on Hakimo
Road. Also contained in the City’s 6-year Capital Improvement Program are
drainage improvements for Auyong Homestead Road and Wai‘anae Elementary School.
The City has submitted a proposal to the Department of Land and Natural
Resources (DLNR) through the “Flood Mitigation Assistance Program” to prepare a
Drainage Master Plan for Wai‘anae. However, competition for these funds is high
and the prioritizing system for projects is uncertain. It appears that a
comprehensive study of local drainage problems in Wai‘anae would provide a
long-range plan of action for the City. Alternative ways of funding such a
study should be considered.
The larger flooding problems relate to flooding from major storms, including
heavy rainfall from Kona storms and high surf from coastal storms. Storms with
heavy rains create severe local flooding and, on occasion, can cause major
damage to homes from mauka stream flooding. Coastal storms with high winds and
waves can result in flooding and sand accumulation on shoreline properties,
including sections of Farrington Highway that are adjacent to the beach.
Farrington Highway is especially vulnerable to coastal flooding in the vicinity
of Ulehawa Channel, Mā‘ili Channel, Mā‘ili‘ili‘i Channel, East Mākaha Stream,
Mākaha Stream, and sections of the highway in Kea‘au and Ohikilolo. In
addition, the entire Wai‘anae Coast is subject to severe damage from any major
tsunami. The tsunami evacuation zone here extends up to, and in some cases as
much as 1/4-mile mauka of Farrington Highway. (Note: As of July 2010, the
department of emergency management was in the final phase of updating the
current O‘ahu tsunami evacuation zone maps.)
4.5.2   Policies Pertaining to Flooding and Drainage
4.5.2.1 Develop Wai‘anae District Local Drainage Improvements Plan and Program
Prepare a comprehensive study of local flooding and drainage problems in the
Wai‘anae District, together with a phased plan for the correction of these
problems. Corrective measures may include removal of barriers, cleaning of
drainage channels and stream channels, re-grading areas to encourage positive
drainage, and construction of new drainage channels, culverts, and other
drainage structures. The Drainage Improvements Plan and Program should also
include programs for the ongoing enforcement of rules and regulations relating
to proper grading and drainage for both urban development projects and
agricultural use of the land, and public education.
Drainage system design should emphasize control and minimization of nonpoint
source pollution and retention and detention. Modifications if needed for flood
protection should maintain rural character and aesthetic quality, avoid
degradation of coastline and of stream and near shore water quality. To the
extent possible, integrate planned drainageway improvements into the regional
open space network by providing for access for pedestrians and bicycles.
4.5.2.2 Establish a Sediment Control Program
Establish a sediment control program to protect both stream quality and the
quality of nearshore waters. Minimally, standards for the creation and use of
sediment basins at critical locations on both agricultural and urban lands
should be established. Thereafter, a program of phased implementation and
conscientious enforcement of sediment control measures should be pursued.
4.6   SOLID WASTE HANDLING AND DISPOSAL
4.6.1   Overview of Solid Waste Issues
The majority of Wai‘anae’s domestic solid waste is collected and disposed of by
the City’s department of environmental services, refuse division. The refuse
division handles the bulk of O‘ahu’s residential solid waste services,
including the recycling and green waste collection. Since 1990, most of O‘ahu’s
residential and general commercial trash has been disposed of at H-POWER, the
City’s waste-to-energy plant, located in Campbell Industrial Park.
Noncombustible solid waste, construction and demolition (C&D) debris, and
industry wastes go directly to a privately owned landfill – the PVT Nānākuli
Construction and Demolition Material Landfill, located in the Wai‘anae
District, on Lualualei Naval Station Road. Waimanalo Gulch, located in the
southwestern corner of the ‘Ewa District, near the border with the Wai‘anae
District is city owned, and operated by a private solid waste company. These
landfills are near their permitted capacities, and the question of what to do
with the island’s waste in the long-run remains unanswered.
The future of O‘ahu’s solid waste became a major public and political issue in
2004, when the decision to expand Waimanalo Gulch landfill came before the City
Council. At that time, the Council voted to expand the Waimanalo Gulch, instead
of opening one of the four alternative sites proposed. The other sites given
consideration were Mā‘ili, Nānākuli, and Makaiwa Gulch, all on the Leeward
Coast, and Kapa‘a Quarry in Kailua. Wai‘anae residents were vocally adamant
that their District should not have to carry the burden of housing yet another
landfill. In addition, most did not support the expansion of Waimanalo Gulch.
Wai‘anae residents have continued to watchdog landfill proposals for their
District.
Another local solid waste issue that is of concern to the Wai‘anae community is
the problem of illegal dumping of all kinds of solid waste, including material
from demolished buildings and from construction sites, old cars, old
appliances, animal carcasses, animal wastes, and various other kinds of junk
and debris. The many country roads and open spaces in the Wai‘anae District are
unfortunately very easy to use for illegal and indiscriminate dumping of
unwanted solid (and liquid) wastes. The many illegal dump areas in the District
are both unsightly and a threat to public health. Much stronger State and City
controls are needed to combat this problem.
4.6.2   Policies Pertaining to Solid Waste Disposal
4.6.2.1   Enforce Anti-Dumping Laws
Public agencies should coordinate with the community to develop and implement a
comprehensive program for the cleanup of illegal dumps and the ongoing
enforcement of laws forbidding illegal dumping of wastes and debris. The
enforcement program may include some form of partnership with the community
whereby each subcommunity of the Wai‘anae District organizes volunteers who
will patrol the area’s roads on a regular basis and report to a designated code
enforcement officer any illegal dumps or illegal dumping activity. Public
agencies, in turn, must provide the manpower to follow up on these reports of
illegal dumping. The appropriate field visits and investigations must be made,
and, where necessary, prosecution of offenders must be pursued.
4.6.2.2   Encourage Green Waste Composting
Green waste composting should be encouraged by private sources within the
District.
4.7   CIVIC, PUBLIC SAFETY, AND EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES
4.7.1   Overview of Civic, Public Safety, and Educational Facilities
Wai‘anae Satellite City Hall is located within the Wai‘anae Neighborhood
Community Center at 85-670 Farrington Highway, just south of Wai‘anae
Intermediate School. As of 2010, services include:
   ·   Car Motor vehicle registration, renewal, and transfer of ownership
   ·   Bicycle and moped registration
   ·   Payment of water bill and real property tax
   ·   Disabled parking permits
   ·   Dog licenses
   ·   Spay/neuter certificates
   ·   Monthly bus passes
   ·   Picnic and campsite permits
   ·   Informational brochures and applications for voter registration and
Handi-Van
   ·   Bus time schedules
   ·   Conference Room
The Honolulu Police Department provides police services to the Wai‘anae
District through the Wai‘anae Police Station and the Barbers Point substation.
Between 14 and 17 police officers are normally on duty to service the area. The
Wai‘anae Police Station handles a large number of 911 calls and a large number
of arrests: typically about 6,000 to 7,000 calls to 911 and 500 to 600 arrests
in an average month. There are not enough officers to handle this substantial
need for police services.
The Honolulu Fire Department has two fire stations in the Wai‘anae District –
one in Nānākuli and the other in Wai‘anae Valley. The Nānākuli Fire Station is
equipped with a 5-person engine and a 1-person tanker truck. The Wai‘anae Fire
Station is equipped with a 5-person engine, a 5-person quint (combination
pumper/ladder truck), and a 1- person tanker. Backup service is provided by
fire stations located in Kapolei, Makakilo, ‘Ewa, and Waipahu. The firefighters
in the Wai‘anae District are called upon to respond to a large number of
brushfires each year, especially during the dry summer months. The Honolulu
fire department has recently stated their need for a new fire station in the
Mā‘ili area, between the Nānākuli and Wai‘anae Fire Stations, in order to meet
their Standards of Response Coverage goals.
Emergency ambulance service is also provided out of the Wai‘anae Fire Station
with one unit. Patients are taken to Hawai‘i Medical Center-West or the
Wai‘anae Comprehensive Health Care Facility. In severe cases, a helicopter is
dispatched to Wai‘anae to transport patients to Queen’s Medical Center. Members
of the community have voiced the need for a full service hospital on the
Wai‘anae Coast. There is also a need for a second ambulance that operates 24
hours a day.
In regards to Emergency Shelters, the Civil Defense system for the City and
County of Honolulu is the responsibility of the Department of Emergency
Management (DEM). The DEM is responsible for monitoring, warning, evacuating,
and securing (if necessary) the vulnerable areas of the Wai‘anae Coast
susceptible to natural hazards such as tsunami, tropical storms, high surf, and
hurricanes. The DEM recommends that any new public buildings, such as schools
and recreation centers, be required to consider emergency shelter capabilities
as a secondary use of the building. The following schools are the existing
emergency shelters within the District:
   ·   Kamaile Elementary
   ·   Leihoku Elementary
   ·   Mā‘ili Elementary
   ·   Mākaha Elementary
   ·   Nānākuli Elementary
   ·   Nānākuli High & Intermediate
   ·   Wai‘anae Elementary
   ·   Wai‘anae Middle
Regarding schools, the Wai‘anae District currently contains ten public schools
operated under the State Department of Education (DOE). There are six
elementary schools, one intermediate, one combined intermediate and high school
and one high school. The total enrollment of each of the schools as of the
2008-2009 school year are shown in
Table 4-1.
In addition to these public schools, the District has two charter schools, Ka
Waihona o ka Na auao-PCS and Kamaile Academy. Ka Waihona is located at the
former Nānāikapono DOE school site in Nānākuli. Kamaile Academy is located in
Wai‘anae Valley, in an area historically known as Kamaile. These charter
schools strive to offer an educational experience that is based on community
and cultural values, an experience that is a viable alternative to the existing
conventional public school model. They also offer after school and summer
programs.
The Wai‘anae community generally supports such charter schools, as is shown by
their growth. Both schools’ enrollments have increased to over 500 students
each. This is significant growth, considering that Ka Waihona enrolled only 68
students in its start-up year of 2002-2003.
Recent plans for developments in Mākaha Valley include the establishment of a
special “Learning Community” facility that will provide special educational
resources and opportunities for all of the people of the Wai‘anae community,
from small children to kūpuna.
Table 4-1: Public School Enrollment in the Wai‘anae District
School Grades Official Enrollment Count, 2008-2009 School Year
Table 4-1: Public School Enrollment in the Wai‘anae District
School                      Grades Official Enrollment Count, 2008-2009 School
                                   Year
PUBLIC
Leihoku Elementary          K – 6770
Mā‘ili Elementary        K – 6681
Mākaha Elementary          K – 6484
Nānāikapono Elementary    K – 6758
Nānākuli Elementary       K – 6421
Nānākuli HS & Intermediate7 – 1820
Wai‘anae Elementary       K – 6487
Wai‘anae Intermediate     7 – 8780
Wai‘anae HS               9 – 11,611
TOTAL                              6,812
Charter
Ka Waihona O Ka Na‘auao-PCK – 8510
Kamaile Academy             K – 6589
TOTAL                              1,099
OVERALL TOTAL                      7,911
Source: DOE, 2008
 
The Board of Education has approved new design enrollment guidelines for new
Department of Education schools (Board Policy 6701):
   ·   Elementary (K-5)
      400-750 students
      8 to 15 usable acres
   ·   Middle (6-8)
      500-1,000 students
      15 to 20 usable acres
   ·   High (9-12)
      800 to 1,600 students
      45 to 55 usable acres
Leeward Community College has a satellite facility in Wai‘anae that offers
Associate Degrees and vocational programs, such as nursing. The current student
population is approximately 720 people. The college is located in a single
building next to Wai‘anae Mall and contains five classrooms.
Wai‘anae also offers a number of enrichment programs on Hawaiian culture for
children and adults. One of the better known programs is the Cultural Learning
Center at Ka‘ala. This center began operations in 1979 with a focus on working
with youth and adults on “hands-on” projects, such as planting taro and other
food and medicinal plants in Wai‘anae Valley. The focus of the program is
“Aloha ‘Aina – loving and caring for the Land.”
It is recognized that public schools are a State function, and that the City’s
Sustainable Communities Plans cannot provide definitive plans for these
facilities. However, City policies can provide some guidance to the development
of future schools for the community.
4.7.2   Policies Pertaining to Civic, Public Safety, and Educational Facilities
4.7.2.1   Improve Quality of Facilities and Adequacy of Staffing
There is a need for improvements in both the quality of public facilities and
the level of staffing for some of these facilities. Specifically, the Wai‘anae
Satellite City Hall needs to be improved in terms of staffing, programs,
equipment, and maintenance. The Wai‘anae Police Station needs more manpower.
Adequate police services are critical to the safety and welfare of Wai‘anae’s
people.
4.7.2.2   Selection of Sites for New Schools Should Comply with the Wai‘anae
Sustainable Communities Plan Criteria
Even if future growth in the Wai‘anae District is fairly slow, there will be an
eventual need for one or more new elementary schools, and possibly another
Intermediate School and High School by the Year 2035. The sites for these new
schools should be selected through a careful planning process. Public agency
planners should coordinate with the community to ensure that the site selection
process for new schools fully considers the plans and policies that make up the
Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan. Specifically, the site selection studies
will need to focus on potential sites within the Rural Residential areas, and
eliminate from consideration any sites on Agricultural lands or sites makai of
Farrington Highway. The construction of a school on Agricultural land would
encourage urban and suburban development that is not compatible with the intent
of this land use designation, and would potentially compromise the learning
environment for students, teachers and staff due to odors, dust and vectors
that often accompany agricultural land uses. Schools should not be makai of
Farrington Highway, due to the long-term issue of sea level rise, as well as
more immediate threats, such as tsunami.
In addition, schools should be located next to parks, and should allow for
shared facilities in order to maximize use of facilities. The City should
support fair share contribution, as adopted by State law.
4.7.2.3   Consider Multi-Purpose Function of Schools
School planners should consider the multipurpose role of schools in the
community. Thus, in addition to classroom education, schools in many
communities throughout the State provide other functions and facilities that
are important to the community, including after school programs, meeting places
for adult education and special programs, meeting places for community groups
and organizations, and meeting places for youth groups and health and fitness
classes. Schools are also the primary emergency shelters during hurricanes,
tsunami, or other large-scale emergency events. Recognizing these diverse
functions of public schools, new schools should be sited in centralized
locations that are easily accessible to a large number of residents.
4.7.2.4   Encourage Charter Schools
Encourage and support the opening of more charter and immersion schools.
(Please note that “stand alone” charter schools do not use DOE facilities.)
4.7.2.5   Increase Ambulance Service
There is currently only one ambulance that serves the District 24 hours a day.
It is recommended that a second one also be on duty at all times.
4.7.2.6   Provide Adequate Emergency Shelters
Emergency shelters provide places for people to live temporarily when there are
natural disasters, such as hurricanes and tsunami. They can also provide
shelter for people fleeing other situations, such as domestic violence or other
types of abuse. An adequate number of emergency shelters should be provided for
the Wai‘anae District.
4.7.3   Guidelines for Civic, Public Safety, and Educational Facilities
4.7.3.1   Design Standards
Public buildings, whether designed and constructed by federal, state, or city
agencies or by other quasi-public entities, should be designed to be both
functionally efficient and aesthetically pleasing. Too many public buildings on
O‘ahu, including police stations, fire stations, and schools, have been
designed with insufficient attention to sound design principles, which should
include:
   ·   The use of building forms and materials that reflect Hawai‘i’s diverse
cultural and architectural heritage.
   ·   The predominantly residential scale of the built environment of the
Wai‘anae District. Massive building forms would not be compatible with this
residential scale.
   ·   The hot, dry climate of the coastal plain zone of the Wai‘anae District.
Public buildings should therefore incorporate “natural” cooling devices
including lanais, wide roof overhangs, natural air circulation, strategically
placed shade trees, and cooler colors for exterior walls.
   ·   Related open areas including front yard areas, parking lots,
playgrounds, and garden spaces should be generously planted with colorful
trees, shrubs, and ground covers. Drought-tolerant native plant species should
be favored.
   ·   Sea level rise should be taken into account when choosing the location
of a public building, especially emergency facilities.
   ·   Design new public buildings, such as schools and recreation centers, to
serve a secondary function as an emergency shelter.
4.8   HEALTH CARE FACILITIES
4.8.1   Overview of Health Care Facilities
There is a wide variety and a large number of health care facilities and
programs in the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan area. These programs
include mental health, family violence counseling, substance abuse counseling
and health support groups (e.g., Alzheimer, cancer, diabetes, AIDS, etc.).
Regular health care services are provided by Kaiser Permanente in Nānākuli and
by the Wai‘anae Coast Comprehensive Health Center.
The Kaiser Permanente Clinic offers the following services:
   ·   Family Practice
   ·   Internal Medicine
   ·   Pediatrics
   ·   Behavioral Health Services
   ·   Diabetes education
   ·   Diabetic eye exams (once a month)
   ·   Diagnostic Imaging (General Radiology)
   ·   Health Education
   ·   Laboratory
   ·   Medical Social Services
   ·   Medication counseling
   ·   Nutrition counseling
   ·   Pharmacy (24-hour prescription refill)
   ·   Nephrology (selected days)
Emergency service for Kaiser Permanente is provided from the Moanalua center
with ambulance service provided by the Waipio Clinic in Waipahu. The nearest
hospital is the Hawai‘i Medical Center-West on Fort Weaver Road. For severe
cases, a helicopter is dispatched to the Wai‘anae coast and the patients are
taken to Queen’s Medical Center.
Wai‘anae Coast Comprehensive Health Center is an outpatient primary care
medical center that offers a wide variety of health care and supportive
services. The Health Center has a main clinic located in Wai‘anae, and
satellite clinics located in the Wai‘anae Mall and Nānākuli Shopping Center.
The Health Center’s primary health care services include:
   ·   Primary Care: family practice, pediatrics, and internal medicine
   ·   Specialty Care: orthopedics, podiatry, dermatology, obstetrics,
gynecology, nephrology, general surgery, pain management, ophthalmology
   ·   Dental: adult and pediatric
   ·   Behavioral Health: mental health and substance abuse treatment
   ·   Integrative Health: acupuncture
   ·   Pharmacy
The Health Center also provides a 24-hour emergency room, laboratory, and
radiology services. The emergency room is designated a Trauma Support Clinic as
well as a Type II facility for Hospital Capability for Readiness in case of a
natural disaster, pandemic, or bioterrorism event.
Other Patient and Community Services include:
   ·   Adult Day Care
   ·   Anonymous HIV Counseling and Testing
   ·   BabySafe Services
   ·   Case Management
   ·   Child Passenger Safety Seat Fitting Stations
   ·   Chronic Disease Management
   ·   Community Health Education
   ·   Diabetes Support Group
   ·   Family Planning
   ·   Fitness Training and Classes
   ·   Health Care for the Homeless
   ·   Health Education (Smoking Cessation, Asthma)
   ·   Kid-Fit Program
   ·   Medical Nutrition Therapy
   ·   Native Hawaiian Healing
   ·   Patient Assistance Services
   ·   Perinatal Services
   ·   Transportation
   ·   Wai‘anae Health Academy
   ·   WIC (Women, Infants, and Children Program)
   ·   Youth Health Corp: TeenBEAT (Teens Being Educated About Tobacco)
The Wai‘anae Coast Community Mental Health Center also offers a number of
programs and services. They operate six Headstart offices at Koa Ike, Nānākuli,
Puu Heleakala, Mā‘ili, Mākaha, and Wai‘anae. These offices provide
comprehensive child development programs with education, health, and social
services. The service is offered to low-income children and their families as
well as to people with handicapped conditions or referrals from the Child
Protective Services. Education and vocational support services, job search and
placement are also provided for persons 55 years of age or older.
Although there are no housing facilities for the elderly in the Wai‘anae
District, there are programs and services that provide assistance to the
elderly. Adult day care is provided by Wai‘anae Adult Day Care operating out of
the Wai‘anae Coast Comprehensive Health Center. Activities such as crafts and
exercise in a social environment are provided, as well as breakfast, lunch and
a snack.
Other programs for the elderly include the Honolulu Gerontology Program that
offers exercise and social support twice a week; Hui O Ka‘ala, Kupuna O
Nānākuli, and Wai‘anae Golden Age that provide social activities and crafts;
and senior citizens social clubs.
4.8.2   Policies Pertaining to Health Care Facilities
4.8.2.1   Support Quality, Community Health Care Facilities
Support and assist community health care facilities and programs to ensure high
quality health care for Wai‘anae residents.
4.8.2.2   Assess the Need for New Health Care Facilities and Services
Assess the need for new health care facilities, including possibly a full-
service hospital. Proceed with planning and funding of new health care
facilities as appropriate.
4.9   RELATION TO PUBLIC FACILITIES MAP
The major existing and planned public facilities discussed in Chapter 4 for the
Wai‘anae District are located schematically on the Public Facilities Map in
Appendix A.
5.   IMPLEMENTATION
Throughout the process of updating the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan,
the number one concern raised by community members was the lack of Plan
implementation. While the community generally agrees that DPP (the City
Department of Planning and Permitting) has satisfactorily utilized the Wai‘anae
Sustainable Communities Plan as a tool when assessing development proposals for
the District, they are concerned that there has been little-to-no
implementation of the projects and programs set forth within the Plan. However,
the responsibility of achieving proactive implementation should be shared by
the community and the City, including all of the City’s planners, engineers,
and other technical and policy-level personnel, as well as elected officials
who determine the allocation of City resources.
Many other City, county, and town jurisdictions on the U.S. mainland have
instituted comprehensive planning programs that emphasize a proactive
community-based planning and implementation process. These local governments
seek to establish a strong link between planning policies and guidelines, and
specific organization, funding, and actions needed to implement a variety of
public and private projects and programs. The following sections of this
Chapter are intended to strengthen the linkage to implementation to realize the
Vision of the future presented in this Plan. It should also be noted that
implementation will depend on each department’s priorities and availability of
resources.
This Chapter includes the following sections:
   5.1   Overview of Planning Implementation Tools
   5.2   Implementation Matrix
   5.3   Public Facility Investment Priorities
   5.4   Development Priorities
   5.5   Special Area Plans
   5.6   Functional Planning
   5.7   Review of Zoning and Other Development Applications
   5.8   Five-Year Sustainable Communities Plan Review
   5.9   Relationship to General Plan and Development Codes
5.1   OVERVIEW OF PLANNING IMPLEMENTATION TOOLS
Implementation of the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan should be pursued
through a variety of means, including:
   ·   Organization and action by the appropriate City departments towards the
realization of the policies contained in the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities
Plan;
   ·   On-going cooperation and communication with community leaders and
community organizations in order to accomplish the objectives of the Wai‘anae
Sustainable Communities Plan;
   ·   Broad dissemination and explanation of the Wai‘anae Sustainable
Communities Plan to public agencies, landowners, major local development
companies, community services providers, and community organizations. The
Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan can be an effective planning guide if it
is widely known and supported;
   ·   Guiding the City’s investment in infrastructure in accordance with the
policies and guidelines of the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan;
   ·   Initiating development code amendments to achieve consistency with the
Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan, including changes to the Land Use
Ordinance that will result in standards that are more appropriate to rural
areas;
   ·   Recommending approval, approval with modifications, or denial of
developments seeking zoning and other development approvals based on their
conformance with the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan;
   ·   Evaluating progress in fulfilling the Vision of the Wai‘anae Sustainable
Communities Plan every two years, and presenting the results of the evaluation
in the Biennial Report; and
   ·   Conducting a review of the Vision, Policies, Guidelines, and CIP
priority investments of the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan every five
years and recommending revisions as necessary.
5.2   IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
This section provides a summary of the specific physical improvements and
actions identified in Chapters 3 and 4 of the Plan to help organize and
facilitate plan implementation.
Table 5-1 presents the implementing actions, the related plans, regulatory code
or action, and the public or private entities responsible for implementing the
action. The table is organized by land use category, with the categories listed
according to the order of Chapters 3 and 4.
   ·   The first column of the table – Policy/Guideline – is comprised of the
guideline statements for each land use category. Policy statements are used if
the land use category does not include guidelines.
   ·   The second column – Program – relates each statement to a specific
regulatory code, functional plan, or other action. The term “project review”
indicates the review of discretionary land use approvals, such as State land
use, zoning and special management area use permits. In some instances, To Be
Determined (TBD) was used to indicate that the related code/plan/action was not
clear. TBD actions are intended to be identified and developed by the agencies
responsible for implementation.
   ·   The third column – Agency(ies) – identifies the public and/or private
entities responsible for implementing the policy or guideline. Although many of
the implementing actions fall under DPP’s jurisdiction, some actions are the
responsibility of other Federal, State or City departments or public agencies,
while a few have been assigned to private entities or individual landowners.
   ·   The fourth column identifies the role of the agencies involved in
implementation. The three categories identified include Implementer, Regulator
(after the law or regulation is implemented), and Advocate.
The following acronyms and abbreviations are used in the Implementation Matrix:
   BFS   Department of Budget and Fiscal Services
   BWS   Board of Water Supply
   CBO   Community-Based Organizations*
   CIP   Capital Improvement Program
   CSD   Customer Services Department
   CWRM   State Commission on Water Resource Management
   DDC   Department of Design and Construction
   DES   Department of Emergency Services
   DLNR   State Department of Land and Natural Resources
   DOA   State Department of Agriculture
   DOH   State Department of Health
   DOT   State Department of Transportation
   DPP   Department of Planning and Permitting
   DPR   Department of Parks and Recreation
   DTS   Department of Transportation Services
   ENV   Department of Environmental Services
   HECO   Hawaiian Electric Company
   IBC   International Building Code
   LUC   State Land Use Commission
   MIL   Military (U.S. Navy and/or U.S. Army)
   NPDES   National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
   TAX   State Department of Taxation
   TBD   To Be Determined
   WWMP   Wai‘anae Watershed Management Plan, PreFinal (BWS, 2010)
   WWTP   Wastewater Treatment Plant
*Community-Based Organizations (CBO) consist of groups that are already formed,
or that may form in the future, that will partner with government agencies to
manage Wai‘anae’s natural and cultural resources. Thus, although “CBO” is
listed numerous times in the matrix, these organizations may not yet be ready
to implement the Policy they are listed next to, but their formation should be
encouraged, and when appropriate, assisted.
TABLE 5-1: IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
NO. POLICY/GUIDELINE PROGRAM AGENCY(IES) ROLE
TABLE 5-1: IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
NO.     POLICY/GUIDELINE                                                   PROGRAM AGENCY  ROLE
                                                                                   (IES)
CHAPTER 3 LAND USE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
3.2 Preservation of Open Space
                                                                           Project DPP/
3.2.2.1 Do Not Allow Significant Negative Impacts on Large Open Spaces     Review  DLNR/   Implementer
                                                                                   MIL
                                                                           Project DPP/
3.2.2.2 Address Project Impacts on Open Space                              Review  DLNR/   Implementer
                                                                                   MIL
        Do Not Allow Significant Negative Impacts on Important Public      Project DPP/
3.2.2.3 Views                                                              Review  DLNR/   Implementer
                                                                                   MIL
                                                                           Project DPP/
3.2.2.4 Address Project Impacts on Important Public Views                  Review  DLNR/   Implementer
                                                                                   MIL
3.2.2.5 Limit Urban Development                                            Project DPP     Implementer
                                                                           Review
3.2.2.6 Government Agencies Should Partner with Community-based            TBD     DLNR/   Implementer/
        Organizations in order to Better Manage Wai‘anae’s Open Spaces         CBO     Advocate
3.2.2.7 Minimize Outdoor Lighting                                          TBD     Private Advocate
3.2.3.1 Minimize Adverse Effects of Artificial Lighting                    TBD     Private Advocate
3.2.3.2 Adopt Outdoor Night Lighting Standards                             TBD     Private Advocate
3.3 Preservation of Coastal Lands
3.3.2.1 Do Not Allow New Coastal Development                               Project DPP/    Implementer
                                                                           Review  DOT/DPR
3.3.2.2 Incrementally Acquire Coastal Properties                           TBD     DLNR    Implementer
3.3.2.3 Discourage Shore Armoring                                          TBD     DPP/    Implementer
                                                                                   DLNR
TABLE 5-1: IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
NO. POLICY/GUIDELINE PROGRAM AGENCY(IES) ROLE
TABLE 5-1: IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
NO.     POLICY/GUIDELINE                                                       PROGRAM AGENCY ROLE
                                                                                       (IES)
3.3.2.4 Government Agencies Should Partner with Community-based Organizations  TBD     DLNR/  Implementer/
        in order to Better Manage Wai‘anae’s Coastal Lands                         CBO    Advocate
3.3.2.5 Prohibit Projects that Negatively Impact Coastal Lands                 Project DPP/   Implementer
                                                                               Review  DLNR
                                                                                       DOA/
3.3.2.6 Prevent the Introduction of Alien Species                              TBD     DOT/   Implementer/
                                                                                       DLNR/  Advocate
                                                                                       CBO
3.3.2.7 Maintain Beaches/Sand                                                  Project DLNR/  Implementer/
                                                                               Review  CBO    Advocate
3.4 Preservation of Mountain Forest Lands
                                                                                       DLNR/  Implementer/
3.4.2.1 Protect Mountain Forest Lands                                          TBD     MIL/   Advocate
                                                                                       CBO
                                                                                       DLNR/
3.4.2.2 Develop Forest Restoration Plan                                        TBD     MIL/   Advocate
                                                                                       CBO
3.4.2.3 Do Not Grant Permits that Negatively Impact Mountain Forest Lands      Project DLNR   Implementer
                                                                               Review
3.4.2.4 Government Agencies Should Partner with Community-based Organizations  TBD     DLNR/  Implementer/
        in order to Better Manage Wai‘anae’s Mountain Forest Lands                 CBO    Advocate
                                                                                       DLNR/  Implementer/
3.4.2.5 Protect Rare and Endangered Species                                    TBD     MIL/   Advocate
                                                                                       CBO
                                                                                       DOA/
3.4.2.6 Prevent the Introduction of Alien Species                              TBD     DOT/   Implementer/
                                                                                       CBO/   Advocate
                                                                                       DLNR
3.4.2.7 Allow Public Access to Hiking Trails                                   TBD     DLNR   Advocate
                                                                                       DLNR/  Implementer/
3.4.2.8 Develop Wildfire Management Plan                                       TBD     MIL/   Advocate
                                                                                       CBO
3.5 Preservation of Streams and Floodplains
                                                                                       CWRM/
3.5.2.1 Establish Stream Conservation Corridors                                TBD     DLNR/  Implementer/
                                                                                       BWS/   Advocate
                                                                                       CBO
                                                                                       DLNR/  Implementer/
3.5.2.2 Restrict Uses within the Stream Conservation Corridors                 TBD     DPP/   Advocate
                                                                                       CBO
                                                                                       CWRM/
3.5.2.3 Establish Minimum In-Stream Flow Standards                             TBD     DLNR/  Implementer/
                                                                                       BWS/   Advocate
                                                                                       CBO
3.5.2.4 Government Agencies Should Partner with Community-based Organizations  TBD     DLNR/  Implementer/
        in order to Better Manage Wai‘anae’s Streams and Stream Corridors          CBO    Advocate
3.6 Preservation of and Access to Historic and Cultural Resources
        Preserve Major Concentrations of Cultural Sites and Allow Access for           DLNR/  Implementer/
3.6.2.1 Cultural Practices                                                     TBD     DPP/   Advocate
                                                                                       CBO
        Do Not Allow Development that Negatively Impacts Cultural Sites or     Project DPP/
3.6.2.2 Access to such Sites                                                   Review  SHPD/  Implementer
                                                                                       DLNR
TABLE 5-1: IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
NO. POLICY/GUIDELINE PROGRAM AGENCY(IES) ROLE
TABLE 5-1: IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
NO.     POLICY/GUIDELINE                                                             PROGRAM AGENCY(IES)           ROLE
3.6.2.3 Government Agencies Should Partner with Community-based Organizations in     TBD     DLNR/CBO              Implementer/
        order to Better Manage Wai‘anae’s Cultural Sites                                                       Advocate
3.6.2.4 Create Signage for Cultural Sites                                            TBD     DLNR/CBO/ SHPD        Implementer/
                                                                                                                   Advocate
3.6.2.5 Protect and Allow Access for Cultural Practices at Sites on City-Owned Lands TBD     DLNR/CBO/ DDC/DPP     Implementer/
                                                                                                                   Advocate
3.6.2.6 Protect and Allow Access for Cultural Practices to Federal, State, or        TBD     DLNR/CBO/MIL/         Implementer/
        Private Lands                                                                        property owners       Advocate
3.6.2.7 Conduct a Thorough Cultural Survey of the District                           TBD     DLNR/CBO/ SHPD        Implementer/
                                                                                                                   Advocate
3.7 Preservation of Agricultural Lands
3.7.2.1 Maintain the Boundary for Agricultural Lands                                 Zoning  DPP                   Implementer
3.7.2.2 Support Agriculture through Zoning Regulations and Tax Assessments           LUO     DPP/BFS               Implementer/
                                                                                                                   Advocate
3.7.2.3 Limit the use of “Agricultural” Land to Agriculture and other Compatible Zoning  DPP/LUC               Implementer
        Land Uses
3.7.2.4 Prohibit Incompatible Land Uses of “Agricultural” Land                   Zoning  DPP/LUC               Implementer
3.7.2.5 Coordinate Farmers Markets and Other Low- Cost Marketing Outlets             TBD     DOA/Local farmers     Advocate
3.8 Residential Land Use
3.8.2.1 Do Not Increase Lands Designated “Residential”                           WSCP    DPP                   Implementer
3.8.2.2 Coordinate with DHHL                                                         TBD     DPP                   Advocate
3.8.2.3 Preserve Agricultural Lands                                                  Zoning  DPP/SLUC              Implementer
3.8.2.4 Support Home-Based Businesses                                                Zoning  DPP                   Implementer
3.8.2.5 201H Projects Should Meet Wai‘anae SCP Guidelines                          Project City Council/DPP      Implementer
                                                                                     Review
3.8.3.1 Follow Wai‘anae SCP Affordable Housing Guidelines                          Project DPP/private           Implementer/
                                                                                     Review  developers            Advocate
3.8.3.2 Limit the Height of Residential Structures                                   LUO     DPP                   Implementer
3.8.3.3 Encourage Clustered Housing in Wai‘anae Country Town                       TBD     DPP                   Regulator/
                                                                                                                   Advocate
3.9 Commercial and Industrial Uses
3.9.2.1 Encourage the Continuation of Existing Commercial Establishments             TBD     DPP                   Regulator/
                                                                                                                   Advocate
3.9.2.2 Encourage Establishment of Commercial Businesses that Serve the Community    TBD     Wai‘anae Chamber of Regulator/
                                                                                             Commerce              Advocate
3.9.2.3 Support the Continued Viability of the Mākaha Resort                        TBD     Private               Implementer
3.9.2.4 Prohibit “Big Box” Stores                                                Project DPP                   Implementer
                                                                                     Reivew
TABLE 5-1: IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
NO. POLICY/GUIDELINE PROGRAM AGENCY(IES) ROLE
TABLE 5-1: IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
NO.      POLICY/GUIDELINE                                   PROGRAM   AGENCY(IES) ROLE
3.9.2.5  Encourage Light Industrial Businesses              Zoning    DPP/private Implementer/
                                                                      developers  Advocate
3.9.2.6  Do Not Allow Heavy Industry                        LUO       DPP         Implementer
3.9.3.1  Design Guidelines for Neighborhood Commercial      Project   DPP         Implementer
         Establishments                                     Review
3.10 Country Towns, Rural Community Commercial Centers and Gathering Places
                                                                      Private
3.10.2.1 Establish a Phased Development Program             TBD       developers/ Advocate
                                                                      DPP
3.10.3.1 Geographic Size of Centers                         Zone      DPP         Regulator
                                                            Change
3.10.3.2 Commercial Establishments in the Centers           Zoning    DPP         Regulator
3.10.3.3 Residential Structures in the Centers              Zoning    DPP         Regulator
3.10.3.4 Center Amenities                                   Zoning    DPP         Regulator
3.10.3.5 Guidelines for Community Gathering Places          TBD       CBO/DPP     Implementer/
         Connected by Walking/Jogging/Biking Path                                 Advocate
3.11 Existing Parks and Recreational Areas
3.11.2.1 Develop Adequate Public Parks                      CIP       DPR         Advocate
3.11.2.2 Prohibit More Golf Courses That Compete with       Zoning    DPP         Implementer
         Agriculture or Open Space Resources
3.11.2.3 Plan for a System of Hawaiian Cultural and         TBD       DPR/CBO/    Advocate
         Educational Parks                                            DLNR
3.11.3.1 Increase Neighborhood Parks Based on City’s Park CIP       DPR/DDC     Advocate
         Standards
3.11.3.2 Flexible Criteria for Recreational Facilities      City Park DPR/CBO/DDC Implementer
                                                            Standards
3.12 Military Land Uses
3.12.2.1 Preserve and Transition Military Lands to Civilian TBD       CBO/MIL     Implementer/
         Use                                                                      Advocate
3.12.2.2 Organize and Implement Cooperative Programs        TBD       CBO/MIL     Advocate
CHAPTER 4 PUBLIC FACILITIES AND INFRASTRUCTURE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
4.1 Transportation Systems
4.1.2.1  Implement Farrington Highway Safety Improvements   CIP       DOT         Advocate
4.1.2.2  Beautify Farrington Highway                        CIP       DOT         Advocate
4.1.2.3  Establish an Emergency Bypass Road                 CIP       DOT/MIL     Advocate/
                                                                                  Implementer
4.1.2.4  Enhance Public Transportation                      CIP       DTS         Advocate
4.1.2.5  Encourage Other Modes of Transportation            TBD       DTS/DOT/    Advocate
                                                                      individuals
4.2 Potable and Nonpotable Water Systems
4.2.4.1  Implement Watershed Protection Strategies to       WWMP      CWRM/BWS/   Advocate
         Improve Forest Health & Perennial Stream Flows               DLNR/CBO
 
TABLE 5-1: IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
NO. POLICY/GUIDELINE PROGRAM AGENCY(IES) ROLE
TABLE 5-1: IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
NO.     POLICY/GUIDELINE                                                             PROGRAM AGENCY(IES) ROLE
4.2.4.2 Encourage Water Conservation                                                 WWMP    BWS/CBO     Advocate
4.2.4.3 Diversify Water Supply, Matching Quality with Use                            WWMP    BWS         Advocate
4.2.4.4 Support the Goals and Objectives of the Adopted Wai‘anae Watershed         WWMP    BWS/DPP     Advocate
        Management Plan
4.3 Wastewater Collection and Treatment Systems
4.3.2.1 Continue Replacement of Old Sewer Lines                                      CIP     ENV         Advocate
4.3.2.2 Improve the Wai‘anae Wastewater Treatment Plant                            CIP     ENV         Advocate
4.3.2.3 Coordinate with DHHL Regarding Sewer Connections                             TBD     ENV/DHHL    Advocate
4.4 Electrical Power and Communications
        Reduce the Visual Impact and Improve Safety of Utility Lines and Poles and           HECO/
4.4.2.1 Reliability of Service                                                       TBD     Hawaiian    Advocate
                                                                                             Telcom
                                                                                             DBEDT,
4.4.2.2 Encourage the Development of Alternative Energy Sources                      TBD     Developers, Advocate
                                                                                             HECO, State
                                                                                             Legislature
4.4.3.1 Require New Development to be Powered 50% by Alternative Energy              IBC     DPP         Implementer
4.5 Drainage Systems
4.5.2.1 Develop Wai‘anae District Local Drainage Improvements Plan and Program     TBD     ENV/DDC     Advocate
4.5.2.2 Establish a Sediment Control Program                                         NPDES   ENV/DLNR/   Advocate
                                                                                             CBO
4.6 Solid Waste Handling and Disposal
4.6.2.1 Enforce Anti-Dumping Laws                                                    TBD     DLNR/CBO    Implementer/
                                                                                                         Advocate
4.6.2.2 Encourage Green Waste Composting                                             TBD     ENV/DLNR/   Implementer/
                                                                                             DPP/CBO     Advocate
4.7 Civic, Public Safety, and Education Facilities
4.7.2.1 Improve Quality of Facilities and Adequacy of Staffing                       TBD     CSD         Advocate
4.7.2.2 Selection of Sites for New Schools Should Comply with Wai‘anae Sustainable TBD     DOE         Implementer
        Communities Plan Criteria
4.7.2.3 Consider Multi-Purpose Functions of Schools                                  TBD     DOE         Implementer
4.7.2.4 Encourage Charter Schools                                                    TBD     Community   Advocate
4.7.2.5 Increase Ambulance Service                                                   TBD     DES         Advocate
                                                                                     Civil
4.7.2.6 Provide Adequate Emergency Shelters                                          Defense DEM         Implementer
                                                                                     System
4.7.3.1 Design Standards                                                             Project DPP/DDC     Implementer
                                                                                     Review
 
TABLE 5-1: IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
NO.     POLICY/GUIDELINE               PROGRAM        AGENCY(IES) ROLE
4.8 Health Care Facilities
4.8.2.1 Support Quality, Community     Project Review Funders     Implementer/
        Health Care Facilities                                    Advocate
4.8.2.2 Assess the Need for New Health TBD            DOH         Advocate
        Care Facilities and Services
 
5.3   PUBLIC FACILITY INVESTMENT PRIORITIES
The VISION for the Wai‘anae District requires the cooperation of both public
agencies and private organizations in planning, financing, and improving
infrastructure. The City must take an active role in planning infrastructure
improvements, such as land acquisition and site improvements for neighborhood
parks, provision of adequate public access to the shoreline, provision of
pedestrian, bicycle, and other transportation options, planning and
implementation of drainage improvements, and improvements to the Wai‘anae
Satellite City Hall and to the Wai‘anae Community Center building.
5.4   DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES
Projects that should receive priority in the process of City land use approvals
are those which:
   ·   Involve land acquisition and improvements for public projects that are
consistent with the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan’s Vision, Policies,
and Guidelines;
   ·   Involve applications for zoning and other regulatory approvals that are
consistent with the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan’s Vision, Policies,
and Guidelines;
   ·   Are located on usable parcels of land that are consistent with the
Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan’s Land Use Map.
5.5   SPECIAL AREA PLANS
Special Area Plans provide more detailed policies and guidelines than
Sustainable Communities Plans for areas requiring particular attention. The
form and content of Special Area Plans depend on what characteristics and
issues need to be addressed in greater detail in planning and guiding
development or use of the Special Area.
Special Area Plans can be used to guide land use development and infrastructure
investment in Special Districts, Redevelopment Districts, or Resource Areas.
Plans for Special Districts provide guidance for development and infrastructure
investment in areas with distinct historic or design character or significant
visual and scenic resources. Plans for Redevelopment Districts provide
strategies for the revitalization or the redevelopment of an area. Plans for
Resource Areas provide resource management strategies for areas with special
natural and cultural resource values.
In 2000, Mākaha Valley was identified for Special Area Plan status because of
several important characteristics:
The City owns approximately 4,000 acres of land in the upper valley and the
steeper valley walls;
   ·   Most of the valley has been designated “urban” under the State Land Use
system;
   ·   There are approximately 350 acres of undeveloped land in Mākaha Valley
that are already zoned for Residential and Resort uses;
   ·   Mākaha Valley is an important resource area in terms of water resources,
rare and endangered plants and animals, and cultural sites.
Since that time, the Mākaha Special Area Plan was developed through a
community-based planning process. It was completed in 2009. See Section 3.8.1
“Overview of Existing and Planned Residential Uses” for a summary of the Mākaha
Special Area Plan.
5.6   FUNCTIONAL PLANNING
Functional planning is the process by which various City agencies determine
needs, assign priorities, phase projects, and propose project financing to
further implement the vision articulated in the Sustainable Communities Plans.
This process may take a variety of forms, depending upon the missions of the
various agencies involved, as well as upon requirements imposed from outside
the City structure, such as federal requirements for wastewater management
planning.
Through the functional planning process, City agencies responsible for
developing and maintaining infrastructure and public facilities or for
provision of City services review existing functional planning documents and
programs. As a result of these reviews, the agencies then update, if required,
existing plans or prepare new long-range functional planning documents that
address facilities and service system needs. Updates of functional planning
documents are also conducted to assure that agency plans will serve to further
implement the Sustainable Communities Plans as well as to provide adequate
opportunity for coordination of plans and programs among the various agencies.
The functional planning process should have opportunities for early and
continuing public involvement, timely public notice, public access to
information used in the evaluation of priorities, and opportunities to suggest
alternatives and to express preferences. The functional planning process
provides the technical background for the Capital Improvement Program and
public policy proposals that are subject to review and approval by the City
Council.
5.7   REVIEW OF ZONING AND OTHER DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS
5.7.1   Wai‘anae District Zoning Designations
A primary way in which the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan will guide
land use will be through the review of applications for zone changes and other
development proposals. Approval for all development projects should be based on
the extent to which the project supports the Policies and Guidelines of the
Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan.
Projects that do not involve significant zone changes will be reviewed by City
Planners for consistency with the Policies and Guidelines of the Wai‘anae
Sustainable Communities Plan during the Zone Change or permit application
process. Projects involving significant zone changes will require an
environmental review in accordance with HRS Chapter 343.
5.7.2   Adequate Facilities Requirement
All projects requesting zone changes shall be reviewed to determine if adequate
public facilities and infrastructure will be available to meet the needs
created as a result of the development. Level of Service Guidelines to define
adequate public facilities and infrastructure requirements will be established
as part of the City’s Capital Improvement Program.
In order to guide development and growth in an orderly manner as required by
the City’s General Plan, zoning and other development approvals for new
developments should be approved only if the responsible City and State agencies
indicate that adequate public facilities and utilities will be available at the
time of occupancy or if conditions the functional agency indicates are
necessary to assure adequacy are otherwise sufficiently addressed.
Staff planners, as part of their report to the department of planning and
permitting on the consistency of the project with the Wai‘anae Sustainable
Communities Plan, will review and summarize any individual agency’s findings
regarding public facilities and utilities adequacy which are raised as part of
the EA/EIS process. The department of planning and permitting will address
these findings and any additional agency comments submitted as part of the
agency review of the zone change application and recommend conditions that
should be included in the Unilateral Agreement or Development Agreement to
insure adequacy of facilities.
5.8   FIVE-YEAR SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLAN REVIEW
The Planning Division shall conduct a comprehensive review of the Wai‘anae
Sustainable Communities Plan and shall report its findings and recommended
revisions to the Planning Commission and the City Council five years after
adoption and every five years thereafter.
In the Five-Year review, the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan will be
evaluated to see if the regional vision, policies, guidelines, and implementing
actions are still appropriate.
5.9   RELATIONSHIP TO GENERAL PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT CODES
This section discusses the transition from the former Wai‘anae Sustainable
Communities Plan (2000) to this revised Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan
(2010), including its relationship to the General Plan guidelines, and the need
for review and revision of development codes, standards, and regulations.
5.9.1   Existing Land Use Approvals
This Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan will go into effect upon adoption by
ordinance. At that time, the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan will become
a self-contained document.
Land use approvals granted under existing zoning, Unilateral Agreements, and
approved Urban Design Plans will remain in force and guide entitlement
decisions until any zoning action to further implement the Vision and Policies
of the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan is initiated. If an Environmental
Assessment or Environmental Impact Statement (EA/EIS) was accepted in the
course of a Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan (2000) land use approval for
a project, it should be acceptable to meet the requirement for an initial
project EA/EIS when zone change applications are submitted for subsequent
phases of the project unless the project scope and land uses are being
significantly changed from those described in the initial EA/EIS.
5.9.2   Review and Revision of Development Codes
Upon completion of the Sustainable Communities Plan Revision Program, current
regulatory codes and standards should be reviewed and revised, as necessary, to
maintain their consistency and effectiveness as standards to guide attainment
of the objectives and policies envisioned for all Sustainable Communities Plan
areas. At the time that such reviews are conducted, the following regulatory
codes and standards may warrant further review and revision to ensure
achievement of the vision for the Wai‘anae District and consistency with the
Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan:
   ·   Land Use Ordinance. (Chapter 21, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu) Zoning
code standards and the zoning map for the Wai‘anae District need to be revised
to further implement the Policies and Guidelines of the Wai‘anae Sustainable
Communities Plan. Special zoning provisions may be needed for the Commercial
Centers and Gathering Places.
   ·   Subdivision Rules and Regulations. (Department of Planning and
Permitting, pursuant to Chapter 22, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu) Public road
right-of-way standards used for subdivisions and rules for the consolidation of
land may need to be revised to reflect the rural emphasis of the Policies and
Guidelines in the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan.
   ·   Traffic Standards Manual. (Department of Transportation Services, July
1976, as revised) Standards that are applied to local and most collector
streets may need to be revised to reflect transportation Policies and
Guidelines in the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan.
   ·   State Highways Division Procedures Manual, Volume 8, Chapter 5, Section
4. (State Department of Transportation) These State highway standards need to
be reviewed to identify provisions that may conflict with the transportation
Policies and Guidelines in the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan.
   ·   Standard Details for Public Works Construction. (Department of Planning
and Permitting) Engineering standards for the dedication of public works
construction need to be revised to reflect Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities
Plan Policies and Guidelines.
   ·   Storm Drain Standards. (Department of Planning and Permitting) Standards
for the dedication of drainage systems to incorporate retention basins, rip-rap
boulder lining of stream banks, and streamside vegetation into the design need
to be created to further implement the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan
Policies and Guidelines for open space.
   ·   Park Dedication Rules and Regulations. (Department of Planning and
Permitting, pursuant to Chapter 22, Article 7, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu)
Regulations need to be reviewed to determine if passive drainage systems which
are designed for recreational use should count toward park dedication
requirements, especially in cases where the area would exceed the amount of
land that would be required under current rules and regulations.
   ·   Wastewater Management Design Standards. (Department of Environmental
Services and the 1990 Revised Ordinances of Honolulu, Chapter 14, relating to
sewer services) These standards and ordinances may require review to further
implement Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan Policies and Guidelines.
APPENDIX: THE CONCEPTUAL MAPS: LAND USE, OPEN SPACE, AND PUBLIC FACILITIES
INTRODUCTION
The Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan includes three conceptual maps in
color:
   ·   The Land Use Map (EXHIBIT A-1)
   ·   The Open Space Map (EXHIBIT A-2)
   ·   The Public Facilities Map (EXHIBIT A-3)
These maps illustrate the long-range VISION for the Wai‘anae District and the
major land use, open space, and public facility policies that are articulated
in the Plan. In examining them the reader should keep in mind that:
   1.   These maps are general and conceptual.
   2.   They are illustrative of the Plan’s policy statements, presented in the
text of this report.
These policy statements, which appear in the preceding chapters, are considered
to be the most important elements of the Plan. The maps are considered
illustrations of the policies. However, it is recognized that the maps may be
more reader friendly than the written policies. This section of the Plan,
therefore, presents a brief explanation of the contents of each of these maps.
Elements common to each of the three maps include one boundary and four land
use designations: “Community Growth Boundary,” “Rural Residential,”
“Agriculture,” “Preservation,” and “Golf Course.” These designations and the
Community Growth Boundary are not parcel-specific. Because they are not parcel-
specific, the lines do not indicate precise or abrupt demarcations. Rather, the
extent of permissible or appropriate uses within these boundaries should be
evaluated and determined in concert with relevant sections of the Plan’s text
and specific site characteristics. These common elements are discussed below.
Information particular to each map is presented under each map topic.
1.   Community Growth Boundary
The Community Growth Boundary defines, protects, and contains the intended
extent of the “built-up” or “settled” areas of rural communities. Its purposes
are to provide adequate lands to support established communities, to protect
such communities from more intense forms of development, and to protect lands
outside the boundary for agriculture or other resource or open space values.
Areas within this boundary typically consist of relatively small, dispersed
residential communities and towns. The Community Growth Boundary is not
intended to reflect a desire for more growth in Wai‘anae than what is planned
under the General Plan.
In the Wai‘anae District, the Community Growth Boundary is defined by a line
that has been drawn to delineate and contain the Farrington Highway development
corridor. This line, although conceptual in nature, has been drawn and should
be interpreted such that the midsection of the line more or less coincides with
the limits of lands that are zoned, as of 2009, R-5 and R-10, as well as
existing scattered zoned commercial and industrial sites and the major
residential developments of the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands in Nānākuli.
The intent of this line is to identify existing urban/suburban areas, allow for
infill residential and commercial development on undeveloped parcels within
this boundary, and clearly define the limits of urban/suburban development.
Thus, no new urban/suburban development shall be allowed mauka of this
Community Growth Boundary line, except for already residentially zoned lands in
Mākaha Valley and “Industrial” lands in Lualualei Valley. Lands mauka of this
line are designated “Agriculture” and “Preservation.” Continued small-scale
agricultural uses of small farm lots within the Community Growth Boundary
should be encouraged.
2.   Rural Residential
Most of the lands makai of the Community Growth Boundary are designated and
colored “Rural Residential.” This general designation is intended to include
single-family homes, town homes, small 2-story apartment buildings, and various
relatively low density community support facilities that are permitted in
residentially zoned areas, including schools and churches. Also included in
this general land use area are a number of small commercial and light
industrial uses that are too small to map at this scale and are therefore
included as nonconforming existing uses. Alternate development options which
result in greater amounts of open space and common facilities may also be used.
The gross density of residential units should generally be in the range of 5 to
8 units per acre or up to 10 units per acre for alternative development options
that preserve open space. Also included within this area, as “grandfathered”
residential uses, are a number of existing “medium density” apartment
buildings. New medium density apartment buildings or condominiums should not be
permitted in “Rural Residential” areas.
3.   Agriculture
Lands with agricultural value by virtue of current agricultural use or high
value for future agricultural use, including those areas identified as Prime,
Unique, or Other Important lands on the Agricultural Lands Important to the
State of Hawai‘i (ALISH) maps. “Agriculture” includes lands suitable for crop
growing, grazing and livestock raising, flower cultivation, nurseries,
orchards, aquaculture, or similar activities.
Included as Agriculture lands are existing “Country” zoned subdivisions with
minimum lot sizes of one acre. The “Country” zoned subdivisions have been
included in the Agricultural lands because many of the lots in these
subdivisions are used for part-time agricultural pursuits.
Under the state constitution, the state is to identify important agricultural
lands (IAL). Once identified, these lands cannot be rezoned except under a
“super majority” vote. To date, IAL lands have not be identified. In 2005, Act
183 was adopted to address this mandate. It established a two-step process:
first, incentives to assure the long term use and protection of IAL. Second,
with adequate state funding, the counties would prepare maps identifying IAL
lands to be adopted by the State Land Use Commission. Act 233, enacted in 2008,
adopted the incentive programs. To date, no state funding has been appropriated
to the counties for the mapping. Lands identified for agricultural purposes by
this Plan can serve as the basis for the county mapping process.
4.   Preservation
Preservation lands include those lands not valued primarily for agriculture,
but that form an important part of a region’s open space fabric. They possess
natural, cultural, or scenic resource values, and include important wildlife
habitat, cultural sites, significant landforms, views, or hazard areas. They
include the following types of land:
   ·   Lands necessary for protecting watersheds, water resources, and water
supplies.
   ·   Lands necessary for the conservation, preservation, and enhancement of
sites with scenic, historical, archaeological, or ecological significance.
   ·   Lands necessary for providing and preserving park lands, wilderness and
beach reserves, and for conserving natural ecosystems of endemic plants, fish,
and wildlife, for forestry, and other related activities to these uses.
   ·   Lands having an elevation below the maximum inland line of the zone of
wave action; and marine waters, fish ponds, and tide pools of O‘ahu unless
otherwise designated on the development plan land use map.
   ·   All offshore and outlying islands of O‘ahu unless otherwise classified.
   ·   Lands with topography, soils, climate, or other related environmental
factors that may not be normally adaptable or presently needed for urban,
rural, or agricultural use.
   ·   Lands with general slopes of 20 percent or more which provide for open
space amenities and/or scenic values.
   ·   Lands susceptible to floods and soil erosion, lands undergoing major
erosion damage and requiring corrective attention by the State or Federal
Government, and lands necessary for the protection of the health, safety, and
welfare of the public by reason of soil instability or the lands’
susceptibility to landslides or inundation by tsunami and flooding, or both.
   ·   Lands used for national, state, or city parks.
   ·   Lands suitable for growing of commercial timber, grazing, hunting, and
recreation uses, including facilities accessory to such uses when said
facilities are compatible with the natural physical environment.
5.   Golf Courses
Golf courses that are existing, or were approved as of November 2009, are
included in this designation. These golf courses include: the Mākaha East golf
course, the expansion area for an additional nine holes at the Mākaha East
course, and the Mākaha West golf course. No other golf courses are designated
on the Land Use Map, and no additional golf courses are provided for in the
Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities Plan land use policies.
A.1   LAND USE MAP
The LAND USE MAP illustrates both existing land uses within the Wai‘anae
District as well as the desired long- range future land use pattern that is in
concert with the VISION and policies for the Wai‘anae Coast. The Land Use Map
thus includes the following elements:
A.1.1   Medium Density Residential
There are only two areas on the Land Use Map that have been designated as
Medium Density Residential: the site of the existing Mākaha Towers project, and
the site of the existing Mākaha Plantation project. Both of these parcels are
currently zoned “A-2,” which allows a maximum density of 1.9 Floor Area Ratio
(FAR) for lots of 40,000 square feet or more. Medium density residential
development on O‘ahu generally has a gross density of 12 to 30 units per acre.
The Plan’s Land Use Map thus recognizes the existence of these two zoned
projects. However, it is the intent of the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities
Plan that no other lands within the Wai‘anae District be designated for “medium
density”, which is a relatively urban residential density.
A.1.2   Resort
The Land Use Map recognizes the existence of two projects in Mākaha Valley that
are at present zoned “Resort”: the site of the Mākaha Resort, and the site of
the proposed Mākaha Conference Center. No other lands within the Wai‘anae
District are designated for new Resort use on the Land Use Map.
A.1.3   Mākaha Special Area Plan
A grey dashed line on the Land Use Map defines Mākaha Valley as a “Special Area
Plan.” This designation indicates the need for the development of a more
detailed plan for future land use and land preservation. Accordingly, the
Mākaha Special Area Plan was developed and finalized in 2009.
A.1.4   Rural Community Commercial Center
Smaller colored circles denote “Rural Community Commercial Centers” for the
sub-communities of Nānākuli, Māili, and Mākaha. The location of these Centers
is schematic in nature. This designation is intended to encourage the
development of smaller-scale concentrations of commercial establishments and
community services in a physical configuration that will help to provide a
stronger physical identity for these subcommunities.
A.1.5   Country Town
A small-scale, low-rise, mixed-use center of commerce and community activity in
rural character and setting in which principal establishments are oriented on
the street. Land use mixtures may include retail, office, and dining
establishments, compatible service businesses and light industry, and
residential uses. Commercial activity is concentrated along street frontages in
typically “Mainstreet” settings.
The Land Use Map shows the approximate location of the existing Wai‘anae town
center, which extends roughly from the Wai‘anae Mall to the Wai‘anae Community
Center. The intent of this designation is to recognize the traditional and
contemporary importance of Wai‘anae town center as the primary commercial hub
of the Wai‘anae Coast. The related policies encourage the renovation and
development of this town center into a multi-faceted “Country Town” center for
the District.
A.1.6   Industrial
The Wai‘anae District Land Use Map includes two “Industrial” areas. The intent
of these Industrial areas is to provide areas for the development of non-
polluting, light industrial uses that would provide employment opportunities
for local people. The first such area is in the vicinity of the Wastewater
Treatment Plant and Wai‘anae Mall. Some commercial uses should also be allowed
in this Industrial area, to provide for an economically viable mix of uses, and
also to serve as a buffer between light industrial uses and nearby residential
areas. It is the intent of this Industrial use that industrial-mixed use “IMX”
be allowed as a compatible zoning designation.
The second Industrial area is in Lualualei Valley. This site is intended for
light industrial uses that are not noxious or socially objectionable in nature.
Light industrial lots at this location should be affordably priced for Wai‘anae
businesses, and include vocational training and other facilities that will
benefit the Wai‘anae community.
A.1.7   Military
The two large existing U.S. Navy installations and the U.S. Army’s training
lands in Mākua Valley have been shown on the Land Use Map with an overlay
graphic texture. The intent of the Land Use Map is thus to recognize the
existence of these military uses, but to show that the long-range vision for
these lands are for agricultural, open space, and preservation uses that are
compatible with the principal policies of the Wai‘anae Sustainable Communities
Plan.
A.1.8   Farrington Highway Beautification
A dashed green line is used to symbolize the various proposed improvements for
Farrington Highway, including safety improvements for vehicles and pedestrians,
traffic-calming devices, sidewalks, bikeways, beautification, and improved
lighting.
A.2   OPEN SPACE MAP
The Open Space Map is intended to illustrate the region’s major open space
patterns and resources as outlined in Chapter 3. It highlights major open space
elements and resources, including agricultural and preservation lands, major
recreational facilities, important “panoramic” views, natural stream corridors
and drainageways, and important boundaries.
A.2.1   Ahupua‘a Boundary
Ahupua‘a boundaries, based on the traditional ahupua‘a method of land
organization, have been adopted for use and displayed in the Plan as a method
of organizing land uses and enhancing community definition within the region.
The approximate boundaries of the nine traditional ahupua‘a of the Wai‘anae
Coast are shown on the map. These boundaries have great cultural, historical,
and ecological significance, and should therefore provide a framework for the
open space plan for the District.
A.2.2   Stream Corridors
The major perennial and intermittent stream corridors are shown on the Open
Space Map. These corridors should be protected and preserved in accordance with
the policies and guidelines articulated in this Sustainable Communities Plan.
A.2.3   Concentrations of Archaeological Sites
The known and probable concentrations of archaeological and cultural sites in
the District are shown by means of an overlay graphic texture. These areas
should be protected and preserved, and appropriate public access should be
provided.
A.2.4   Heiau
The approximate locations of known heiau are shown on the map with brown
triangles.
A.2.5   Parks
Public and private parks and recreational facilities, including beach parks,
playgrounds, playfields, district parks, botanical gardens, zoos, and golf
courses. Neighborhood and beach parks are shown with a green circle.
A.2.6   Small Boat Harbor
The existing Wai‘anae small boat harbor is shown with a blue circle. The harbor
is an important facility for both recreational and commercial fishermen.
A.2.7   Gathering Places
The concept of community gathering places is presented in the Wai‘anae
Sustainable Communities Plan text. The location of future gathering places is
schematically shown on the Open Space Map. These locations are subject to
further planning by the various community groups that will take the lead in
developing Gathering Places for their people.
A.3   PUBLIC FACILITIES MAP
The Public Facilities Map illustrates major existing and future public
facilities and privately owned facilities for public use. Its purpose is to
display the public resources or assets available in the region. When the Plan
is adopted, a separate “Public Infrastructure Map,” which will focus on and
display facilities eligible for City Capital Improvements Program funding, will
also be developed. For the Wai‘anae Region, the following types of facilities
are displayed:
   ·   Wastewater Treatment Plant
   ·   Police Station
   ·   Fire Stations
   ·   High Schools
   ·   Intermediate Schools
   ·   Elementary Schools
   ·   Small Boat Harbor
   ·   Landfill
The Public Facilities Map for the Wai‘anae District also includes a conceptual
alignment for bicycle lanes and bicycle routes:
   ·   Bikeways on Farrington Highway
   ·   Major valley roads designated and improved to accommodate bicycle routes
   ·   Multi-purpose beach path
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8659.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8657.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8655.png]
ARTICLE 10: NORTHWESTERN HAWAIIAN ISLANDS
Sections
Part I. Development Plan Special Provisions for the Northwestern Hawaiian
Islands
   
24-10.1   Area description
   
24-10.2   Jurisdictional responsibilities
   
24-10.3   Land use and urban design principles, standards, and controls
Part II. Development Plan Maps for the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands
   
24-10.4   Land use maps
   
Appendix 24-10
PART I. DEVELOPMENT PLAN SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR THE NORTHWESTERN HAWAIIAN
ISLANDS
§ 24-10.1 Area description.
   The northwestern Hawaiian islands consist of all islands, atolls, reefs, and
shoals in the Hawaiian Archipelago. All islands, atolls, reefs, and shoals in
the Hawaiian Archipelago, except for the Midway Islands, are included in the
State of Hawaii under the Admission Act, the State Constitution, and the Hawaii
Revised Statutes, and are a part of this development plan. Nine larger islands,
or island groups, are: Nihoa; Necker Island; French Frigate Shoals; Gardner
Pinnacles; Maro Reef; Laysan Island; Lisianski Island; Pearl and Hermes Atoll;
and Kure Atoll. Many of these islands, or groups of islands, actually consist
of many islets; for example, French Frigate Shoals contains 13 specific islets.
The nine major islands, or groups of islands, range in size from Maro Reef with
less than one acre to Laysan Island with 913 acres.
   The Northwestern Hawaiian Islands have no permanent residents; however, the
U.S. Coast Guard maintains facilities at Kure Atoll and the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service has facilities on Tern Island in French Frigate Shoals.
(Sec. 32-10.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 10,
§ 24-10.1)
§ 24-10.2 Jurisdictional responsibilities.
(a)   The federal government has jurisdiction to manage most of the
northwestern islands of the Hawaiian Archipelago. All northwestern Hawaiian
islands, except Kure Atoll, are a part of the Hawaiian Islands National
Wildlife Refuge established in 1909; these islands are administered and
controlled by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Kure Atoll is also a wildlife
refuge, but it is under the jurisdiction of the State of Hawaii, department of
land and natural resources, division of fish and game. On French Frigate Shoals
(Tern Island), the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has facilities and an
airstrip. All of the northwestern Hawaiian islands and archipelagic waters
within the State of Hawaii are included in the State land use conservation
district; thus, the State manages the subject islands where there is no federal
jurisdiction.
(b)   The city’s general plan expresses:
(1)   The city’s awareness of the abundant and diverse populations of birds,
marine life, and native plants in the northwestern Hawaiian islands;
(2)   The city’s awareness of the unique importance of these fragile resources;
and
(3)   The city’s concern for their protection by appropriate agencies of the
State and federal governments.
(Sec. 32-10.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 10,
§ 24-10.2)
§ 24-10.3 Land use and urban design principles, standards, and controls.
   The northwestern Hawaiian islands are primarily a wildlife refuge under the
jurisdiction and administration of the federal or State government, or both.
All northwestern Hawaiian islands included within this development plan are
included within the State conservation district and designated for preservation
of the development plan land use maps. The land use policy of the City and
County of Honolulu for the northwestern Hawaiian islands is to protect and
preserve the natural environment, including marine life and wildlife resources.
   No special provisions with respect to land use and urban design are
established at this time.
(Sec. 32-10.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 10,
§ 24-10.3)
PART II. DEVELOPMENT PLAN MAPS FOR THE NORTHWESTERN HAWAIIAN ISLANDS
§ 24-10.4 Land use maps.
(a)   The maps on file with the city clerk entitled “Development Plan Land Use
Maps for the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands, City and County of Honolulu”, are
adopted and made a part of this development plan. They include an overall map
of the Hawaiian Archipelago and eight large-scale maps of the major islands*
(including atoll, shoal, or island group) and depict the approximate land
boundaries of each entity. All land areas are designated for preservation use.
(b)   Any land use boundaries which may be established on the maps are not to
be considered zoning boundaries, nor are they intended to reflect land use
designations by metes and bounds. Therefore, the maps are not a precise graphic
delineation of existing or potential future legal uses. They do not confer upon
property owners any rights respecting the use of their land that they do not
presently enjoy. Flexibility in interpreting the boundaries on the land use
maps is permitted to the degree necessary to implement the intended land use
pattern.
(Sec. 32-10.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 24, Art. 10,
§ 24-10.4)
Editor’s note:
   * A map of Maro Reef, which only has one rock protruding above water, is not
included.
APPENDIX 24-10
   [Reserved]
CHAPTER 25: SPECIAL MANAGEMENT AREAS
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 23-4 does not affect any special management area use permit or minor
permit that had been issued prior to March 9, 2023.
   All special management area use permit or minor permit applications received
prior to March 9, 2023 and deemed complete for processing by the Department of
Planning and Permitting must be processed in accordance with Chapter 25, as it
read prior to March 9, 2023.
Articles
   
1.   General Provisions
   
2.   Special Management Area
   
3.   Objectives, Policies, and Guidelines
   
4.   Permit Review Guidelines
   
5.   Permit Processing Procedures
   
6.   Required Conditions
   
7.   Exemptions
   
8.   Penalties
   
9.   Enforcement
   
10.   Appeals
   
11.   Rules
   
Appendix 25-1: Special Management Area Use Permit and Shoreline Variance
Resolutions
   
Appendix 25-2: Special Management Area Maps
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections
   
25-1.1   Authority
   
25-1.2   Purpose and intent
   
25-1.3   Definitions
§ 25-1.1 Authority.
   Pursuant to authority conferred by HRS Chapter 205A, the regulations and
procedures in this chapter are established and apply to all lands within the
special management area of the city.
(Sec. 33-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 1, §
25-1.1) (Am. Ord. 23-4)
§ 25-1.2 Purpose and intent.
(a)   It is the city’s policy to preserve, protect, and whenever possible,
restore the natural resources of the coastal zone. Special controls on
development within an area in proximity to the shoreline are necessary to avoid
permanent loss of valuable resources and foreclosure of management options, and
to ensure that adequate public access is provided to beaches, recreation areas,
and natural reserves, by dedication or other means. It is also the policy of
the city to avoid or minimize damage to wetlands whenever prudent or feasible;
to require that activities not dependent upon a wetland location be located at
upland sites; and to allow losses of wetlands only when all practicable
measures have been applied to reduce those losses that are unavoidable and in
the public interest.
(b)   To ensure this policy is adequately implemented, no development, as
defined in this chapter, may be undertaken within the special management area
without special management area permit approval. Special management area permit
approval is required prior to obtaining any other permits or approvals other
than State land use district boundary amendments, zone changes, and amendments
to the general plan and development plans, including the development plans
entitled “sustainable communities plans.”
(Sec. 33-1.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 1, §
25-1.2) (Am. Ords. 93-74, 23-4)
§ 25-1.3 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. These definitions
are intended to clarify but not replace or negate the definitions used in HRS
Chapter 205A.
Agency. The department of planning and permitting.
Applicant. Includes any individual, organization, partnership, firm,
association, trust, estate, limited liability company, or corporation, and any
agency of the federal, State, and county government.
Artificial Light or Artificial Lighting. The light emanating from any fixed
human-made device.
Beach. A coastal landform primarily composed of sand from eroded rock, coral,
or shell material, or any combination thereof, established and shaped by wave
action and tidal processes. A beach includes sand deposits in nearshore
submerged areas, sand dunes, and upland beach deposits landward of the
shoreline that provide benefits for public use and recreation, coastal
ecosystems, and as a natural buffer against coastal hazards.
Coastal Dune. One of possibly several continuous or nearly continuous mounds or
ridges of unconsolidated sand contiguous and parallel to the beach, situated so
that it may provide some form of protection from wave run-up and be accessible
to storm waves and seasonal high waves for release to the beach or offshore
waters.
Coastal Hazards. Natural processes that place people, property, or the
environment at risk for injury or damage, including but not limited to tsunami
hurricane, wind, wave, storm surge, high tide, flooding, erosion, sea level
rise, subsidence, or point and nonpoint source pollution.
Council. The city council of the City and County of Honolulu, which body shall
act as the “authority” under HRS Chapter 205A.
Crops. Agricultural produce or parts of plants or trees cultivated for
commercial or personal use.
Cumulative Impact. The impact on the environment that results from the
incremental impact of an action or development when added to other past,
present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions or developments. Cumulative
impacts can result from individually minor but collectively significant actions
and development taking place over a period of time.
Development. Any of the uses, activities, or operations on land, or in or under
water, that occur within the special management area, as follows.
(1)   Development includes but is not limited to the following:
(A)   The placement or erection of any solid material, or any gaseous, liquid,
solid, or thermal waste;
(B)   Grading, removing, dredging, mining, or extraction of any materials;
(C)   Change in the density or intensity of use of land, including but not
limited to the division or subdivision of land;
(D)   Change in the intensity of use, ecology, or access to water; and
(E)   Construction, reconstruction, or alteration of the size of any structure,
including but not limited to the construction or reconstruction of a dwelling
unit:
(i)   Situated on a shoreline lot or a lot that is impacted by waves, storm
surges, high tide, or shoreline erosion, including additions that exceed 300
square feet:
(ii)   When the dwelling unit and related garages, carports, covered lanais,
and accessory structures have an aggregate floor area of 7,500 square feet or
more; or
(iii)   That is part of a larger development of three or more dwelling units.
(2)   Development does not include the following:
(A)   Construction or reconstruction of a dwelling unit that is less than 7,500
square feet of floor area, is not situated on a shoreline lot or a lot that is
impacted by waves, storm surges, high tide, or shoreline erosion, and is not
part of a larger development of three or more dwelling units;
(B)   Structural and nonstructural improvements:
(i)   To existing dwelling units, including the addition of minor accessory
structures and floor area additions; provided that such additions are limited
to 300 square feet if the dwelling unit is considered development under
subdivision (1)(E)(i), (ii), or (iii); or
(ii)   Directly related to relocating a dwelling unit farther mauka or to an
area less susceptible to coastal hazards, on the same zoning lot, and
activities related to the relocation of the dwelling unit;
(C)   Repair or maintenance of roads and highways within existing rights-of-
way;
(D)   Routine maintenance dredging of existing streams, channels, or
drainageways;
(E)   The repair and maintenance of underground utility lines, including but
not limited to water, sewer, power, or telephone lines, or minor appurtenant
structures, such as pad mounted transformers and sewer pump stations;
(F)   Zoning variances, except with respect to height, density, or parking, or
shoreline setback variances;
(G)   Repair, maintenance, or interior alterations to existing structures;
(H)   Demolition or removal of structures, except for structures located on any
historic site as designated in national or State registers;
(I)   The use of any land for the purpose of cultivating, planting, growing,
and harvesting of plants, crops, trees, and other agricultural, horticultural,
or forestry products; animal husbandry; aquaculture or mariculture of plants or
animals; or other agricultural purposes, subject to review by the agency in
accordance with subdivision (3); provided that this exclusion does not apply to
uses associated with agricultural activity dedicated to manufacturing,
processing, or packaging;
(J)   The transfer of title to land;
(K)   The creation or termination of easements, covenants, or other rights in
structures or land;
(L)   The subdivision of a parcel of land into four or fewer parcels if no
associated construction activities are proposed; provided that after the
initial subdivision, any subsequent subdivision of the resulting parcels will
be considered development for purposes of this chapter;
(M)   Installation of underground utility lines and appurtenant aboveground
fixtures less than 4 feet in height along existing corridors;
(N)   Nonstructural improvements to existing commercial structures; or
(O)   Construction, installation, maintenance, repair, or replacement of
emergency management warning or signal devices and sirens.
(3)   Cumulative impact. Whenever the agency finds that any use, activity, or
operation that is not otherwise considered development is or may become part of
a larger project, the cumulative impact of which may have a significant adverse
environmental or ecological effect on the special management area, that use,
activity, or operation will be defined as development for the purposes of this
chapter.
(4)   Significant effect. Whenever the agency finds that a use, activity, or
operation that is not otherwise considered development may have a significant
adverse environmental or ecological effect on the special management area, that
use, activity, or operation will be defined as development for the purposes of
this chapter.
Directly Illuminate.  To illuminate through the use of a glowing element, lamp,
globe, or reflector of an artificial light source.
Director. The director of planning and permitting.
Dwelling, Detached. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Dwelling Unit. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1. For the purposes of this chapter, dwelling units include farm
dwellings, ohana units, accessory dwelling units, and caretaker units.
Effects or Impacts. Changes to the human environment from the proposed action
or alternatives that are reasonably foreseeable and have a reasonably close
causal relationship to the proposed action or alternative, including those
effects that occur at the same time and place as the proposed action or
alternative and may include effects that are later in time or farther removed
in distance from the proposed action or alternative.
Emergency Permit. Special management area emergency permit as defined in HRS §
205A-22.
Environmental Disclosure Document. An environmental assessment or an
environmental impact statement prepared in compliance with HRS Chapter 343.
Finding of No Significant Impact. A determination based on an environmental
assessment that the subject action will not have a significant effect and
therefore will not require the preparation of an environmental impact
statement.
Floor Area. The area of all floors of a structure excluding unroofed areas,
measured from exterior faces of exterior walls. The floor area includes areas
under the roof overhang or eaves, and the roof or floor above which are
supported by posts, columns, partial walls, or similar structural members.
Hawaii Sea Level Rise Viewer. The interactive viewer prepared by the Pacific
Islands Ocean Observing System through coordination with the Hawaii sea grant
program and the State department of land and natural resources to support the
Hawaii Sea Level Rise Vulnerability and Adaptation Report.
Hawaii Sea Level Rise Vulnerability and Adaptation Report. The 2017 report
prepared by Tetra Tech. Inc., and the State department of land and natural
resources, office of conservation and coastal lands, and adopted by the Hawaii
climate change mitigation and adaptation commission.
Land. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS Chapter 205A.
Mauka. Landward or in a landward direction from the ocean.
Person. Any individual, organization, partnership, firm, association, trust,
estate, public or private corporation, limited liability company, the State or
any of its political subdivisions, or any other legal entity.
Restoration. A human activity that returns a natural area, including a wetland
or former wetland, from a disturbed or altered condition with lesser acreage or
functions to an improved condition.
Sea Level Rise Exposure Area. The mapped zone on the Hawaii Sea Level Rise
Viewer, or its successor, representing the aggregate of the following coastal
hazard layers: passive flooding (still water high tide flooding), annual high
wave flooding (overwash during the largest wave events of the year), and
coastal erosion.
Shoreline. The upper reaches of the wash of the waves, other than storm and
seismic waves, at high tide during the season of the year in which the highest
wash of the waves occurs, usually evidenced by the edges of vegetation growth
or the upper limit of debris left by the wash of the waves.
Shoreline Lot. A zoning lot of record, any portion of which lies within the
shoreline setback area, or if no certified shoreline survey exists, any portion
of which lies within 130 feet inland of the natural vegetation line or debris
line. A zoning lot may be determined to be a shoreline lot notwithstanding the
existence of a second zoning lot between the first zoning lot and the
shoreline.
Shoreline Setback Area. All of the land area between the shoreline and the
shoreline setback line.
Shoreline Setback Line. The line established by
Chapter 26 that runs mauka from and parallel to the certified shoreline at the
horizontal plane.
Shoreline Survey. A survey map rendered by a registered land surveyor for the
purpose of determining the location of the shoreline. A shoreline survey is
considered a certified shoreline survey when the location of the regulatory
shoreline has been determined by the State board of land and natural resources
or the State surveyor in accordance with HRS § 205A-42 and the rules adopted
pursuant thereto.
Significant Effect. The sum of effects on the quality of the environment,
including actions that irrevocably commit a natural resource, curtail the range
of beneficial uses of the environment, are contrary to the State’s
environmental policies or long-term environmental goals as established by law,
or adversely affect the economic welfare, social welfare, or cultural practices
of the community and State.
Special Management Area or SMA. The land extending mauka from the certified
shoreline, as established in this chapter, with the mauka boundary delineated
on the maps established by the council and filed with the council and agency
pursuant to HRS § 205A-23.
Special Wetland Area. That area that is a wetland and the area within 50 feet
of a wetland.
Structure. Any portion of any building, pavement, road, pipe, flume, utility
line, fence, groin, wall, or revetment; or anything constructed or erected with
a fixed location at or under the ground, or requiring a fixed location on or
under the ground, or attached to something having or requiring a fixed location
on or below the ground.
Valuation. The estimated fair market value of the proposed development based on
current costs relating to and including site preparation, materials, labor,
stockpiling, grading, grubbing, and impervious surfaces.
Wetland. An area possessing three essential characteristics:
(1)   Hydrophytic vegetation;
(2)   Hydric soils; and
(3)   Wetland hydrology;
as defined in the “Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual,” January
1987, as amended. Wetlands include ponds and mudflats, which while possessing
hydric soils and wetland hydrology, may not have the commonly required
hydrophytic vegetation.
(Sec. 33-1.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 1, §
25-1.3) (Am. Ords. 93-74, 96-58, 00-11, 10-32, 11-28, 23-4)
ARTICLE 2: SPECIAL MANAGEMENT AREA
Sections
   
25-2.1   Adoption
   
25-2.2   Included area
   
25-2.3   Permits required for development
§ 25-2.1 Adoption.
(a)   The special management area, as established by the council in this
chapter and shown on the special management area maps, which have been adopted
and made a part of this chapter and filed with the council, is the city’s
official special management area to be administered and enforced by the
director under this chapter.
(b)   This chapter applies to all development that would affect wetlands within
the special management area, regardless of the size of the wetland.
(Sec. 33-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 2, §
25-2.1) (Am. Ords. 93-74, 23-4)
§ 25-2.2 Included area.
   The special management area includes those areas of the island of Oahu so
designated from the mauka boundary on the maps to the shoreline; and the
islands within 3 miles offshore of Oahu, including but not limited to those
islands shown on the maps; and the northwestern Hawaiian Islands, which include
Nihoa, Necker Island, French Frigate Shoals, Gardner Pinnacles, Maro Reef,
Laysan Island, Lisianski Island, Pearl and Hermes Atoll, and Kure Atoll.
(Sec. 33-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 2, §
25-2.2) (Am. Ord. 23-4)
§ 25-2.3 Permits required for development.
(a)   All development within the special management area is subject to review
under this chapter, pursuant to the objectives, policies, and guidelines set
forth in this chapter.
(b)   A proposal is exempt from obtaining a permit if the director finds that
the proposal is not development governed by this chapter.
(c)   A special management area minor permit may be granted if the director
finds that the development proposal:
(1)   Has a valuation or fair market value not in excess of $500,000; and
(2)   Will not have significant adverse environmental or ecological effect,
taking into account potential cumulative impacts and significant effects.
(d)   A special management area major permit, approved by resolution of the
council, is required for any development proposal that:
(1)   Has a valuation or fair market value that exceeds $500,000; or
(2)   May have significant adverse environmental or ecological effects, taking
into account potential cumulative impacts and significant effects.
(Added by Ord. 23-4)
ARTICLE 3: OBJECTIVES, POLICIES, AND GUIDELINES
Sections
   
25-3.1   Objectives, policies, and guidelines
§ 25-3.1 Objectives, policies, and guidelines.
   The objectives, policies, and guidelines of this chapter are those contained
in HRS §§ 205A-2 and 205A-26(1). The objectives, policies, and guidelines
summarized below are the basis for analysis of uses, activities, or operations
within the special management area.
(a)   Recreational resources. Development within the SMA should provide coastal
recreational opportunities to the public. Adequate access, by dedication or
other means, to beaches, coastal dunes, recreation areas, and natural reserves
must be provided to the extent consistent with sound conservation principles.
Adequate and properly located public recreation areas and wildlife preserves
must be preserved.
(b)   Historic and cultural resources. Development within the SMA should
protect, preserve, and restore natural or human-made historical and cultural
resources.
(c)   Scenic and open space resources. Development within the SMA should
protect, preserve, and whenever desirable, restore or improve the quality of
coastal scenic and open space resources. Alterations to existing land forms and
vegetation, other than for the cultivation of coastal dependent crops, must be
limited so they result in minimum adverse impacts on water resources, beaches,
coastal dunes, and scenic or recreational amenities. Development that is not
dependent on the coast is encouraged to locate mauka of the SMA.
(d)   Coastal ecosystems. Development within the SMA should protect valuable
coastal ecosystems, including reefs, beaches, and coastal dunes from
disruption, and minimize adverse impacts on all coastal ecosystems. Solid and
liquid waste treatment and disposition must be managed to minimize adverse
impacts on SMA resources.
(e)   Economic uses. Development within the SMA should consist of facilities
and improvements important to the State’s economy, and ensure that coastal-
dependent development and coastal-related development are located, designed,
and constructed to minimize exposure to coastal hazards and adverse social,
visual, and environmental impacts within the SMA.
(f)   Coastal hazards. Development within the SMA should reduce impacts of
coastal hazards on life and property, and must be designed to minimize impacts
from landslides, erosion, sea level rise, siltation, or failure in the event of
earthquake.
(g)   Managing development and public participation. The development review
process should stimulate public awareness, education, and participation in
coastal management.
(h)   Beach and coastal dune protection. Development within the SMA should
facilitate beach management and protection by safeguarding beaches and coastal
dunes for public use and recreation, the benefit of ecosystems, and use as
natural buffers against coastal hazards. New structures should be located mauka
of the shoreline setback line to conserve open space, minimize interference
with natural shoreline processes, and minimize the loss of improvements due to
erosion.
(i)   Marine and coastal resources. Development within the SMA should promote
the protection, use, and development of marine and coastal resources to ensure
that these resources are ecologically and environmentally sound and
economically beneficial. Impacts on water resources, beaches, coastal dunes,
and scenic or recreational amenities resulting from the construction of
structures must be minimized. Development within wetland areas should be
limited to activities that are dependent on or enhance wetlands, or are
otherwise approved by appropriate State and federal agencies. Examples include
traditional Hawaiian agricultural uses such as wetland taro production,
aquaculture, and fishpond management, as well as activities that clean and
restore traditional wetland areas or create new wetlands in appropriate areas.
(j)   Cumulative impact or significant effect and compelling public interest.
Development within the SMA should not have any cumulative impact or significant
effect, unless minimized to the extent practicable and clearly outweighed by
public health, safety, or other compelling public interest.
(k)   Consistency with plans and regulations. Development within the SMA must
be consistent with the general plan, development plans, sustainable communities
plans, and zoning ordinances; provided that a finding of inconsistency does not
preclude concurrent processing of amendments to applicable plans or a zone
change.
(Sec. 33-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 3, §
25-3.1) (Am. Ord. 23-4)
ARTICLE 4: PERMIT REVIEW GUIDELINES
Sections
   
25-4.1   Permit review guidelines
§ 25-4.1 Permit review guidelines.
(a)   No development may be approved unless the agency or the council has first
found that the development is consistent with the objectives, policies, and
guidelines set forth in this chapter and will not have any significant adverse
environmental or ecological effect, except for situations in which the adverse
effect is minimized to the extent practicable and clearly outweighed by public
health and safety, or a compelling public interest. Adverse effects include,
but are not limited to the potential cumulative impact of individual
developments, each of which taken by itself may not have a significant adverse
effect. Adverse effects may also involve development that would eliminate
future planning options.
(b)   The agency or council shall seek to minimize, whenever reasonable:
(1)   Dredging, filling, or otherwise altering any bay, estuary, salt marsh,
wetland, river mouth, slough, or lagoon, except for restoration purposes;
(2)   Any development that would reduce the size of any beach, coastal dune, or
other area usable for public recreation;
(3)   Any development that would reduce or impose restrictions upon public
access to tidal and submerged lands, beaches, coastal dunes, portions of rivers
and streams, and the mean high tide line where there is no beach;
(4)   Any development that would substantially interfere with or detract from
the line of sight toward the ocean from the State highway nearest the coast;
(5)   Any development that would adversely affect water quality, existing areas
of open water free of visible structures, existing and potential fisheries and
fishing grounds, coastal ecosystems, wildlife habitats, or potential or
existing agricultural uses of land; and
(6)   Risk to development from sea level rise and other coastal hazards, which
may be accomplished by siting habitable structures outside of the sea level
rise exposure area if feasible, or if not feasible, adapting habitable
structures within the sea level rise exposure area to accommodate sea level
rise.
(Added by Ord. 23-4)
ARTICLE 5: PERMIT PROCESSING PROCEDURES
Sections
   
25-5.1   Information—Preliminary determination
   
25-5.2   Special management area minor permit
   
25-5.3   Special management area major permit
   
25-5.4   Fees
§ 25-5.1 Information—Preliminary determination.
   Any applicant contemplating development within the special management area
may contact the agency for information regarding procedures and general
information that may influence the applicant’s proposed development. The
applicant may request a special management area determination in which the
applicant provides a summary of the proposal to the agency and the agency makes
a preliminary determination about whether the proposal constitutes development
for the purposes of this chapter and whether an SMA permit is required.
(Added by Ord. 23-4)
§ 25-5.2 Special management area minor permit.
(a)   When a proposed development requires a special management area minor
permit, the applicant for the proposed development within the special
management area will be responsible for submitting the following materials to
the agency:
(1)   A completed application form (to be obtained from the agency) that is
filled out in accordance with the agency’s application instructions;
(2)   A tax map key identification of the property on which the applicant
proposes development;
(3)   A plot plan of the property, drawn to scale;
(4)   A written description of the proposed development, a statement of the
objectives of the development, and an estimate of the valuation of the
development;
(5)   A shoreline survey if required by rules adopted by the director pursuant
to HRS Chapter 91;
(6)   Any other relevant plans or information pertinent to the analysis of the
development required by the agency; and
(7)   The applicable application fee as specified in §
25-5.4.
(b)   Upon receipt of an application and applicable fees, the director shall
review the application for completeness. Within 10 working days after receipt
of an application, the director shall provide the applicant with written notice
that:
(1)   The application is deemed complete and has been accepted for processing;
or
(2)   The application is incomplete and has been rejected, with a statement of
the specific requirements necessary to complete the application.
(c)   If the director determines the development satisfies the review criteria
identified in §
25-4.1, the director shall grant or grant with conditions a special management
area minor permit within 45 calendar days after acceptance of a completed
application. The director may extend the deadline for an additional 45 calendar
days should revised plans or application materials be submitted by the
applicant or when additional application materials are deemed necessary during
the director’s analysis of the proposal. The director may grant an additional
deadline extension of 30 calendar days on request of the applicant, as
necessary.
(d)   If the director determines the development is likely to have significant
adverse environmental or ecological effects, taking into account potential
cumulative effects, the director shall deny the application and the applicant
may seek a special management area major permit.
(Sec. 33-5.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 5, §
25-5.1) (Am. Ords. 99-31, 00-11, 03-12, 14-4, 20-18, 21-27, 23-4)
§ 25-5.3 Special management area major permit.
   When a proposed development requires a special management area major permit,
the following procedures apply.
(a)   Except for single-unit and two-unit dwellings on a single zoning lot, the
applicant shall prepare the applicable environmental disclosure document, which
will be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in HRS Chapter
343 and the rules adopted thereunder. The department of planning and permitting
will act as the accepting agency for purposes of HRS Chapter 343; provided that
if another agency proposes the action and is preparing the environmental
disclosure document, that agency shall act as the accepting agency. The
director may allow the application for an SMA major permit application to be
processed concurrently with the preparation of the applicable environmental
disclosure document.
(b)   Prior to submitting an SMA major permit application to the agency, the
applicant shall present the project to the neighborhood board of the district
where the project is located or, if no such neighborhood board exists, an
appropriate community association. The applicant shall provide written notice
of the presentation to owners of all properties adjoining the proposed
development. The requirements of this subsection will be deemed satisfied if
the applicant makes a written request to present the proposed development to
the neighborhood board or community association and:
(1)   The neighborhood board or community association fails to provide the
applicant with an opportunity to present the proposed development at a meeting
held within 60 days after the date of the written request; or
(2)   The neighborhood board or community association provides the applicant
with written notice that it has no objection to the proposed development or
that no presentation of the project is necessary.
(c)   Upon issuance of a finding of no significant impact or acceptance of the
environmental disclosure document, and after the applicant has met the
requirements of subsection (b), the applicant may submit a special management
area major permit application to the agency.
(d)   The applicant shall submit to the agency:
(1)   All application materials that would be required for the special
management area minor permit as specified in §
25-5.2:
(2)   A copy of the final environmental disclosure document; and
(3)   The applicable application fee specified in §
25-5.4.
(e)   Upon receipt of an application, the director shall review the application
for completeness. Within 10 working days after receipt of an application, the
director shall provide the applicant with written notice that:
(1)   The application is deemed complete and has been accepted for processing;
or
(2)   The application is incomplete and has been rejected, with a statement of
the specific requirements necessary to complete the application.
(f)   The agency shall hold a public hearing on the application at a date set
not less than 21 nor more than 60 calendar days after the date the application
was accepted as complete; provided that the period may be extended if agreed to
by the applicant. The public hearing may be held in the area in which the
development is proposed.
(g)   Notice of the public hearing must be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the State at least 20 calendar days prior to the date of the
public hearing.
(h)   The agency shall provide adequate written notice of the public hearing
to:
(1)   Pertinent neighborhood boards or community associations;
(2)   Owners of all property within 300 feet of the affected property; and
(3)   Owners of all property described in the application.
(i)   The agency shall transmit its findings and recommendations on the
application for a special management area major permit to the council for its
consideration and decision within 45 calendar days after the close of the
public hearing; provided that this transmittal deadline may be extended if
agreed to by the applicant.
(j)   The council shall grant, grant with conditions, or deny any application
for a special management area major permit within 60 calendar days after
receipt of the agency’s findings and recommendations thereon. If the council
does not act on the application as provided in this section within the 60-day
period, the application will be deemed denied. The applicant may request, and
the council may approve, an extension of time if the request is made in writing
and approved by the council prior to the expiration of the previous deadline
for council action.
(Added by Ord. 23-4) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 25-5.4 Fees.
(a)   The following table sets forth application review and processing fees.
The review fees cover the costs of determining whether an application is
complete or incomplete, and are not refundable.
Submittal Type Review Fee Processing Fee Total Fee
Submittal Type        Review Fee Processing Fee         Total Fee
Environmental         $200       $1,200                 $1,400
Assessment
Environmental Impact  $400       $2,400                 $2,800
Statement
Special Management    $200       $1,200                 $1,400
Area Minor Permit
                                 $2,400 plus an         $2,800 plus an
Special Management               additional $600 per    additional $600 per
Area Major Permit     $400       acre or major fraction acre or major fraction
                                 thereof, up to a       thereof, up to a
                                 maximum of $30,000     maximum of $30,000
Modification of a
Special Management    $100       $200                   $300
Area Major Permit
Special Management    none       $150 per tax map key   $150 per tax map key
Area Determination
Confirmation of
Nonconformity or Site none       $300 per tax map key   $300 per tax map key
History and Status
 
(b)   When an application is submitted, it must include all required fees. The
nonrefundable application review fee will immediately be applied to the review
of the application. When an application has been accepted for processing, the
application review fee for the application will be counted as partial payment
towards the total fee. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the
processing fee will be returned.
(c)   Review fees and processing fees must be doubled for permits and
environmental disclosure documents submitted after a citation has been issued
for the activity or construction.
(d)   Review fees and processing fees must be doubled for permits and
environmental disclosure documents submitted after the proposed work is
completed.
(e)   The director may waive the fees in this section for city projects.
(Added by Ord. 23-4)
ARTICLE 6: REQUIRED CONDITIONS
Sections
   
25-6.1   Conditions for all development
§ 25-6.1 Conditions for all development.
   The following requirements apply to all uses, activities. or operations
within the special management area, even if the proposal is not considered
development as defined in this chapter.
(a)   Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting on a shoreline lot must be
shielded to reduce the possibility that seabirds and other marine life forms
may become disoriented and harmed by the lighting. Shielded exterior lighting
must be implemented both during and after any construction work on a shoreline
lot. Any wall-mounted exterior lighting on buildings on a shoreline lot must be
shielded by wall directors or other acceptable shielding, and all shielding
must be specified on building permit plans. Artificial light from exterior
lighting fixtures, including but not limited to floodlights, uplights, or
spotlights used for decorative or aesthetic purposes on a shoreline lot are
prohibited if the light directly illuminates or is directed to project across
property boundaries toward the shoreline or ocean waters, or both, except as
may otherwise be permitted by HRS § 205A-71(b).
(b)   Landscaping. All landscaped areas, landscaping, and irrigation on or for
any shoreline lot must be contained and maintained within the property
boundaries of the shoreline lot of origin, and may not:
(1)   Be planted, watered, and maintained so that they act as a shoreline
hardening barrier, such as naupaka, particularly if they alter or interfere
with the natural beach processes;
(2)   Extend seaward of the shoreline as depicted on the current certified
shoreline survey for the shoreline lot, or, in the event there is no current
certified shoreline survey for the lot, seaward of the presumed shoreline; and
(3)   Extend into any adjoining beach access right-of-way, public or private.
(1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 6, § 25-6.3) (Added by Ord. 10-32) (Am. Ord. 23-4)
ARTICLE 7: EXEMPTIONS
Section
   
25-7.1   Emergency permits
§ 25-7.1 Emergency permits.
(a)   In cases of emergency repairs to existing public utilities, including but
not limited to flood control structures, highways, and water, sewer, gas and
electric transmission lines, the respective governmental agency or public
utility company is exempt from obtaining a special management area use permit
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. Two reports on the repair
projects must be recorded with the agency, the first within three days after
the start of the project and the second upon the project’s completion.
(b)   In the event an impending disaster or disaster has been declared under
Chapter 2, Article 25A or under HRS Chapter 127A, the requirements of this
chapter will be waived.
(Sec. 33-7.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 7, §
25-7.1) (Am. Ords. 00-11, 23-4)
ARTICLE 8: PENALTIES
Sections
   
25-8.1   Civil fine
   
25-8.2   Additional fines
   
25-8.3   Additional penalties for special wetland areas
§ 25-8.1 Civil fine.
   Any person who violates this chapter will, upon notice issued pursuant to §
25-9.1, be deemed to have committed a civil violation and will be subject to a
civil fine not to exceed $100,000.
(Sec. 33-8.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 8, §
25-8.1) (Am. Ord. 23-4)
§ 25-8.2 Additional fines.
   In addition to any other penalties, any person who undertakes any
development in violation of this chapter will, upon notice issued pursuant to §
25-9.1, be deemed to have committed a civil violation and will be subject to a
civil fine not to exceed $10,000 per day for each day in which the violation
persists.
(Sec. 33-8.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 8, §
25-8.2) (Am. Ord. 23-4)
§ 25-8.3 Additional penalties for special wetland areas.
   In the event of a violation of the wetlands rules adopted pursuant to
Article 11, the director may, after consultation with the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, order wetland
restoration, creation, or other appropriate mitigating measures be undertaken
by the applicant to address and correct, to the extent possible, the damaged or
destroyed wetland areas.
(1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 8, § 25-8.3) (Added by Ord. 93-74) (Am. Ord. 23-4)
ARTICLE 9: ENFORCEMENT
Sections
   
25-9.1   Notice of violation and order
   
25-9.2   Effect of order—Right to hearing
   
25-9.3   Judicial enforcement of order
   
25-9.4   Judicial enforcement of chapter
   
25-9.5   Nonexclusiveness of remedies
   
25-9.6   Involuntary revocation or modification of permits
   
25-9.7   Voluntary revocation or modification of permits
§ 25-9.1 Notice of violation and order.
   If the director determines that any person is violating this chapter, any
rule adopted thereunder, or any permit issued pursuant thereto, the director
may have the person served with a notice of violation and order. A notice of
violation and order must be served upon responsible persons; provided that if
the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the director is not able to
ascertain the whereabouts of such persons after exercising reasonable
diligence, the director shall provide an affidavit to that effect. The notice
of violation and order must be served pursuant to the requirements of the
agency’s administrative rules, or other relevant legal authority.
(a)   Contents of the notice of violation. At a minimum, the notice must
include the following information:
(1)   Date of the notice;
(2)   The name and address of the person noticed;
(3)   The section number of the ordinance that has been violated;
(4)   The nature of the violation; and
(5)   The location and time of the violation.
(b)   Contents of the order.
(1)   The order may require the person do any or all of the following:
(A)   Cease and desist from the violation;
(B)   Correct the violation at the person’s own expense before a date specified
in the order;
(C)   Pay a civil fine per recurring incident not to exceed $100,000 each, in
the manner, at the place, and before the date specified in the order;
(D)   Pay a civil fine not to exceed $10,000 per day for each day in which the
violation persists, in the manner and at the time and place specified in the
order, if the person has undertaken any development in violation of this
chapter;
(E)   In the event of a violation of the wetlands rules adopted pursuant to
this chapter, the director may pursue the remedies specified in §
25-8.3. If the responsible party does not complete the measures specified in
the order within the time frame set forth in the order, the city may restore
the affected wetland to its prior condition, and create or restore other
wetlands for the purpose of offsetting losses sustained as a result of the
violation. The order may require that the person or agent responsible for the
original violation be liable to the city for the cost of such actions;
(F)   To guide restoration and creation actions, the agency may order the
violator to develop a plan as described in the rules adopted pursuant to
Article 11 for approval by the agency; or
(G)   Appear before the director at a time and place specified in the order and
answer the charges specified in the notice of violation.
(2)   The order must advise the person of the finality of the order 20 days
after the date of its service, unless a written request for a hearing is mailed
or delivered to the director prior to expiration of the 20-day period specified
in §
25-9.2(a).
(Sec. 33-9.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 9, §
25-9.1) (Am. Ords. 93-74, 15-19, 23-4)
§ 25-9.2 Effect of order—Right to hearing.
(a)   The provisions of the order issued by the director under §
25-9.1 will become final 20 days after the date the person is served, unless
within those 20 days the person subject to the order requests in writing a
hearing before the director. The request for a hearing will be considered
timely if the written request is delivered or mailed and postmark dated to the
director within the 20-day period.
(b)   Upon receipt of a written request for a hearing, the director shall
specify a time and place for the person subject to the order to appear and be
heard. The hearing will be conducted by the director in accordance with HRS
Chapter 91. Following the hearing, the director, at the director’s discretion,
may affirm, modify, or rescind the order.
(Sec. 33-9.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 9, §
25-9.2) (Am. Ord. 23-4)
§ 25-9.3 Judicial enforcement of order.
   The director may institute a civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the enforcement of any order issued pursuant to §§
25-9.1 and
25-9.2. If a civil action has been instituted to enforce a civil fine imposed
by the order, the director need only show that a notice of violation and order
was served, a hearing was held or the time granted for requesting a hearing had
expired without such a request, a civil fine was imposed, and the fine imposed
has not been paid.
(Sec. 33-9.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 9, §
25-9.3) (Am. Ord. 23-4)
§ 25-9.4 Judicial enforcement of chapter.
   In addition to any other remedy provided for under this chapter, the
director may institute a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction
for injunctive relief to prevent violation of any provision of this chapter,
any rule adopted thereunder, or any permit issued pursuant thereto.
(Sec. 33-9.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 9, §
25-9.4) (Am. Ord. 23-4)
§ 25-9.5 Nonexclusiveness of remedies.
   The remedies provided in this chapter for enforcement of this chapter, any
rule adopted thereunder, or any permit issued pursuant thereto are in addition
to any other remedy as may be provided by law.
(Sec. 33-9.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 9, §
25-9.5) (Am. Ord. 23-4)
§ 25-9.6 Involuntary revocation or modification of permits.
(a)   A special management area major permit or a special management area minor
permit may be revoked or modified without the consent of the permittee for any
of the following reasons:
(1)   The permit was granted in violation of HRS Chapter 205A or this chapter;
(2)   A material breach of the terms of the permit has occurred;
(3)   A material violation of HRS Chapter 205A or of this chapter following the
granting of the permit has occurred;
(4)   A material mistake of fact or a material misrepresentation was made by
the permit applicant in the application or otherwise made by the applicant to
the agency or the council relating to the permit application;
(5)   A material mistake of fact was made by the council in the issuance of the
permit so that the findings required to be made by the council as a
prerequisite to the issuance of a permit under HRS § 205A-26 and ROH §
25-4.1 were erroneous; or
(6)   A material change in circumstances has occurred following the issuance of
the permit that would cause the development, as approved and conditioned in the
permit, to pose a significant threat to public health or safety, as determined
by the State department of health, the State department of labor and industrial
relations, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the U.S. Surgeon General, the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration, the U.S. Coast Guard, or any other State or federal agency
having jurisdiction over the development or with respect to the type of health
or safety threat posed by the development.
(b)   The revocation or modification of a special management area minor permit
will be processed in accordance with rules adopted by the agency.
(c)   The agency may initiate the revocation or modification of a special
management area major permit without the consent of the permittee as follows.
(1)   Upon determining that adequate reasons may exist under subsection (a) for
the revocation or modification of a special management area major permit, the
agency shall hold a public hearing on the proposed revocation or modification
on a date set not less than 21 nor more than 60 days after the date on which
the notice of revocation or modification is mailed to the permittee pursuant to
subdivision (2).
(2)   The agency shall give written notice of revocation or modification of a
special management area major permit to the permittee and any disclosed owner
of record of the property that is subject to the permit. The notice must
include the following information:
(A)   The permit proposed to be revoked or modified, identified by council
resolution number and title;
(B)   The date, time, place, and nature of the hearing;
(C)   The reasons for the proposed revocation or modification; and
(D)   In the case of a proposed modification, the nature of the modification
proposed.
(3)   The agency shall give written notice of the proposed revocation or
modification of a special management area major permit, by publication once in
a newspaper of general circulation in the city and once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the State, not less than 21 nor more than 60 days prior
to the date of the public hearing. The notice must state the following:
(A)   The location of the affected property by tax map parcel number or street
address, or if neither exists, by a general statement of its location;
(B)   The permit proposed to be revoked or modified, identified by council
resolution number and title;
(C)   The date, time, place, and nature of the hearing;
(D)   The reasons for the proposed revocation or modification; and
(E)   In the case of a proposed modification, the nature of the modification
proposed.
(4)   The agency shall give written notice of the proposed revocation or
modification of a special management area major permit containing the
information set forth in subdivision (3) to any pertinent neighborhood boards
or community associations, and make a good faith effort to give notice to the
owners of all property within 300 feet of the affected property; provided that
if the property is subject to condominium property regime, notice may be given
to the association of apartment owners of the condominium project.
(5)   In conducting the public hearing, the agency shall provide an opportunity
for all parties to provide testimony on all issues involved. The agency may
adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 with respect to the conduct of hearings
under this subsection.
(6)   Following the public hearing, the agency shall prepare a written report
with its findings and recommendation and, if the report recommends revocation
or modification, submit the report and a draft resolution implementing the
agency’s recommendation to the council within 30 calendar days after the close
of the public hearing. For each of the reasons for the revocation or
modification included in the notice provided under subdivision (2), the report
must state whether the evidence presented at the public hearing supported or
did not support revocation or modification for that reason. The report must
include a recommendation that the permit be revoked, that the permit not be
revoked, or that the permit be modified and, in the case of a proposed
modification, the nature of the proposed modification.
(d)   The council may initiate the revocation or modification of a special
management area major permit without the consent of the permittee by resolution
as follows:
(1)   The resolution must set forth the following:
(A)   The permit proposed to be revoked or modified, identified by council
resolution number and title;
(B)   The reasons for the proposed revocation or modification, identifying
which of the permissible reasons set forth in subsection (a) are applicable;
(C)   In the case of a proposed modification, the nature of the proposed
modification; and
(D)   A direction to the agency to process the proposed revocation or
modification in accordance with this section.
(2)   After adoption of the resolution, the city clerk shall transmit the
resolution to the agency for processing.
(3)   Upon receiving the resolution, the agency shall conduct an initial
investigation into the reasons set forth in the resolution for revocation or
modification of the special management area major permit and, within 60 days of
receipt of the resolution, the agency shall give the permittee and any
disclosed owner of record of the property that is subject to the permit,
written notice of a hearing on the proposed revocation or modification. The
written notice must meet the notice requirements of subsection (c)(2), and must
include the reasons for the proposed revocation or modification set forth in
the resolution, and any other reasons for revocation or modification the agency
may have identified during its initial investigation or otherwise.
(4)   The agency shall hold a public hearing on the proposed revocation or
modification on a date set not less than 21 nor more than 60 days following the
date of sending the notice to the permittee and others pursuant to subdivision
(3).
(5)   The agency shall give written notice of the hearing and conduct the
hearing in accordance with subsections (c)(3), (c)(4), and (c)(5).
(6)   Following the public hearing, the agency shall prepare and submit to the
council a written report and transcript of the public hearing within 30
calendar days after the close of the public hearing. If the agency recommends
revocation or modification, the report must include a draft resolution
implementing the agency’s recommendation.
(e)   The council may, by resolution, revoke, refuse or decline to revoke, or
modify a special management area major permit within 90 calendar days after
receipt of the agency’s report and draft resolution; provided that council
adoption of a resolution for revocation or modification of a special management
area major permit requires the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the
entire membership of the council. If the council fails to act within 90
calendar days of receipt of the report and draft resolution, the permit will be
deemed not to have been revoked or modified and the resolution will be deemed
to have been filed; provided that pursuant to a written request from the
permittee, the council may approve an extension of this 90-day period.
(f)   After the filing of a resolution proposing to revoke or modify a special
management area major permit, no further resolution may be introduced proposing
to revoke or modify the same permit for the same reasons that were stated in
the resolution that has been filed; provided that a further resolution may be
introduced, no earlier than six months following the filing of the initial
resolution if a substantial change in circumstances has occurred following the
filing of the initial resolution that would cause the development, as approved
and conditioned in the permit, to pose a significant threat to public health or
safety, as determined by the State department of health, the State department
of labor and industrial relations, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the U.S.
Surgeon General, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration, the U.S. Coast Guard, or any other State or
federal agency having jurisdiction over the development or the type of health
or safety threat posed by the development.
(g)   The council may revoke or modify a permit pursuant to this section only
for one or more of the reasons specified in subsection (a). The council shall,
prior to revocation or modification of the permit, set forth written findings
of fact and conclusions of law justifying the revocation or modification. If
the council revokes a permit without the consent of the permittee based upon a
material mistake of fact or a material change in circumstances, it must first
find that the mistake or change in circumstances cannot be adequately addressed
by a reasonable modification to the permit. The findings of fact and
conclusions required under this subsection may be incorporated into either the
final resolution or a separate document adopted by the council.
(h)   Before a permit may be revoked or modified pursuant to this section, the
council must first hold a public hearing on the proposed revocation or
modification, at which the permittee, any disclosed owner of the subject
property, and the agency have an opportunity to provide oral testimony of not
less than one-half hour each. All other interested parties must also be given
an opportunity to provide oral testimony in accordance with council rules. The
permittee, agency, and other interested parties may provide additional oral
testimony in accordance with council rules at any council or council committee
meetings at which the revocation or modification may be considered. Written
testimony may also be provided by any interested party.
(i)   In conjunction with the written notice of agency hearing, or by written
request from the council sent by registered or certified mail with postage
prepaid and return receipt requested sent at least 10 days in advance of the
date of a council public hearing, the agency or the council may request the
permittee to provide information at or before the agency hearing or the council
public hearing, respectively, relating to:
(1)   The current status of all other permits or governmental approvals
necessary for the development approved by the special management area major
permit;
(2)   The status of the permittee’s compliance with or progress toward
compliance with any conditions of the permit; and
(3)   The level and timing of expenditures made by the permittee or others with
respect to various phases or aspects of the development.
The agency and the council may rely upon the accuracy of the information
provided by the permittee in any action or proceeding to revoke or modify the
special management area major permit. If the permittee fails or refuses to
provide requested information, the agency or the council may find that there
has been no progress towards compliance with permit conditions or that no
expenditures have been made on the development.
(j)   The corporation counsel shall, upon request of the agency or the council,
advise the agency or the council with respect to the extent to which the
permittee’s rights to construct the development or portion thereof may be
vested under law.
(k)   Any expenditures made by the permittee or others on a development for
which a special management area major permit has been issued following:
(1)   The receipt, by the party making the expenditure, of notice of the
proposed revocation or modification of the special management area major or
minor permit for the development; or
(2)   The first published notice of the agency hearing;
whichever first occurs, and before the adoption or filing of the resolution
proposing the revocation or modification is not deemed an expenditure made in
good faith reliance upon the issuance of the permit for purposes of determining
whether development rights are vested.
(l)   For the purposes of this section, a modification to a permit includes but
is not limited to a modification to the plans for the development or a
modification to the conditions imposed upon the development in the permit.
(m)   An owner of record of property shall be deemed to have been disclosed if
a permit applicant, permittee, or owner gave notice to the agency of the
owner’s status either at the time of the permit application or through a formal
written notice to the agency of such ownership status at least one week before
the date on which the agency is required to give notice to disclosed owners of
record.
(1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 9, § 25-9.6) (Added by Ord. 95-12) (Am. Ord. 23-4)
§ 25-9.7 Voluntary revocation or modification of permits.
(a)   A special management area major permit or a special management area minor
permit may be revoked or modified at the request of the permittee in accordance
with this section.
(b)   An application for the revocation or modification of a special management
area minor permit will be processed in the same manner as an application for
the granting of a special management area minor permit; provided that the
agency may adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 providing for processing of
the application for revocation or modification in a different manner.
(c)   An application for the revocation or modification of a special management
area major permit will be processed in the same manner as an application for
the granting of a special management area major permit; provided that if a
permit proposed for modification provides a different process for minor
modifications to the permit, that process may be followed for minor
modifications.
(1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 9, § 25-9.7) (Added by Ord. 95-12) (Am. Ord. 23-4)
ARTICLE 10: APPEALS
Section
   
25-10.1   Appeal in accordance with State statute
§ 25-10.1 Appeal in accordance with State statute.
   If any person is aggrieved by an order issued by the director pursuant to §§
25-9.1 and
25-9.2, the person may appeal the order in the manner provided in HRS Chapter
91; provided that no provision of the order shall be stayed on appeal, unless
specifically ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Sec. 33-10.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 10,
§ 25-10.1) (Am. Ord. 23-4)
ARTICLE 11: RULES
Section
   
25-11.1   Rules
§ 25-11.1 Wetlands rules.
   The agency shall adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 to implement this
chapter and HRS Chapter 205A, Part II.
(1990 Code, Ch. 25, Art. 11, § 25-11.1) (Added by Ord. 93-74) (Am. Ord. 23-4)
APPENDIX 25-1: SPECIAL MANAGEMENT AREA USE PERMIT AND SHORELINE VARIANCE
RESOLUTIONS
Editor’s note:
   * Only those special management are use permits and shoreline setback
variances granted by city council resolutions are included in this appendix.
   Resolutions adopted before 1988 may be found in Appendix C to Chapter 21,
Revised Ordinances of Honolulu 1978 (1983 Ed.) and in Appendix 1 to Chapter 33,
Revised Ordinances of Honolulu 1978 (1983 Ed.), 1987 Supp.
Res. No. Date Description
Res. Date Description
No.
88-  4-   Issued to State department of transportation, a special management area
102  13-  use permit to install an aviation fuel dispensing facility at Dillingham
     1988 Airfield in Mokuleia.
88-  4-   Issued to Hotel Kaimana, Inc., a special management area use permit to
119  13-  perform exterior renovations to the existing hotel buildings located at
     1988 2863 Kalakaua Ave., in Diamond Head.
89-  7-   Granting a special management area use permit to State department of
152  21-  accounting and general services for Phases IV and V of the Kapiolani
     1989 Community College master plan.
89-  7-   Granting a special management area use permit for Maunalua Bay Estates,
206  12-  consolidation/resubdivision, and construction of four single-family
     1989 dwelling units. (Amended by Res. 90-193.)
89-  7-   Granting a special management area use permit for cluster housing
225  21-  project on Kaneohe Bay to Thomas Metcalf, et al.
     1989
89-  6-   Granting a special management area use permit for a batch treatment tank
233  21-  at Kahe Generating Station to Hawaii Electric Co., Ltd.
     1989
89-  7-   Granting a special management area use permit and a shoreline setback
264  12-  variance for the Sand Island shore protection project to the State
     1989 department of land and natural resources. 88/SV-7.
89-  8-9- Granting a special management area use permit for structures at Sunset
337  1989 Beach elementary school to State department of accounting and general
          services.
89-  8-9- Granting a special management area use permit for petroleum pipeline
354  1989 facilities at Barber’s Point harbor to Pacific Resources, Inc., Texaco
          Refining & Marketing, Inc., and Chevron USA, Inc.
89-  9-   Granting a special management area use permit for a Chevron gas station
374  20-  and convenience store in Laie to Chevron USA.
     1989
89-  9-   Granting a special management area use permit for an eight-lot
375  20-  subdivision at Pounder’s Bluff to Jeffrey R. Stone.
     1989
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. Date Description
No.
89-  10-  Granting a special management area use permit to Donald W. and Judith A. Moody
440  11-  to construct an eight-unit apartment building located at 715 Wailepo Place,
     1989 Kailua.
89-  10-  Granting a special management area use permit to Hawaii Pacific Industries to
442  11-  construct a bulk cargo unloading and loading system at Pier 6, and a closed
     1989 conveyor system near Pier 6 at Barber’s Point.
89-  10-  Granting a special management area use permit to AES Barber’s Point, Inc., to
443  11-  construct approximately 1,000 linear feet of overland pipe conveyor adjacent to
     1989 Barber’s Point harbor in Ewa.
89-  10-  Granting a special management area use permit to Mr. and Mrs. Rudy Brilhante to
464  11-  construct a cluster housing project located at 44-291 Kaneohe Bay Drive.
     1989
89-  11-  Granting a special management area use permit to Kuilima Development Company to
491  8-   construct a wedding pavilion at the Kuilima Resort in Kahuku.
     1989
89-  1-   Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline variance to Hawaii
551  31-  community development authority to develop park facilities, at Kewalo Basin.
     1990 TMK: 2-1-58: 57, 61, 62, 70, 71, 75, 76, 87, pors. 1, 64, 77.
89-  1-   Granting a special management area use permit to City and County of Honolulu,
570  31-  department of public works, to construct a wastewater collection system within
     1990 the Kahaluu sewerage subdistrict. TMK: 4-7-var.
     1-   Granting a special management area use permit to Hawaiian Electric Company,
90-9 31-  Inc., to construct an overhead facilities training center at Kahe Generating
     1990 Station. 92-200 Farrington Highway, Waianae.
90-  2-   Granting a special management area use permit to Maili Business Plaza, Inc., to
10   14-  construct a self-service car wash facility at 87-800 Farrington Highway in
     1990 Waianae. TMK: 8-7-23: 57.
90-  1-   Granting a special management area use permit to Kaneohe Yacht Club to renovate
11   31-  the existing yacht clubhouse in Kaneohe.
     1990
90-  6-   Granting a special management area use permit to State department of
90   26-  transportation to construct a 2.3-mile-long, two-lane highway to bypass Haleiwa
     1990 Town.
90-  4-   Granting a special management area use permit to State department of
140  25-  transportation, harbors division, to construct a new comfort station and a
     1990 trailer boat launching area at Ala Wai Boat Harbor.
90-  4-   Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline setback variance to
147  25-  city department of public works to construct four overflow swales on beach
     1990 rights-of-way along Mokulua Drive in Lanikai.
90-  4-   Granting a special management area use permit to Teruya Brothers, Ltd., to
153  25-  demolish an abandoned service station and a neighborhood market and construct a
     1990 new FASTOP convenience store in Makaha.
          Granting a special management area use permit to State department of
90-  4-   transportation to fill and raise the northern portion of Keehi Boat Harbor;
154  25-  construct a floating dock pathway connecting Piers 800, 900, and 1,000; raise
     1990 the shoreward portions of Piers 700, 800, 900, and 1,000; and pave the gravel
          parking areas located at #4 Sand Island Access Road in Honolulu.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. Date Description
No.
90-  12-  Amending Res. 89-206 to delete Condition F thereof and replace it with a new
193  5-   Condition F.
     1990
90-  5-   Granting a special management area use permit to city department of parks and
218  23-  recreation to develop a park at the old CYO Camp site, including a parking
     1990 lot, comfort station, and other improvements in Laie.
90-  9-   Granting a special management area use permit to Con-Fab Corporation to
219  12-  develop a manufacturing and storage site for concrete products at Campbell
     1990 Industrial Park.
90-  5-   Granting a special management area use permit to Waianae Coast Comprehensive
220  23-  Health Center to construct a new one-story mental health center adjacent to
     1990 the existing Waianae Coast Comprehensive Health Center in Waianae.
90-  5-   Granting a special management area use permit to State department of Hawaiian
224  23-  home lands to construct a gravity sewer collection system and a sewage pumping
     1990 station for Hawaiian home lands in Waimanalo.
90-  7-   Granting a special management area use permit to Hans Reicke, FAIA, to
302  25-  construct a 12,000-square-foot addition to an existing warehouse in Kalihi.
     1990
90-  10-  Granting a special management area use permit to Chevron USA, Inc., to
303  3-   construct a new maintenance workshop at Campbell Industrial Park.
     1990
90-  12-  Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline setback variance
304  5-   to Keen Jun Enterprises to construct a cluster housing development located at
     1990 Waikalua.
90-  7-   Granting a special management area use permit to Bridgestone/Firestone, Inc.,
331  25-  for an automobile tire store and repair shop in Pearl Kai.
     1990
90-  8-8- Granting a special management area use permit to Matson Terminals, Inc., for
356  1990 Matson container yard improvements, including new cranes, located at Piers 52
          and 53, Sand Island Access Road.
90-  10-  Granting a special management area use permit to State department of
386  3-   accounting and general services for expansion of existing film facility
     1990 located at Diamond Head.
     1-   Granting a special management area use permit to Thomas Square Development,
90-  30-  Inc., to demolish an existing structure and develop a neighborhood convenience
388  1991 shopping center consisting of four commercial buildings and parking located in
          Makaha.
     9-   Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline setback variance
90-  12-  to State department of transportation to construct a canoe racing facility,
405  1990 including a raised judge’s pavilion, elevated spectators’ area, additional
          parking, etc., at Keehi Lagoon Park in Kalihi.
     12-  Granting a special management area use permit to Windward Park, Inc., to
90-  5-   construct a 35-tee golf driving range with chipping and putting areas, snack
408  1990 bar/pro shop, and supporting infrastructure located at the corner of
          Kalanianaole Highway and Kapaa Quarry Road in Kailua.
90-  10-  Granting a special management area use permit to city department of parks and
418  3-   recreation to construct a lanai addition to an existing bathhouse/recreation
     1990 building located at Swanzy Beach Park in Kaaawa.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res.  Date  Description
No.
90-   10-3- Granting a special management area use permit to Oceanic Institute
426   1990  to construct a center for applied aquaculture located in Waimanalo.
90-   10-3- Granting a special management area use permit to Marisco, Ltd., to
432   1990  construct a ship repair facility at Barber’s Point Harbor in Ewa.
            Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline setback
90-   10-3- variance to Pacific Atlas (Hawaii), Inc., to construct Phase 1 of
433   1990  Bay View Golf Course improvements, consisting of work on golf
            fairways and clubhouse and realignment of Kawa Stream at Waikalua,
            Kaneohe.
      10-   Granting a special management area use permit to city department of
90-   17-   public works to open a 10,000-foot waterway in the interior of
452   1990  Kawai Nui Marsh and construct a vegetation/sediment handling area
            located at Kawai Nui Marsh in Kailua.
90-   12-5- Granting a special management area use permit to Chevron USA, Inc.,
484   1990  to demolish an existing service station and construct a new service
            station and car wash facility in Aiea.
            Granting a special management area use permit and a shoreline
90-   12-5- setback variance to Hawaii Property Management, Inc., to remove
518   1990  mounds of debris, construct two drainage ditches, and establish two
            new plant sanctuaries at Campbell Industrial Park.
90-   1-30- Granting a special management area use permit to F. T. Opperman, et
524   1991  al., to construct a new 16-lot subdivision and 32-foot-wide road
            right-of-way in Waialua.
90-   12-5- Granting a special management area use permit to State department
526   1990  of land and natural resources to construct infrastructure
            improvements located at Sand Island.
            Granting a special management area use permit to city department of
90-   1-30- parks and recreation to construct a parking lot, landscaping,
558   1991  irrigation systems, walkways, and vehicular barriers located at
            Ehukai Beach Park.
90-   8-7-  Granting a special management area use permit to Pohakapu Partners
559   1991  to develop a subdivision on a 2.627-acre parcel into 15 residential
            lots and to construct a roadway access located in Kailua.
90-   1-30- Granting a special management area use permit to Kihapai Partners
560   1991  for demolition of two residential structures and construction of a
            four-story, 11-unit apartment building located in Kailua.
90-   1-30- Granting a special management area use permit to Hawaiian Electric
561   1991  Company, Inc., to construct a 46,000 kilovolt (kV) alternating
            current transmission substation in Kalihi.
            Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline setback
      1-30- variance to State department of transportation to expand the
91-07 1991  general aviation area, realign Lagoon Drive, extend the existing
            water, sewer, and drainage systems and develop an airport training
            center at Honolulu International Airport.
      1-30- Granting a special management area use permit to Hanumantha
91-08 1991  Sanjeevi to establish a seven-lot residential subdivision along
            Kamehameha Highway in Hauula.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. No. Date       Description
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Hawaiian
                    Electric Company, Inc., to construct 4.5 miles of 138
91-22    8-7-1991   kilovolt (kV) electric transmission lines and new steel
                    poles and other related work between the Waiau Power Plant
                    and the Makalapa Substation.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to State
91-85    4-10-1991  department of transportation to construct two perimeter
                    service roads located on runway grounds of Honolulu
                    International Airport.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Sea-Land
91-91    4-10-1991  Service, Inc., to construct improvements to Sea-Land
                    Service, Inc., including a new office building, gate house,
                    and guardhouse, at Pier 51-A in Honolulu.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to city
                    department of housing and community development to expand
91-148   7-24-1991  the existing Kahuku Wastewater Treatment Plant by
                    constructing a new secondary treatment unit and other
                    improvements in Kahuku.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Craig
91-149   8-7-1991   Kobayashi for construction of two additional dwelling
                    units, for a total of four single-family dwellings located
                    on a lot in Waialua.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Mr. and
91-162   9-11-1991  Mrs. David Cole to construct a five-unit cluster housing
                    development in Kailua.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Shell Oil
91-164   9-11-1991  Company to demolish an existing service station and
                    construct a new service station and car wash at 98-135
                    Kamehameha Highway located in Waimalu.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to State
                    department of transportation for improvements and expansion
91-169   8-7-1991   of existing fire fighting station, construction of a new
                    truck reservicing facility and parking lot located at the
                    end of Lagoon Drive within the Honolulu International
                    Airport.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to city
91-170   8-7-1991   department of public works to construct improvements to the
                    wastewater collection system for the Heeia sewage tributary
                    area.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to city
91-177   9-11-1991  department of parks and recreation to construct
                    improvements to Kalama Beach Park located in Kailua.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Brewer
                    Environmental Industries to demolish several buildings,
91-209   10-23-1991 renovate one building, and construct a new warehouse and
                    office with parking and landscaping located at Kaomi Loop
                    in Ewa.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to State
91-250   11-13-1991 department of accounting and general services to construct
                    a two-story, eight-classroom building and connecting
                    walkway at Waialua Elementary School in Waialua.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to State
                    department of human services to construct transitional
91-271   2-12-1992  housing units consisting of 35 family units, 20 single/
                    couple units, five administration/child-care units, three
                    laundry units, and 60 parking stalls for the Malaekahana
                    Weinberg Villages located in Kahuku.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. No. Date      Description
                   Granting a special management area use permit to the city
91-300   2-12-1992 department of parks and recreation to construct a pedestrian
                   bridge located in Haleiwa.
                   Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline
                   setback variance to American Telephone and Telegraph Company
92-60    3-25-1992 to install two new transpacific submarine communications
                   fiber optic cables and construct a new cable easement and
                   ocean ground bed located in Keawaula.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to Daniel Siu
92-68    4-15-1992 to construct a 12,000 square-foot, one-story warehouse
                   located in Waipahu.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to State
92-94    5-6-1992  department of accounting and general services to construct
                   an athletic locker/shower facility for Kalaheo High School.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to Sen Plex
92-96    5-27-1992 Corporation to create a 24-lot industrial subdivision and
                   access road located in Kalihi.
                   Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline
                   setback variance to city department of parks and recreation
                   to replace 590 feet of concrete sidewalk with tile pavers on
92-100   5-6-1992  the makai side of Kalakaua Avenue; replace almost all
                   concrete pavement between the food concession/comfort
                   station building and the Diamond Head side of the banyan
                   arbor, and make other improvements to Kuhio Beach Park in
                   Waikiki.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to State
                   department of accounting and general services to construct
92-114   5-27-1992 an enclosure outside of the State emergency operating center
                   to house a 300-KVA supplementary generator and to install an
                   above-ground 8,000-gallon fuel storage tank with a
                   containment wall erected around it, located at Diamond Head.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to Palisades
92-131   6-17-1992 Community Chapel Assembly of God to construct a new chapel
                   church complex located in Waianae.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to city
92-144   7-8-1992  department of parks and recreation to construct park
                   improvements at Tracks Beach in Waianae.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to State
                   department of accounting and general services to demolish an
92-146   7-8-1992  existing administration building, to construct a new
                   administration building, and to convert an existing
                   playcourt to a 31-stall parking area at Waipahu Intermediate
                   School in Waipahu.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to Disabled
                   American Veterans (DAV) Keehi Lagoon Memorial Management
92-152   7-8-1992  Committee to demolish the existing memorial hall, construct
                   a new one-story memorial hall building, and install a new
                   parking area located at Moanalua.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to Waialae
92-156   7-8-1992  Country Club to grade topsoil to form mounds ranging from 2
                   to 5 feet in height at the Waialae Country Club.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to city
92-185   9-23-1992 department of parks and recreation to develop a park at the
                   former Mormon Church campgrounds and make other
                   improvements, located in Laie.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. No. Date       Description
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the city
92-223   10-14-1992 building department to demolish the existing fire station
                    and construct a new one-story fire station and accessory
                    structures, located in Pupukea.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to A. L.
92-227   10-14-1992 Kilgo to construct a five-story parking garage and expand
                    the existing home improvement establishment located at Sand
                    Island Access Road in Honolulu.
                    Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline
92-268   12-2-1992  setback variance to GTE Hawaiian Tel to install a submarine
                    fiber optic cable landing site located in Maunalua (Sandy
                    Beach).
                    Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline
92-272   12-2-1992  setback variance to GTE Hawaiian Tel to install a submarine
                    fiber optic cable landing site located in Honouliuli (Kahe
                    Point).
                    Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline
92-281   12-2-1992  setback variance to State department of land and natural
                    resources to rehabilitate the existing seawall walkway
                    located at Diamond Head.
                    Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline
                    setback variance to State department of business, economic
92-282   12-2-1992  development and tourism to develop a marine education and
                    training center and public boat launching facility at Sand
                    Island.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to
92-283   12-2-1992  Attractions Hawaii, dba Waimea Falls Park, to permit
                    (retain) four concrete bridges located in Waimea.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the city
92-296   1-27-1993  building department to construct an office building and
                    automotive equipment storage shed located in Kaneohe.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Hawaiian
                    Electric Company, Inc., to construct approximately 4,600
92-307   2-17-1993  feet of 138 kilovolt (kV) electrical transmission lines and
                    new steel poles west of the Waiau Power Plant, and to
                    relocate existing 46 kV lines, and other related work west
                    of the Waiau Power Plant in Pearl City.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Mitchell
92-312   1-27-1993  Nowicki to construct two wooden commercial buildings and a
                    parking lot located in Haleiwa.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Mr. and
93-58    3-10-1993  Mrs. Hal Schatz to construct an eight-unit apartment
                    addition and parking facilities to an existing 10-unit
                    apartment building located in Kailua.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Mr. Don W.
93-59    3-10-1993  Moody and Mr. James S. Dial to construct a 24-unit
                    condominium apartment building with parking and loading
                    facilities located in Kailua.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Nanakuli
93-68    3-10-1993  Investment Company, Ltd., to construct commercial
                    structures located in Nanakuli.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to State
                    department of accounting and general services to permit
93-87    3-31-1993  construction of a new weight room building, a broadcast
                    booth, a 10-classroom building, and other improvements to
                    Waianae High School.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. Date Description
No.
          Granting a special management area use permit to city building department to
93-  3-   construct an automotive equipment service building, caretaker’s cottage and
88   31-  carport, office/covered parking shed, parking lot, and wall located at
     1993 Waianae Corporation Yard and a portion of the Waianae Wastewater Treatment
          Plant.
     4-   Granting a special management area use permit to Hilton Hawaiian Village
93-  21-  Joint Venture to replace an existing auditorium with a new 400-unit hotel
108  1993 structure and health-sports clinic and spa, including retail and restaurant
          space, a lagoon, and waterfall, located in Waikiki.
93-  4-   Granting a special management area use permit to KFC Hawaii to permit the
110  21-  construction of a new Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC) retail outlet in Nanakuli.
     1993
     5-   Granting a special management area use permit to city department of parks and
93-  26-  recreation to relocate the skeet and combat/MPPL ranges, and to construct an
132  1993 American trap range, a 2700 pistol range, a range master residence, comfort
          station, and parking lot located in Koko Head.
     5-   Granting a special management area use permit to city department of parks and
93-  26-  recreation to construct master plan improvements, including demolition of
134  1993 various structures, renovation of a pavilion/concession building, and other
          improvements at Kailua Beach Park.
93-  6-   Granting a special management area use permit to Shirley A. Lipman to permit
137  23-  the construction of a new apartment complex in Waialua.
     1993
93-  5-   Granting a special management area use permit to city department of public
150  26-  works to permit the construction of an interim chemical treatment facility at
     1993 the existing Sand Island Wastewater Treatment Plant on Sand Island.
93-  7-   Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline setback variance
213  14-  to city department of parks and recreation to permit the construction of
     1993 various park improvements at the Hanauma Bay Nature Park in East Oahu.
93-  7-   Granting a special management area use permit to the city building department
215  14-  to permit the construction of a radio communications facility at the Keaau
     1993 Beach Park in Makaha.
93-  7-   Granting a special management area use permit to the Waianae Coast
219  14-  Comprehensive Health Center to permit the construction of a new medical/
     1993 dental lab and other improvements to the existing health center in Waianae.
93-  8-   Granting a special management area use permit to Dale and Patricia Moore to
223  11-  permit the construction of two additional single-family dwellings, for a
     1993 total of four single-family dwelling units, on a parcel of land in Waialua.
93-  9-   Granting a special management area use permit to Blue Mountain, Inc., to
225  29-  permit the construction of five single-family dwellings on land zoned A-
     1993 1 low-density apartment district in Waialua.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. No. Date       Description
                    Granting a special management area use permit to city
93-235   8-11-1993  building department to permit the construction of
                    improvements to an existing radio communications facility
                    at the Koko Head Regional Park in East Honolulu.
                    Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline
                    setback variance to State department of transportation,
93-244   10-20-1993 harbors division, to construct a parking lot with lighting
                    and planter boxes, a washdown area, a rock revetment, and
                    line an existing drainage ditch located at Maunalua Bay
                    launching ramp in Hawaii Kai.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to State
                    department of accounting and general services to permit the
93-251   8-11-1993  relocation of an existing portable building, construction
                    of a new cafetorium, and reconstruction of the existing
                    parking lot on a parcel of land in Sunset Beach.
                    Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline
93-259   9-29-1993  setback variance to the Estate of James Campbell to permit
                    the construction of a drainage channel in Ewa.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
93-272   9-29-1993  department of public works to permit the restoration of a
                    portion of the mauka bank of Kahaluu Lagoon in Kahaluu.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
93-284   9-29-1993  department of public works to construct a flood control
                    project and wetland mitigation within the Kawai Nui Marsh
                    located in Kailua.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Haseko
93-286   12-1-1993  (Ewa), Inc., to develop a master-planned marina, including
                    a 120-acre marina, commercial and marina support
                    facilities, and residential community, located in Ewa.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the Hawaii
93-292   11-10-1993 housing authority to construct transitional housing and a
                    parking lot for homeless families located in Waimanalo.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the city
93-305   10-20-1993 department of wastewater management to permit the
                    construction of new secondary treatment facilities at the
                    existing Waianae Wastewater Treatment Plant.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Hawaiian
93-316   12-1-1993  Electric Company, Inc., to permit the construction of a
                    demineralizer system at the existing Kahe generating system
                    in Ewa.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to West Beach
93-318   10-20-1993 Estates to redevelop and expand the existing commercial
                    facilities and uses at Paradise Cove located at West Beach
                    in Honouliuli.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to building
93-339   10-12-1994 department to permit the construction of improvements to
                    the existing Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell complex located at
                    Diamond Head.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to
93-354   1-26-1994  Corporation of the Presiding Bishop of the Church of Jesus
                    Christ of Latter-Day Saints to construct a chapel facility
                    and parking lot located in Haleiwa.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. No. Date      Description
                   Granting a special management area use permit to department
                   of transportation services to construct a 3.5-mile-long
93-376   1-26-1994 bikeway and pedestrian path located on the makai side of
                   Kamehameha Highway between Kapuhi Street (Waimea) and
                   Oopuola Street (Waialee).
                   Granting a special management area use permit to State
94-31    3-9-1994  department of land and natural resources to expand the
                   existing administration building located at Keehi Boat
                   Harbor in Kapalama.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to State
94-49    3-9-1994  department of land and natural resources to redevelop 111
                   industrial lots within Sand Island Industrial Park located
                   at Sand Island.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to Midas
94-69    4-13-1994 Muffler Shops of Hawaii to construct a commercial center
                   located at Waipahu.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to department
94-85    4-13-1994 of parks and recreation to construct various park
                   improvements at Ala Moana Regional Park located at Honolulu.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to Pacific
                   Atlas (Hawaii), Inc., to expand and develop an 18-hole
94-122   9-21-1994 executive golf course, including a clubhouse, driving range,
                   practice greens, sand bunkers and chipping areas, and a
                   putting course located at Waikalua, Kaneohe.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to board of
                   water supply to construct a two-story concrete masonry unit
94-125   6-22-1994 office and storeroom complex, a temporary office trailer,
                   and a parking lot for employees and visitors located at
                   Kaneohe.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to Robert and
                   Judith Bailey to reconstruct six dwelling units, replace the
94-160   6-22-1994 existing cesspools with septic tanks and leaching fields,
                   install a chain link fence, fire hydrant, water main, check
                   flow meter and water lines located at Punaluu.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to State
94-164   6-22-1994 department of transportation to replace 4 existing wooden
                   bridges with four new 42-foot-wide concrete bridges located
                   at Makaha.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to Melville
94-177   8-31-1994 and Blake to permit the construction of a new two-story
                   commercial building in Maili.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to department
                   of transportation services to place a new bikeway from
94-180   12-1-1994 Hahani Street to Kaneapu Place, and a pedestrian/bicycle
                   bridge approximately 3 feet makai of Kawailoa Bridge located
                   in Kailua.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to department
94-202   9-21-1994 of wastewater management to permit the construction of a
                   septage handling facility located at Sand Island.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to GTE
94-209   8-31-1994 Hawaiian Tel to permit the installation of a new fiber optic
                   telecommunication system in Keawaula and Mokuleia.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to department
94-212   9-21-1994 of wastewater management to permit the construction of a
                   septage handling facility located in Kahuku.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. Date Description
No.
94-  9-   Granting a special management area use permit to Kahala Hotel
231  21-  Associates, Limited Partnership, to permit the renovation and expansion
     1994 of an existing hotel complex located in Kahala.
     5-   Granting a special management area use permit to Obayashi Hawaii
94-  24-  Corporation to construct elderly housing units and a Y.M.C.A. facility
232  1995 and appurtenant infrastructure, including sewerage infrastructure,
          located in Pupukea.
     10-  Granting a special management area use permit to Young Men’s Christian
94-  12-  Association of Honolulu to construct new buildings, add a parking lot,
266  1994 erect chain link fences, and repair existing structures at Camp Erdman
          located at Mokuleia.
94-  3-8- Granting a special management area use permit to city building
280  1995 department to construct a vehicle maintenance shop and storeroom
          facility, and add an employee parking lot located in Waipahu.
          Granting a special management area use permit to State department of
94-  12-  accounting and general services to construct a new administration
322  1-   building and other improvements at Laie Elementary School, including
     1994 additional parking, renovation of an existing building, and installation
          of a septic tank and leaching field located in Laie.
95-  1-   Granting a special management area use permit to Bridgestone/Firestone,
10   25-  Inc., to construct an automobile tire store/repair shop and parking lot
     1995 located in Waimalu.
          Granting a special management area use permit to State department of
95-  3-8- land and natural resources to permit the construction of a roadway,
72   1995 parking lot, comfort station, picnic tables, and landscaping located in
          Aiea.
     4-   Granting a special management area use permit to Ehukai Homes, a Hawaii
95-  12-  partnership, to construct four single-family homes, an aerobic
92   1995 wastewater treatment plant and a soil absorption system located in
          Waialua.
95-  5-3- Granting a special management area use permit to department of parks and
120  1995 recreation to construct a new building, covered parking area, parking
          lot, wash area and chain link fence located in Waianae.
95-  6-   Granting a special management area use permit to State department of
154  20-  accounting and general services to construct a new classroom building
     1995 and multipurpose outdoor playcourt at Waipahu Intermediate School.
95-  6-   Granting a special management area use permit to Waialae Country Club to
190  20-  permit the replacement of the existing golf maintenance facility with
     1995 two new buildings and other improvements located in Kahala.
95-  8-   Granting a special management area use permit to the city building
250  16-  department to permit the construction of improvements to the existing
     1995 Waialua Corporation Yard in Waialua.
95-  8-   Granting a special management area use permit to the State department of
251  16-  accounting and general services to permit the expansion of the existing
     1995 Iroquois Point Elementary School Library in Ewa.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. No. Date      Description
                   Granting a special management area use permit to the city
                   department of transportation services to construct a new
95-288   9-20-1995 bike path from Waipio Point Access Road to Lehua Avenue
                   located within the former Oahu Railway and Land Company
                   right-of-way in Pearl City.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to Waianae
                   Coast Comprehensive Health Center to permit the
95-345   6-26-1996 implementation of a facilities master plan for the existing
                   health center. (Res. 08-195 granted an SMP to Waianae
                   Comprehensive Health Center to modify SMP No. 94/SMA-1, 9-
                   24-2008)
                   Granting a special management area use permit to La Pietra/
95-347   12-6-1995 Hawaii School for Girls to permit the construction of a new
                   two-story, three-classroom building on Diamond Head.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to department
95-379   5-1-1996  of parks and recreation to construct a comfort station,
                   outdoor shower, parking lot and other improvements at Sunset
                   Beach Support Park.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to Clement/May
95-380   1-24-1996 Hung to construct two additional single-family dwellings,
                   for a total of four single-family dwellings, and accessory
                   structures located in Waialua.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to Hawaiian
95-381   1-24-1996 Electric Company, Inc., to construct a sandblast enclosure
                   and storage shed located in Waianae.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to Hilton
                   Hawaiian Village Joint Venture and the EnterOcean Group,
96-03    1-24-1996 Inc., to construct an aquatic recreational facility and
                   other improvements located at the Duke Kahanamoku Lagoon
                   located in Waikiki.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to the
96-47    2-14-1996 department of wastewater management to construct a
                   wastewater pump station and for other improvements located
                   in Kaneohe.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to building
96-66    5-1-1996  department to demolish the existing Kaaawa Fire Station and
                   construct a replacement fire station in Kaaawa.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to the city
                   department of parks and recreation to demolish various
96-68    8-7-1996  structures at Kailua Beach Park; construct an open pavilion,
                   canoe halau, new picnic area, and pedestrian walkway;
                   realign a bikeway; and modify existing facilities to provide
                   equal accessibility to the park.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to Gentry
96-72    3-13-1996 Homes, Ltd., to construct a grass-lined drainage channel
                   with supportive detention basin and outlet works at Ewa.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to Foodland
96-75    3-13-1996 Supermarkets, Ltd., for a ground floor and second floor
                   addition, asphalt-concrete parking lot and a chain link
                   fence or solid wall located in Pupukea.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to James
96-114   5-1-1996  Campbell Estate to construct various improvements, including
                   a 264-stall paved parking area located in Koolina.
                   Granting a special management area use permit to the city
96-158   6-26-1996 department of public works to construct a dewatering
                   facility, access road and chain link fence located at 16-
                   1 Sand Island Parkway.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. No. Date       Description
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the city
96-162   6-26-1996  department of public works to construct a dewatering
                    facility located at the Pearl City Wastewater Treatment
                    Plant.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Flynn
                    Learner Company to construct four industrial buildings,
96-218   9-25-1996  concrete masonry unit walls, asphalt concrete parking, and
                    an irrigation system located at 120 Sand Island Access
                    Road.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to 7-Eleven
96-219   10-16-1996 Hawaii Inc. to construct a new 7-Eleven Store and parking
                    lot located at 85-010 Farrington Highway.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Maunalua
96-220   10-16-1996 Associates to construct a one-million-gallon water
                    reservoir located at 7381 Kalanianaole Highway at Koko
                    Head.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Pacific
96-271   12-4-1996  Atlas (Hawaii), Inc., to modify and expand the existing
                    Bayview Golf Course located in Waikalau, Kaneohe.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Pacific
96-273   12-4-1996  Atlas (Hawaii), Inc., to construct a 4.3-acre residential
                    subdivision located along Kaneohe Bay Drive.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Le Jardin
96-276   12-4-1996  Academy to construct a new school campus located at 917
                    Kalanianaole Highway in Kailua.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to King Food
96-287   1-29-1997  Service to construct a one-story cold storage building
                    located at Pupuole Street in Waipahu.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Hawaii
96-341   1-29-1997  Institute of Marine Biology to modify and expand the Hawaii
                    Institute of Marine Biology located on Coconut Island in
                    Kaneohe.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to BHP
97-48    2-19-1997  Petroleum Americas Refining, Inc., to further develop an
                    existing fuel terminal facility for truck park and storage
                    located at Two Sand Island Access Road.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to department
                    of parks and recreation for implementation of a fee system
97-49    3-12-1997  pursuant to Ord. 96-19, siting of two booths for collecting
                    admission and parking fees, and improvements for a new
                    pedestrian pathway and shuttle turnaround located at
                    Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Dale and
97-64    3-12-1997  Patricia Moore to construct two additional single-family
                    dwellings, for a total of four single-family dwellings, on
                    an apartment-zoned lot located in Waialua.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Gedatsu
97-143   5-28-1997  Church of Hawaii to construct a new church building located
                    at Summer Street in Kuliouou.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Ronald K.
97-177   6-18-1997  C. Kang to construct a new two-story office/retail building
                    and accessory infrastructure located in Maili.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to BHP
                    Petroleum Americas (Hawaii) Inc. to develop a new gas
97-230   8-6-1997   dispensary, convenience store with internal food specialty
                    retailer, and car wash, and to replace three underground
                    fuel storage tanks located in Nanakuli.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. Date Description
No.
97-  10-  Granting a special management area use permit to Takao Building
276  15-  Development Company to construct a new two-story office building and other
     1997 improvements located at 2571 Lemon Road.
97-  10-  Granting a special management area use permit to World of Aloha, Inc., to
293  15-  construct a wedding chapel and support structures located at 47-507
     1997 Kamehameha Highway.
97-  12-  Granting a special management area use permit to the board of water supply
198  3-   to construct a water pump booster station located at Kaluanui in Hauula.
     1997
97-  12-  Granting a special management area use permit to the department of parks
336  3-   and recreation to construct a new comfort station and other improvements
     1997 at Makaha Beach Park.
97-  12-  Granting a special management area use permit to the Mitsuyasu Family to
342  3-   construct a residential development and accessory structures located in
     1997 Ewa Beach.
98-  4-8- Granting a special management area use permit to the State department of
54   1998 transportation to demolish the existing bridge and construct a new bridge
          and riprap revetments located at Malaekahana Stream Bridge in Kahuku.
98-  10-  Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design
246  14-  and construction to construct two new temporary classrooms at the Honolulu
     1998 Police Academy training facility in Waipahu.
98-  11-  Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design
259  10-  and construction to construct improvements to Kuhio Beach Park.
     1998
     12-  Granting a special management area use permit to the building department
98-  2-   to restore the war memorial and ocean recreation swimming pool
265  1998 (Natatorium) including improvements to driveways, parking, play court,
          landscaping, and other accessory uses.
98-  1-   Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline setback
272  27-  variance to Haseko (Ewa), Inc., to construct a private recreation facility
     1999 located at 91-329 and 91-333 Papipi Road in Ewa.
98-  12-  Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design
306  2-   and construction to construct a pavilion, comfort station, parking lot,
     1998 and other improvements to Hauula Beach Park.
98-  12-  Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design
307  2-   and construction to construct improvements at the existing Kuliouou Beach
     1998 Park.
          Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline setback
98-  6-9- variance to the department of design and construction to construct a
316  1999 comfort station, basketball court, and other improvements for Aweoweo
          Beach Park.
99-  3-   Granting a special management area use permit to McDonald’s of Hawaii to
41   17-  construct a new fast food restaurant and parking lot in Aiea.
     1999
99-  6-   Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design
74   30-  and construction to modify the existing Waipahu wastewater pump station
     1999 located on the Waipio Peninsula.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. Date Description
No.
          Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline setback variance
99-  6-   to the department of design and construction to implement a park master plan
145  30-  to construct various park improvements, including landscaping, parking areas,
     1999 walls, picnic facilities, showers and a comfort station at the existing
          Ulehawa Beach Park.
99-  9-   Granting a special management area use permit to the State department of
233  22-  transportation to demolish the existing baseyard and construct a new baseyard
     1999 located at 54-307 Hauula Homestead Road.
99-  11-  Granting a special management area use permit to the city department of
256  10-  design and construction to make improvements to the Hanauma Bay Nature
     1999 Preserve and demolish the abandoned Hawaii Job Corps site.
99-  12-  Granting a special management area use permit to GTE Hawaiian Tel
356  1-   International, Inc., to construct a submarine fiber optics cable landing
     1999 facility and support structures.
00-  3-   Granting a special management area use permit to Hawaiian Cement to develop a
21   15-  new cement import and transshipment terminal at the recently expanded
     2000 Barber’s Point Harbor.
     4-   Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline setback variance
00-  26-  to the State department of transportation to install or replace, or both,
68   2000 street lights along Farrington Highway from Ala Hema Street to Piliokoe
          Bridge in Waianae and Nanakuli.
          Granting a special management area use permit to the department of land and
00-  4-   natural resources, division of forestry and wildlife, to restore Pouhala
73   26-  Marsh, including vegetation and trash removal, removal and stockpiling of
     2000 fill, wetland basin sculpting, installation of water control devices and
          perimeter fencing.
00-  6-   Granting a special management area use permit to the Queen Liliuokalani Trust
98   14-  for the Queen Liliuokalani Children’s Center and accessory structures in
     2000 Haleiwa.
     1-   Granting a special management area use permit to the board of water supply
00-  24-  for two under-stream crossings of a 36-inch water transmission main, one
104  2001 makai of Kamehameha Highway Bridge No. 9 and the other at Bridge No. 10,
          located in Punaluu.
00-  10-  Granting a special management area use permit to Campers Villages, LLC, to
105  18-  construct an outdoor recreation facility and accessory structures at Puaena,
     2000 Haleiwa.
00-  7-   Granting a special management area use permit to St. Rita Catholic Church to
120  12-  construct a new open parking lot in Nanakuli.
     2000
00-  8-9- Granting a special management area use permit to Hawaiian Electric Company
144  2000 for a new water storage tank located at the existing Kahe Power Plant.
00-  9-   Granting a special management area use permit to Castle Family Limited
169  27-  Partnership for redevelopment of a retail/commercial property located in
     2000 Kailua Town.
00-  10-  Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design and
186  18-  construction to construct a viewing deck, outdoor shower, vehicle barriers,
     2000 landscaping, and other improvements at Sunset Beach.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. Date Description
No.
     10-  Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design and
00-  18-  construction to construct a new 2,500-square-foot canoe and equipment storage
199  2000 facility, trailer parking, five-station fitness equipment and new landscaping
          at Maunalua Bay Beach Park.
00-  11-  Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design and
215  15-  construction to construct beach park improvements and implement a master plan
     2000 at Laie Beach Park.
00-  11-  Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design and
216  15-  construction to construct a bathhouse, parking lot, and other improvements at
     2000 the existing Haleiwa Alii Beach Park.
00-  11-  Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design and
217  15-  construction to construct a disinfection facility, effluent pump station and
     2000 electrical substation at the Sand Island Wastewater Treatment Plant.
00-  11-  Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design and
218  15-  construction to construct a new 1,364-square-foot multipurpose building,
     2000 additional parking and walkway at the existing Hauula Community Park.
     11-  Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design and
00-  15-  construction to replace the existing gravel parking lot with asphalt concrete
219  2000 and landscape improvements for a passive park at the Kawai Nui Community
          Park.
          Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design and
01-  3-   construction to demolish the existing caretaker’s cottage and construct a
42   14-  caretaker’s cottage detached from the main dwelling, expand the existing
     2001 parking lot, construct new walkways and a wooden boardwalk, implement dune
          restoration and other improvements at Kalama Beach Park (Boettcher Estate).
01-  12-  Granting a special management area use permit to the State department of land
58   12-  and natural resources, land division, for Kawai Nui Marsh management plan
     2001 improvements.
          Granting a special management area use permit to Phoenician, LLC, to develop
01-  4-4- new waterfront industrial facilities: a small boat repair facility, boat
84   2001 launch ramp, and parking, and a liquefied petroleum gas storage terminal
          facility near Kalaeloa Barber’s Point Deep Draft Harbor.
     5-   Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design and
01-  30-  construction to develop a portion of the Kahaluu Park master plan, including
141  2001 sports fields, comfort stations, parking areas, canoe storage building,
          landscaping, and other accessory structures.
          Granting a special management area use permit to the Kahala Mandarin Oriental
          Hawaii Hotel to expand the existing spa and fitness center, add five beach
01-  6-   suites as a partial third floor addition, add an open-air second floor to the
155  20-  existing poolside snack bar, construct an elevated outdoor tennis court for
     2001 daytime play at the rear of the hotel with receiving offices and delivery
          area underneath, and expand the existing swimming pool at the Kahala Mandarin
          Oriental Hawaii Hotel.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. Date Description
No.
01-  7-   Granting a special management area use permit to the State department
185  11-  of accounting and general services for construction of the Nanakuli
     2001 IV Elementary School.
     7-   Granting a special management area use permit to the department of
01-  11-  design and construction to allow expansion and modifications of the
189  2001 existing Sand Island Wastewater Treatment Plant and other
          miscellaneous site and facility improvements.
01-  7-   Granting a special management area use permit to the department of
190  11-  design and construction to develop the Kahua O Waikalua Neighborhood
     2001 Park in Kaneohe.
          Granting a special management area use permit to the department of
01-  8-1- design and construction to install fiber optic cables, new manholes,
212  2001 and ductlines at Lualualei and Kahe Point Beach Parks and along
          Farrington Highway.
          Granting a special management area use permit to the department of
01-  9-   design and construction for master plan improvements at Oneula Beach
228  11-  Park; and denying a shoreline setback variance to retain and maintain
     2001 the existing unpaved parking area within the 40-foot shoreline
          setback.
     9-   Granting a special management area use permit to the department of
01-  11-  land and natural resources, State parks division, for construction of
241  2001 public improvements related to the Ka Iwi Scenic Shoreline and
          Makapuu Lookout, Phase I, Increment 2.
          Granting a special management area use permit to Kaunala Beach
     9-   Estates, LLC, to consolidate and re-subdivide 19.1 acres of land into
01-  11-  33 parcels: 29 single-family residential parcels, a private roadway,
250  2001 a sewage treatment plant parcel, and a parcel to be dedicated to the
          city for park use, a remnant parcel, and the dedication of a separate
          public pedestrian shoreline access easement at Kaunala.
01-  10-  Granting a special management area use permit to the department of
258  17-  transportation services for the Pearl Harbor Bikeway Extension
     2001 located in Waipahu (Middle Loch).
01-  12-  Granting a special management area use permit to the department of
323  12-  design and construction to allow expansion and modification of the
     2001 existing Public Baths wastewater pump station.
02-  1-   Granting a special management area use permit to the department of
03   30-  transportation services for the Waialae-Kahala bicycle staging area
     2002 located on the Kapiolani Community College Diamond Head Campus.
     02-  Granting a special management area use permit to the State department
02-  20-  of accounting and general services for construction of an addition to
10   2002 the existing cafeteria building and other improvements at Laie
          Elementary School.
02-  02-  Granting a special management area use permit to the department of
16   20-  design and construction for the construction of the Banzai Rock Beach
     2002 Support Park skateboard facility in Pupukea.
02-  2-   Granting a special management area use permit to the department of
24   20-  design and construction for retention of a second-floor addition and
     2002 other improvements at Kalili Surf Center, Haleiwa Ali’i Beach Park.
02-  6-   Granting a special management area use permit to Pahounui DP LLC for
133  26-  construction of a new warehouse facility located at 120 Sand Island
     2002 Access Road.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. No. Date       Description
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Edward and
02-211   8-7-2002   Sylvia Ing for a 12-lot agricultural subdivision, including
                    roadway, water, and drainage improvements in Pupukea.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
02-220   8-7-2002   department of design and construction to construct the
                    Sunset Beach Recreation Center located in Pupukea.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the State
02-221   8-7-2002   department of accounting and general services and the
                    department of education for the Waianae High School Media
                    Center.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Hilton
02-225   8-7-2002   Hotels Corporation for construction of a high-rise tower
                    and other improvements at Hilton Hawaiian Village in
                    Waikiki.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Outrigger
02-271   11-13-2002 Enterprises to construct an above-grade pedestrian bridge
                    and frontage modifications at the Outrigger Reef on the
                    Beach Hotel.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
02-307   12-4-2002  department of design and construction for various master
                    plan improvements to Koko Head District Park and safety
                    improvements to the Koko Head shooting complex.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
02-310   12-4-2002  department of design and construction to construct a new
                    skateboard facility located along Kamehameha Highway across
                    from Haleiwa Beach Park.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
02-339   1-29-2003  department of design and construction for a master plan for
                    the 13.3-acre Kawai Nui Gateway Park in Kailua.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
03-25    2-26-2003  department of transportation services to construct the
                    Nanakuli Makai connector roadway of the Waianae Coast
                    Emergency Access Road.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Chevron
03-80    4-16-2003  Products to construct replacement acid pump tanks at the
                    Chevron Refinery.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the State
03-92    5-7-2003   department of transportation for the Kamehameha Highway
                    drainage improvements at Kii Bridge and the Kahuku Hospital
                    Ditch drainage culvert.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Kuilima
03-116   7-2-2003   Resort Company to renovate, modify, and expand the existing
                    Turtle Bay Resort.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
03-123   6-4-2003   department of design and construction to construct a new
                    canoe halau located at Keehi Lagoon Beach Park.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Synagro-
03-193   1-28-2004  WWT to construct and operate an In-Vessel Bioconversion
                    Facility at Sand Island Wastewater Treatment Plant.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Leo J.
03-218   9-24-2003  Noecker to construct two additional single-family
                    dwellings, for a total of four single-family dwellings, and
                    accessory structures in Waialua (Waialua Ocean Villas).
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. No. Date       Description
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Hawaii
03-235   5-12-2004  Intergenerational Community Development Association to
                    construct the Nanaikeola Senior Apartments and mixed use
                    project located in Nanakuli.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
03-237   9-24-2003  department of design and construction to construct a new
                    canoe halau at Waimanalo Beach Park.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Jas. W.
                    Glover Holding Company, Ltd., to create a 5-lot subdivision
03-238   9-24-2003  and construct a hot-mix asphalt plant and base yard for a
                    trucking and construction operation at Sand Island Access
                    Road.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Hawaii
03-262   10-15-2003 Reserves, Inc., to construct various improvements along
                    Hale Laa Boulevard, including Temple Gardens and parking
                    area in Laie.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
03-274   11-5-2003  department of design and construction to construct repairs,
                    upgrades, minor amenities, and a new canoe halau at
                    Nanakuli Beach Park.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
03-297   12-3-2003  department of design and construction for the Hauula Skate
                    Park facility at the existing Hauula Community Park.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Waialae
03-333   5-12-2004  Country Club to construct various improvements at the
                    existing Waialae Country Club Golf Course.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the State
03-348   1-28-2004  department of transportation to demolish an existing bridge
                    over Kokololio Stream and construct a new bridge and a
                    temporary detour road in Hauula.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the Hawaii
                    Yacht Club to allow additions to the meeting facility,
04-04    2-18-2004  including a new hydraulic elevator and lobby, renovation of
                    the rest room/shower rooms to comply with ADA requirements,
                    relocation of lockers, a new trellis, and modification to
                    the outdoor terrace area at the Hawaii Yacht Club.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
04-11    2-18-2004  department of design and construction to construct a new
                    bathhouse, outdoor showers, septic tank, leach field, and
                    other improvements located at Kaiona Beach Park.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
04-13    2-18-2004  department of design and construction to construct a new
                    canoe halau at Pokai Bay Beach Park.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to St. Joseph
04-49    3-24-2004  Church and School to expand the existing meeting facility
                    (church) and school and construct various other
                    improvements in Waipahu.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
04-57    3-24-2004  department of design and construction for the construction
                    of the Kaaawa Beach Park comfort station.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Best Buy
04-64    4-14-2004  Purchasing for a one-story retail establishment and an
                    upper-level parking structure in Waimalu.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Hawaiian
04-174   7-14-2004  Electric Company to re-grade two former wastewater
                    discharge ponds in Waiau.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. Date Description
No.
04-  9-   Granting a special management area use permit to St. John Lutheran Church to
241  22-  construct a new sanctuary and ancillary church uses in Kailua.
     2004
04-  9-   Granting a special management area use permit to Hawaiian Electric Company to
247  22-  construct an individual wastewater system, earthwork, and drainage improvements
     2004 and a new water storage tank at Kahe Point Power Plant.
04-  9-   Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design and
251  22-  construction to construct parking lot improvements at Maili Beach Park.
     2004
04-  1-   Granting a special management area use permit to La Pietra/Hawaii School for
355  26-  Girls to construct building improvements at La Pietra/Hawaii School for Girls.
     2005
04-  1-   Granting a special management area use permit to the department of
391  26-  environmental services for the Waipahu ash landfill closure project.
     2005
05-  1-   Granting a special management area use permit to the State department of
001  26-  accounting and general services to construct a new classroom building at
     2005 Waianae High School.
05-  3-   Granting a special management area use permit to the State department of
056  16-  accounting and general services to construct a telecommunications facility at
     2005 Hanauma Nature Preserve.
05-  4-6- Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design and
074  2005 construction for the East Honolulu Police Station.
05-  5-   Granting a special management area use permit to the State department of land
116  11-  and natural resources for the Ka Iwi Shoreline and Makapuu Lookout improvements
     2005 project.
05-  7-6- Granting a special management area use permit to Evans and Barbara Yim to
213  2005 construct a new commercial building at 74 Kihapai Street, Kailua.
05-  1-   Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline variance to the
241  25-  State department of transportation for Punaluu Bridge replacement.
     2006
05-  8-   Granting a special management area use permit to the State department of
242  10-  transportation, highways division, for the North Kahana Bridge replacement
     2005 project.
05-  9-   Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design and
251  28-  construction for construction of a new canoe halau at Ala Moana Regional Beach
     2005 Park.
05-  9-   Granting a special management area use permit to RKL Beachside, LLC, for the
269  28-  Royal Kai Lani project.
     2005
05-  10-  Granting a special management area use permit to Haseko (Ewa) for the Papipi
310  19-  Road drainage improvements project.
     2005
05-  10-  Granting a special management area use permit to Red Cross - Hawaii for
314  19-  renovation of the Red Cross - Hawaii headquarters.
     2005
05-  10-  Granting a special management area use permit to Hawaiian Electric Company for
316  19-  renovations and modifications relating to the Hawaiian Electric Company’s Waiau
     2005 power plant.
05-  11-  Granting a special management area use permit to Dennis Almendares for the
338  9-   Ohana Pili Kai project.
     2005
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. Date   Description
No.
05-  12-7-  Granting a special management area use permit to Tesoro, Hawaii,
351  2005   for the Sand Island terminal expansion project.
05-  1-25-  Granting a special management area use permit to the department of
408  2006   design and construction for the Sand Island Wastewater Treatment
            Plant elevator project.
05-  1-25-  Granting a special management area use permit to Juliana Simone for
416  2006   the Anahulu Centre.
06-  3-1-   Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline
022  2006   variance to the State department of land and natural resources for
            Keehi small boat harbor and the Sand Island boat launch facility.
06-  3-1-   Granting a special management area use permit to the department of
048  2006   design and construction for soil management at the Sand Island
            Wastewater Treatment Plant.
06-  3-1-   Granting a special management area use permit to the department of
054  2006   design and construction for the Kawai Nui model airplane park.
06-  4-12-  Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline
069  2006   variance to the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology for Coconut
            Island.
06-  4-12-  Granting a special management area use permit to Hilton Hotels
106  2006   Corporation for the restoration of the Duke Kahanamoku Lagoon and
            landside improvements.
06-  7-19-  Granting a special management area use permit to Robert A. Paranhos
183  2006   Lopes for the construction of new single-family dwellings (North
            Shore Villas).
06-  7-19-  Granting a special management area use permit to Edward and Sylvia
239  2006   Ing for Sunset Beach agricultural subdivision (extension of time -
            original Res. 02-211).
06-  12-13- Granting a special management area use permit to Kaneohe Ranch
345  2006   Company, LLC, to develop a new two-story commercial building,
            parking, and other improvements (2006/SMA-33).
07-  1-24-  Granting a special management area use permit to the State
001  2007   department of transportation for construction of Kalanianaole
            Highway improvements at Makapuu Point.
07-  4-11-  Granting a special management area use permit to the State
072  2007   department of education to construct an administration building and
            other improvements at Sunset Beach Elementary School.
07-  6-6-   Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline setback
118  2007   variance to Haseko (Ewa) Inc., to construct drainage improvements
            to the Kaloi Gulch drainage channel at Oneula Beach Park.
07-  8-15-  Granting a special management area use permit to the State
221  2007   department of transportation for improvements to Kalanianaole
            Highway.
07-  9-19-  Granting a special management area use permit to GLP Asphalt LLC to
247  2007   construct an asphalt cement terminal at Barber’s Point Harbor.
07-  9-19-  Granting a special management area use permit to Imperium
252  2007   Renewables Hawaii LLC to construct and operate a biodiesel
            production facility at Barber’s Point Harbor.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. No. Date       Description
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the State
07-278   10-17-2007 department of transportation for construction of a new
                    bridge over Kaipapau Stream at Hauula, Oahu.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Burger
07-293   10-17-2007 Project Management LLC to consolidate and subdivide two
                    lots into 24 residential lots.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
07-317   11-7-2007  department of design and construction to repair and
                    renovate the Halona Blowhole lookout.
                    Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline
                    setback variance to Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology for
07-318   3-19-2008  four near-term improvement projects in the Coconut Island
                    Long Range Development Plan and after-the-fact approval of
                    various unauthorized improvements.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
07-350   12-12-2007 department of design and construction to construct the
                    Kapolei Corporation Yard.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Mid-
07-368   12-12-2007 Pacific Country Club to construct two support structures at
                    Mid-Pacific Country Club.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Hawaiian
07-383   1-23-2008  Electric Company, Inc., for the Kahe Power Plant reclaimed
                    water storage improvement project.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Chevron
08-16    2-20-2008  Products Company for the Chevron Port Security Grant
                    project.
                    Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline
08-21    2-20-2008  setback variance to Kyo-Ya Hotels & Resorts, LP, for
                    portions of master planned improvements and renovations to
                    the Royal Hawaiian Hotel and Sheraton Waikiki Hotel.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Dennis A.
08-27    3-19-2008  Almendares for the construction of new single-family
                    dwellings (Au Kai Hale Mauka).
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
08-195   9-24-2008  Waianae Coast Comprehensive Health Center to modify SMP
                    No.94/SMA-1 (Res. 95-345, CD1) for construction of the
                    Harry and Jeanette Weinberg Family Medical Building.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Honolulu
08-229   11-12-2008 Marine, LLC, for the Honolulu Marine Commercial Shipyard
                    facility.
08-234   11-12-2008 Granting a special management area use permit to Walgreen
                    Company for construction of a new drugstore (Walgreens).
                    Granting a special management area use permit to Green
08-244   12-3-2008  Homes at Lualualei, LLC, for a portion of a proposed
                    cluster housing project.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
08-266   1-28-2009  department of design and construction to update the master
                    plan for Kapiolani Regional Park.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
08-276   1-28-2009  Honolulu Community Action Program for renovation and
                    expansion of a nonconforming meeting facility building in
                    Waianae.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. Date Description
No.
09-  5-   Granting a special management area use permit to the Waialae Country Club
133  27-  for the Waialae Country Club clubhouse renovation project.
     2009
09-  8-   Granting a special management area use permit to St. John Lutheran Church
213  26-  for the removal of an existing church office and a new fellowship hall and
     2009 church office located in Kailua.
09-  8-   Granting a special management area use permit to PB & Ches, LLC, for the
240  26-  demolition of an existing building and construction of a new commercial
     2009 building in Pearl City.
09-  9-   Granting a special management area use permit to Sause Bros., Inc., for the
251  16-  construction of a storage yard facility and accessory office building at
     2009 Kalaeloa Barber’s Point harbor.
     9-   Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design
09-  16-  and construction to install a 72-inch sewer tunnel and 48-inch high density
253  2009 polyethylene (HDPE) pipeline on land located near the eastern entrance to
          Ala Moana Beach Park.
     9-   Granting a special management area use permit and a shoreline setback
09-  16-  variance to REIT Management & Research, LLC, for a soil remediation and
254  2009 containment project and the construction of a subsurface concrete
          containment wall along the shoreline at James Campbell Industrial Park.
     10-  Granting a special management area use permit to Juliana Simone to
09-  27-  construct a new three-story building with ground level parking, two upper
265  2009 floors of commercial uses, and appurtenant site improvements in Haleiwa.
          (Amended by Res. 12-273, 13-233)
          Granting a special management area use permit to the State department of
09-  10-  business, economic development and tourism for the demolition of a one-
276  27-  story soundstage and four one-story office buildings, construction of a
     2009 two-story film and digital media center and a two-story parking structure,
          and appurtenant site improvements at Diamond Head Road/Kilauea.
09-  10-  Granting a special management area use permit to the Windward Retreat
277  27-  Center for construction of a meeting facility and caretaker’s dwelling at
     2009 Kaaawa.
09-  10-  Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design
278  27-  and construction for various site improvements at the existing Sunset Beach
     2009 Neighborhood Park.
09-  11-  Granting a special management area use permit to Unitek Solvent Services,
302  18-  Inc., for the expansion of an existing petroleum waste and tire recycling
     2009 facility in the Campbell Industrial Park.
09-  11-  Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline setback
307  18-  variance to the State department of land and natural resources for
     2009 construction of a predator fence at Kaena Point.
09-  11-  Granting a special management area use permit to Sasada International, LLC,
309  18-  for major exterior renovations and landscaping improvements to the Park
     2009 Shore Waikiki Hotel.
09-  1-   Granting a special management area use permit to the Doris Duke Foundation
347  27-  for Islamic Art for construction of a maintenance/landscaping building at
     2010 Black Point.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. Date Description
No.
09-  1-   Granting a special management area use permit to the State department of
365  27-  transportation for construction of a new bridge over Kawela Stream at
     2010 Sunset Beach.
10-  7-   Granting a special management area use permit to Kapiolani Community
144  14-  College, University of Hawaii, for a new culinary facility on the former
     2010 Fort Ruger Cannon Club site.
10-  7-   Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline setback
185  14-  variance to Kyo-ya Hotels and Resorts, LP, for the development of the Moana
     2010 Surfrider Diamond Head Tower.
     8-   Granting a special management area use permit to Frederick E. Hanby, Jr.,
10-  18-  and Vicky Dagen-Hanby to construct two additional single-family dwellings,
199  2010 for a total of four dwellings, and accessory structures (Au Kai Hale
          Makai).
     8-   Granting a special management area use permit to 7-Eleven Hawaii to
10-  18-  demolish an existing automobile service station and construct a one-story
203  2010 convenience store and open parking lot, accessory gas dispensing island,
          and appurtenant site improvements in Haleiwa.
10-  8-   Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design
209  18-  and construction to install a dual 60-inch wastewater force main system.
     2010
10-  8-   Granting a special management area use permit to the department of design
210  18-  and construction to allow various site improvements at the Ted Makalena
     2010 Golf Course.
10-  11-  Granting a special management area use permit to Hawaiian Electric Company,
294  22-  Inc., for construction of a new utility bridge at the Waiau Power Plant.
     2010
10-  1-   Granting a special management area use permit for the construction of
338  26-  improvements to Samuel Wilder King Intermediate School.
     2011
10-  1-   Granting a special management area use permit for development of a
339  26-  dewatering facility at the Pearl City base yard.
     2011
     1-   Granting a special management area use permit to the department of
11-7 26-  transportation services for construction of portions of the Honolulu High-
     2011 Capacity Transit Corridor (HHCTC) Project.
11-  3-   Granting a special management area use permit for the expansion of the
48   16-  Queen Liliuokalani Children’s Center Meeting Facility (Community Center).
     2011
11-  8-   Granting a special management area use permit for the construction of two
170  17-  new single-family dwellings (Au Kai Hale Mauka).
     2011
11-  8-   Granting a special management area use permit for redevelopment or
174  17-  replacement of the Waianae Police Station.
     2011
11-  8-   Granting a special management area use permit for the construction of
211  17-  improvements to Farrington Highway.
     2011
11-  9-   Granting a special management area use permit for development of a hotel,
84   16-  restaurant, and commercial building in Laie, Oahu.
     2011
11-  9-   Granting a special management area use permit to construct a fifth wet
221  16-  sludge storage tank at the Sand Island Wastewater Treatment Plant.
     2011
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. No. Date      Description
11-277   12-7-2011 Granting a special management area use permit for the Hilton
                   Hawaiian Village Master Plan Improvements.
                   Granting special management area use permits for
11-282   4-3-2012  construction of new bridges over Makaha and West Makaha
                   streams at Makaha Beach, Oahu. (Applicant: State department
                   of transportation)
                   Granting a special management area use permit for
12-47    4-25-2012 development of the Kamehameha Schools school facility.
                   (Applicant: Trustees of the Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop
                   - Kamehameha Schools)
                   Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline
12-112   6-6-2012  variance for development of the Keehi Lagoon Memorial.
                   (Applicant: Keehi Memorial Organization)
                   Granting a special management area use permit to construct a
12-114   6-6-2012  solids handling return lift station (RLS) at the Sand Island
                   Wastewater Treatment Plant. (Applicant: department of design
                   and construction)
                   Granting a special management area use permit for the
12-142   7-11-2012 construction of improvements to the Maili Beach Park.
                   (Applicant: department of design and construction)
                   Granting a special management area use permit for
12-165   8-15-2012 development of a new one-story commercial building, at-grade
                   parking lot, and appurtenant site improvements. (Applicant:
                   Kaneohe Ranch Management Limited)
                   Granting a special management area use permit for the Kahe
12-167   8-15-2012 Generating Station 2011 Project Improvements. (Applicant:
                   Hawaiian Electric Company, Inc.)
                   Granting a special management area use permit for St.
                   Augustine By-the-Sea Church to construct a St. Damien
12-195   9-12-2012 Museum; demolish and replace an existing parish hall
                   (including a new multi-purpose building with parking, parish
                   hall, offices, and storage spaces); and appurtenant site
                   improvements. (Applicant: St. Augustine By-the-Sea Church)
                   Granting a special management area use permit to allow the
12-221   9-12-2012 development of four single-family dwellings on a single
                   residential lot, and associated improvements. (Applicant:
                   Westgate Enterprises, Inc.)
                   Granting a special management area use permit for
12-292   12-5-2012 development of a convenience store. (Applicant: 7-Eleven
                   Hawaii, Inc.)
                   Granting a special management area use permit for the Kualoa
12-335   1-30-2013 Regional Park wastewater system improvements. (Applicant:
                   department of design and construction)
                   Granting a special management area use permit for
12-336   1-30-2013 development of a new two-story mixed use commercial
                   building, at-grade parking lot, and appurtenant site
                   improvements in Nanakuli. (Applicant: Sungho (Andy) Kim)
                   Granting a special management area use permit for
12-337   1-30-2013 restoration improvements to a portion of the Kawainui Marsh.
                   (Applicant: department of land and natural resources,
                   division of forestry and wildlife)
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. No. Date       Description
                    Granting a special management area use permit to allow the
                    development of the second egg-shaped digester, sludge
13-65    5-8-2013   storage tank, biogas holding tank, and gas flare assembly,
                    as a component of the existing in-vessel bioconversion
                    facility at the Sand Island Wastewater Treatment Plant.
                    (Applicant: department of design and construction)
                    Granting a special management area use permit for Waimanalo
                    Bay Beach Park Master Plan improvements to the existing
13-68    5-8-2013   park, including sports fields, comfort stations, and picnic
                    areas, and increasing camp sites and walking trails.
                    (Applicant: department of design and construction)
                    Granting a special management area use permit for the
13-136   7-10-2013  Kaneohe/Kailua Wastewater Conveyance (Tunnel) and Treatment
                    Facilities Improvement Project. (Applicant: department of
                    design and construction)
                    Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline
13-150   8-7-2013   setback variance to construct a drainage outlet as a
                    component of the Western Kapolei regional drainage system.
                    (Applicant: Aina Nui Corporation)
                    Granting a Special Management Area Use Permit and shoreline
13-208   9-11-2013  setback variance to construct portions of the Honolulu Rail
                    Transit Project (HRTP). (Applicant: Honolulu Authority for
                    Rapid Transportation)
13-261   12-11-2013 Granting a special management area use permit for the
                    development of a library. (Applicant: State of Hawaii)
                    Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline
14-165   8-13-2014  setback variance for the Coconut Island Infrastructure
                    Rehabilitation and Replacement Project.
                    Granting a special management area use permit for
14-222   11-12-2014 construction of portions of the Kapaa Light Industrial
                    Park.
                    Approving an extension of time to obtain a development
                    permit for the replacement of the Moana Surfrider Diamond
                    Head Tower with a new tower, including the construction of
14-279   12-10-2014 a new retaining wall, fill, swimming pool and deck,
                    stairway, and lateral walkway, which may encroach up to 40
                    feet into the shoreline setback area, under the special
                    management area use permit and shoreline setback variance
                    granted by Res. 10-185, CD1.
                    Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline
15-039   3-11-2015  setback variance for the Lee Residence and new shoreline
                    protection structures.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to renovate
15-117   6-3-2015   the existing Waikiki Parc Hotel including landscaping and
                    streetscape improvements.
                    Granting a special management area use permit for the
15-130   7-8-2015   development of improvements to the three-level hotel podium
                    (including basement) of the Hyatt Regency Waikiki Beach
                    Resort and Spa.
15-247   10-7-2015  Granting a special management area use permit for
                    construction of an outpatient health care facility.
                    Granting a special management area use permit for St.
16-74    5-4-2016   Augustine By-the-Sea Church to construct a new St. Damien
                    and St. Marianne Cope Museum, demolish and replace the
                    existing parish hall, and appurtenant site improvements.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. No. Date       Description
16-127   8-3-2016   Granting a special management area use permit for the
                    former Henry J. Kaiser Estate renovations.
                    Granting a special management area use permit for flood
16-130   7-6-2016   mitigation measures, the restoration of Punaluu Stream, and
                    the enhancement of surrounding ecosystem.
                    Granting a special management area use permit for a new
16-133   7-6-2016   single-story retail structure, individual wastewater
                    system, parking lot, sidewalk, and appurtenant site
                    improvements.
                    Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline
16-180   10-5-2016  variance for the Hoakalei master plan update improvements
                    project.
                    Granting a special management area use permit for Kalaheo
16-203   9-7-2016   High School athletic field and complex renovation and
                    expansion.
                    Granting a special management area use permit for the
                    construction of three two-story, two-family dwelling units,
16-242   11-2-2016  landscaping, swimming pools, a concrete masonry unit wall,
                    and guest parking areas within the special management area
                    along with minor structures within the 40-foot shoreline
                    setback area.
16-265   11-2-2016  Granting a special management area use permit for the
                    Kihapai Place apartment project.
16-319   1-25-2017  Granting a special management area use permit to install
                    upgrades to the Waikapoki wastewater pump station.
16-325   1-25-2017  Granting a special management area use permit for the St.
                    Rita Catholic Church.
                    Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline
17-060   4-26-2017  setback variance for the redevelopment of the Outrigger
                    Reef Waikiki Beach Resort.
                    Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline
17-069   3-22-2017  setback variance to install upgrades to the Kahanahou
                    wastewater pump station.
17-118   6-7-2017   Granting a special management area use permit for Waianae
                    High School athletic field improvements.
                    Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline
17-228   9-6-2017   setback variance for the Hawaiki submarine fiber-optic
                    cable landing at Kapolei.
                    Granting a special management area use permit for the
17-248   10-11-2017 Sunset Beach Elementary School portable buildings,
                    administration building, and improvements.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to allow the
17-273   11-1-2017  construction of a new two-story workshop and classroom
                    building, triangular open courtyard, and paved parking lot
                    at Waianae High School.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
18-19    2-28-2018  Hawaiian Electric Company, Inc. for a variety of minor
                    projects at its Waiau generating station.
                    Granting a special management area use permit to the
18-36    2-28-2018  department of environmental services, for a new sewer force
                    main.
 
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. Date Description
No.
18-  6-6- Granting a special management area use permit to allow the installation of an
110  2018 SO2 scrubbing system and the replacement of karbate gas coolers at the Island
          Energy Kapolei oil refinery.
18-  7-   Granting a special management area use permit to replace an existing
123  11-  communications tower and accessory equipment, and make improvements to accessory
     2018 structures at the Kaaawa fire station.
18-  7-   Granting a special management area use permit to allow the installation of a
124  11-  radio broadcast antenna tower located Makai of Nimitz Highway and west of Kalihi
     2018 Stream.
18-  8-   Granting a special management area use permit to allow for the construction of a
148  15-  convenience store in Hauula.
     2018
18-  9-   Granting a special management area use permit for the expansion of a parking lot
166  12-  and improvement of drainage from the parking lot and maintenance yard at the Ted
     2018 Makalena golf course in Waipahu.
18-  12-  Granting a special management area (SMA) use permit to allow the development of
238  5-   three single-family dwelling units on the site.
     2018
18-  11-  Granting a special management area use permit to allow the development of a
245  14-  rural community commercial center and associated improvements in Pupukea, Oahu.
     2018
18-  1-   Granting a special management area use permit for the Malaekahana State
288  30-  Recreational Area, Kahuku section park improvements.
     2019
19-  7-3- Granting a special management area use permit to renovate two existing single-
43,  2019 family dwelling units, construct a new single-family dwelling unit, and make
CD-1      various improvements in Maunalua
19-  7-3- Granting a special management area use permit for improvements to the existing
111, 2019 City wastewater pump station on Paiko Drive in Kuliouou
CD-1
19-  7-3- Granting a special management area use permit for the construction of a manifold
138, 2019 system to interconnect two existing oil pipeline systems in Kapolei
CD1
19-  11-  Granting a special management area use permit to allow the installation of a
267, 6-   solar photovoltaic and battery storage system at Kapiolani Community College in
CD1  2019 Diamond Head, O‘ahu
20-  2-   Granting a special management area use permit for the demolition and
1,   19-  reconstruction of structures at the Saint Rita Catholic Church
CD1  2020
20-  2-   Granting a special management area use permit for improvements at the Ala Moana
21,  19-  Regional Park and Magic Island
CD1  2020
20-  7-8- Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline setback variance for
57,  2020 modifications to the storm water drainage system along Kawailoa and Alala Roads
CD1       in Kailua
20-  4-   Granting a special management area use permit for facility expansion and
69,  15-  upgrades to the Sand Island Wastewater Treatment Plant
FD1  2020
20-  4-   Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline setback variance for
70,  15-  improvements and repairs to the onshore segment of an existing wastewater
FD1  2020 outfall pipeline on Sand Island
20-  5-6- Granting a special management area use permit for various improvements to the
97,  2020 Turtle Bay Resort
CD1
20-  9-9- Granting a special management area use permit for a new coastal wetlands aviary
187, 2020 exhibit at the Honolulu Zoo
CD1
20-  5-5- Granting a special management area use permit to replace the Hanohano Hale
226, 2021 apartment building's existing wastewater treatment system
CD1
20-  12-  Granting a special management area use permit for the construction of two above-
290, 9-   ground fuel storage tanks and associated improvements at the existing Par Hawaii
CD1  2020 Refining LLC Sand Island Bulk Fuel Storage Terminal
21-
16,  6-2- Granting an after-the-fact special management area use permit for renovations to
CD1, 2021 the Haleiwa Beach House Restaurant.
FD1
21-  3-   Granting a special management area use permit to allow for new construction and
40,  17-  improvements to the New Hope Church
CD1  2021
21-  4-   Granting a special management area ("SMA") use permit for the construction of a
61,  14-  Windward District Operations Base Station ("WDOBS") and associated improvements
CD1  2021 on the mauka side of Mokulua Drive, diagonally across from Kailua Beach Park
21-  6-2- Granting a special management area (SMA) use permit to allow the replacement of
91,  2021 the existing, deteriorating wastewater treatment system at Tax Map Key (TMK) 5-
CD1       3-008:002 in Punaluu
21-  6-   Approving an extension of time to obtain a development permit for a rural
115, 30-  community commercial center in Pupukea, Oahu, under the special management area
CD1  2021 use permit granted by Resolution 18-245, CD1, FD1.
21-  10-  Granting a special management area ("SMA") use permit for improvements to the
203, 6-   Kawailoa Transfer Station
CD1  2021
21-  10-  Granting a special management area use permit to replace the Laieloa Stream
204, 6-   Bridge
CD1  2021
21-  10-  Granting an after-the-fact special management area (SMA) use permit to allow
209, 6-   construction and repainting of a security fence surrounding the Diamond Head 180
CD1  2021 Reservoir, and revegetation of cleared areas, at Tax Map Key (TMK) 3-1-042:007
          at Diamond Head Crater
21-  12-  Granting a special management area use permit for the construction of a two-
259, 1-   family detached dwelling in Haleiwa, O‘ahu.
CD1  2021
21-  1-   Granting a special management area use permit for the Punaluu Stream Restoration
267, 26-  Project
CD1  2022
21-  1-   Granting a special management area use permit to allow the construction of a new
281, 26-  single-family dwelling unit with a garage and repairs to an existing swimming
CD1  2022 pool at Tax Map Key ("TMK") 4-3-008:045 in Lanikai
22-  2-   Granting a special management area use permit for the Heeia Wastewater Pump
13,  23-  Station Improvement Project
CD1  2022
22-  5-4- Granting a special management area use permit to allow the construction of two
61,  2022 new single-family dwelling units and a garage at Tax Map Key 3-5-003:007 in
CD1       Kahala, O‘ahu
22-  5-4- Granting a special management area use permit for the Kalauao (Pearlridge) Bus
66,  2022 Transit Center Project
CD1
22-  6-1- Granting a special management area use permit to allow for new construction and
117, 2022 miscellaneous improvements at the Ka‘ōhao Public Charter School in Lanikai,
CD1       Kailua
22-  6-1- Granting a special management area use permit to allow the construction of a new
118, 2022 single-family dwelling unit, accessory dwelling unit, and other improvements at
CD1       Tax Map Key 6-1-009:010 in Haleiwa (Kawailoa)
22-       Granting a special management area use permit to allow the improvements
141, 7-6- identified in the Ho‘ōla Nā Pua (Hoola Na Pua) residential special treatment
CD1  2022 facility master plan at Tax Map Key 5-8-001:051 in Waiale‘e (Waialee), North
          Shore
          Granting a special management area use permit to allow the construction of one
22-  11-  single-family detached dwelling unit and one two-family detached dwelling unit
175, 2-   (three dwelling units total), two shallow swimming pools, two garages,
CD1  2022 landscaping elements, and supporting infrastructure at Tax Map Key 5-8-003:012
          in Kaunala, North Shore
          Granting a special management area use permit to allow the demolition of seven
22-  10-  existing single-family dwellings, redevelopment of six single-family dwellings,
220, 5-   and construction of six single family dwellings for a total of twelve dwelling
CD1  2022 units; widen an existing driveway; improve supporting infrastructure; and
          install open fencing within the shoreline setback area at Tax Map Keys 3-5-006:
          007, 009, 014, and 025 in Kahala
          Granting a special management area use permit to allow the construction of a new
22-  11-  Waianae High School girls’ athletic locker room building (requiring either
235, 2-   removal or relocation of the existing administrative portable building), an
CD1  2022 extension/widening of the fire access road, removal and planting of trees,
          landscaping, and related site improvements at Tax Map Key 8-5-015:001 (portion)
23-  6-7- Granting a special management area use permit to allow construction of a sand
35,  2023 shed, retaining wall, septic tank with leach fields, and water line and fire
CD1       hydrant improvements at Tax Map Key 9-1-026:056 in Honouliuli.
23-  6-7- Granting a special management area use permit to allow the construction of a new
57,  2023 one-family detached dwelling at 5699 Kalanianaole Highway.
CD1
23-       Granting a special management area use permit and shoreline setback variance to
90,  6-7- allow roadway and pedestrian safety improvements along Kamehameha Highway in
CD1, 2023 Haleiwa, North Shore.
FD1
23-  6-   Granting a special management area use permit to allow the construction of a new
118, 21-  single family dwelling unit and other improvements at Tax Map Key 3-5-058:011 in
CD1  2023 Waialae, Oahu.
23-  8-9- Granting a special management area use permit to allow repairs of an addition to
140, 2023 an existing single-family detached dwelling and related site improvements at
CD1       1508 Mokulua Drive in Lanikai.
23-  9-6- Granting a special management area use permit to allow the construction of a new
178, 2023 single family dwelling unit and other improvements at Tax Map Key 5-6-001:007 in
CD1       Mālaekahana.
23-  9-6- Granting a special management area use permit to allow the construction of two
181, 2023 new accessory farm dwellings at Tax Map Key 6-8-003:045 in Mokulē‘ia.
CD1
23-  9-6- Granting a special management area use permit to allow the construction of a
184, 2023 single-family dwelling, accessory dwelling unit, and carport at 66-153
CD1       Walikanahele Road at Tax Map Key 6-6-005:046 in Hale‘iwa.
23-  11-  Granting a special management area use permit to allow the new construction of a
206, 1-   single-family detached dwelling and accessory dwelling unit, and other
CD1  2023 improvements at 10 Kamani Kai Place, Kailua, O‘ahu.
23-  11-  Granting a special management area use permit to allow for phased improvements
238, 1-   to the Tom Moffatt Waikīkī Shell in Waikīkī, O‘ahu.
CD1  2023
23-  11-  Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction of
242, 1-   a new single-family detached dwelling and improvements to an existing single-
CD1  2023 family detached dwelling unit in Hawai‘i Kai, O‘ahu.
23-  12-  Granting a special management area major permit to allow the implementation of a
252, 6-   slope stabilization project at 46-40, 46-50, and 46-70 Kōnane Place in He‘eia,
CD1  2023 O‘ahu.
23-  11-  Amending Resolution 18-245, CD1, FD1, as amended by Resolution 21-115, CD1, to
253, 1-   further extend the deadline to obtain a development permit for a rural community
CD1  2023 commercial center and associated improvements in Pūpūkea, O‘ahu.
23-  12-  Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction of
264, 6-   a new single-family dwelling unit and other improvements at 67-429A Waialua
CD1  2023 Beach Road in Waialua, O‘ahu.
23-  12-  Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction of
273, 6-   additions and improvements to an existing single-family detached dwelling in
CD1  2023 Wailupe, O‘ahu.
24-  2-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction of
14,  28-  two new single-family dwellings, a swimming pool, and a garage in Mokulē‘ia,
CD1  2024 O‘ahu.
24-  3-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction of
24,  25-  a new single-family detached dwelling with an integrated garage and other
CD1  2024 improvements in Niu, O‘ahu.
24-  3-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the replacement of
38,  25-  the Ono Vista Condominium wastewater treatment plant in Waialua, O‘ahu.
CD1  2024
24-  3-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction of
39,  25-  improvements to the track and field facilities at Wai‘anae High School in
CD1  2024 Wai‘anae, O‘ahu.
24-  4-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction of
54,  17-  an accessory farm dwelling and agricultural structures in Mokulē‘ia, O‘ahu.
CD1  2024
24-  4-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the establishment
57,  17-  of agricultural operations and the construction of accessory farm dwellings and
CD1  2024 agricultural structures in Mokulē‘ia, O‘ahu.
24-  4-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow the construction of two
58,  17-  new single-family dwellings with accessory pavilions, a swimming pool, and a
CD1  2024 garage in Kailua, O‘ahu.
24-  4-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow the construction of a
71,  17-  new single-family dwelling, garage, driveway, landscaping and sprinkler system,
CD1  2024 and lānai area with swimming pool in Kahalu‘u, O‘ahu.
24-  5-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow the construction of a
95,  15-  new single-family dwelling with an attached garage and a swimming pool in
CD1  2024 Lanikai, O‘ahu.
24-  5-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow the construction of a
110, 15-  new single-family dwelling with an accessory dwelling unit, a swimming pool, and
CD1  2024 a garage in Kāne‘ohe, O‘ahu.
24-  6-5- Granting a special management area major permit and shoreline setback variance
124, 2024 to allow for improvements to the Waikīkī Aquarium wastewater system at 2777
CD1       Kalākaua Avenue, Waikīkī, O‘ahu.
 
Res. No. Date Description
Res. Date Description
No.
24-  6-5- Granting a special management area major permit and shoreline setback variance
124, 2024 to allow for improvements to the Waikīkī Aquarium wastewater system at 2777
CD1       Kalākaua Avenue, Waikīkī, O‘ahu.
24-  7-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow the construction of a
142, 10-  new single-family dwelling with an attached carport and lānai in Paumalū,
CD1  2024 O‘ahu.
24-  7-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction
152, 10-  of a new single-family dwelling and an accessory dwelling unit with an
CD1  2024 attached two-car garage and driveway, swimming pool and spa, individual
          wastewater system, and irrigation system in Waialua, O‘ahu.
24-  8-7- Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction
154, 2024 of a new two-story single-family dwelling and other improvements in Diamond
CD1       Head, O‘ahu.
          Granting an “after-the-fact” special management area major permit for
24-  8-7- unauthorized modifications to an existing single-family dwelling, including
155, 2024 two new wood upper decks connected by stairs, a new roof-top deck with bedroom
CD1       extension below, renovation of a lower wood deck, and expansion of a swimming
          pool and spa in Maunalua, O‘ahu.
24-  8-7- Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction
156, 2024 of a new single-family dwelling with a pool, spa, and pool house in Lanikai,
CD1       O‘ahu.
24-       Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction
182, 8-7- of a new single-family dwelling, including two lānais, detached garage and
CD1  2024 covered parking area, swimming pool with deck and pool pavilion, and retaining
          walls in Maunalua, O‘ahu.
24-  10-  Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction
208, 9-   of a new two-story structure with a primary dwelling unit on the second floor,
CD1  2024 attached accessory dwelling unit on the ground floor, carport, and fence in
          Hau‘ula, O‘ahu.
24-  10-  Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction
219, 9-   of a new single-family dwelling with lānais, an attached garage, and other
CD1  2024 improvements in Kahuku, O‘ahu.
24-  10-  Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction
225, 9-   of a new single-family dwelling detached dwelling with attached garage, and
CD1  2024 the construction of a new second floor addition and carport for an existing
          single-family detached dwelling in ‘Ewa Beach, O‘ahu.
24-  10-  Denying a special management area major permit and shoreline setback variance
226  9-   to allow the expansion and fortification of a nonconforming concrete seawall
     2024 in Lanikai, O‘ahu.
24-  10-  Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction
231, 9-   of a new single-family dwelling with an attached garage in Wailupe Peninsula,
CD1  2024 O‘ahu.
24-  11-  Granting a special management area major permit to allow the construction of a
250, 7-   new single-family dwelling with an attached garage and other improvements in
CD1  2024 Wai‘alae, O‘ahu.
24-  12-  Granting a special management area major permit to allow the construction of a
251, 11-  new single-family dwelling with an accessory dwelling unit and other
CD1  2024 improvements in Mākaha, O‘ahu.
24-  12-  Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction
255, 11-  of improvements for the Waimānalo Beach Park in Waimānalo, O‘ahu.
CD1  2024
     12-  Granting a special management area major permit to allow the construction of a
24-  11-  new single-family dwelling unit and other improvements, and denying a
256  2024 shoreline setback variance for structures and activities in the shoreline
          setback area at Tax Map Key 3-9-002: 031 in Hawai‘i Kai, O‘ahu.
24-  12-  Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction
258, 11-  of a new single-family dwelling with an attached garage, a swimming pool, an
CD1  2024 accessory dwelling unit, and other improvements in Mākaha, O‘ahu.
25-  12-  Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction
266, 11-  of a new single-family dwelling with a garage, a swimming pool, and other
CD1  2024 improvements in Māi‘ili, O‘ahu.
24-  12-  Granting a special management area (SMA) major permit to allow for upgrades
277, 11-  and improvements to the secondary spill containment and storm water management
CD1  2024 system at the Sand Island bulk jet fuel storage facility in Kalihi-Kai, O‘ahu.
25-  1-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the development
23,  29-  of an eight-story multi-unit affordable rental housing project in ‘Aiea,
CD1  2025 O‘ahu.
25-  4-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction
24,  16-  of a two new single-unit dwellings with attached garages in Lā‘ie, O‘ahu.
CD1  2025
25-  2-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction
39,  26-  of certain phased improvements in Waimea Valley in Hale‘iwa, O‘ahu.
CD1  2025
25-  3-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction
49,  19-  of two new single-unit dwellings with attached garages and a carport,
CD1  2025 retaining walls, and an individual wastewater system in He‘eia, O‘ahu.
     4-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow the construction of a
25-  16-  new single-family dwelling, after-the-fact posting of a second single-family
68   2025 dwelling, installation of an individual wastewater system, and construction of
          perimeter fencing and gates in Pūpūkea-Paumalū, O‘ahu.
25-  4-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow the construction of
78   16-  physical improvements and the implementation of a strategic management plan at
     2025 the Ka‘iwa Ridge Trail in Lanikai, O‘ahu.
25-  4-   Granting an after-the-fact special management area major permit to allow for
80,  16-  the retention of a previously constructed new single-unit dwelling with an
CD1  2025 attached garage, pool, pool cabana, pond, driveway, and other improvements in
          Lanikai, O‘ahu.
25-  4-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow Improvements to the
91,  16-  Hilton Hawaiian Village Planned Development-Resort Master Plan area, including
CD1  2025 the construction of a new hotel tower, in Waikīkī, O‘ahu.
25-  4-   Approving a conceptual plan for a planned development-resort project to modify
92,  16-  the boundaries of the Hilton Hawaiian Village Master Plan area, and allow for
CD1  2025 certain improvements, including the construction of a new hotel tower, in
          Waikīkī, O‘ahu.
25-  4-   Amending Resolution 22-61, CD1, as amended by minor modification 2024/MOD-50,
93,  16-  to extend the deadline to obtain a development permit for a single-family
CD1  2025 dwelling, detached garage, gym, swimming pool, and other improvements in
          Kāhala, O‘ahu.
25-  4-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction
95,  16-  of a new single-family dwelling with a detached garage, pool, pool lounge,
CD1  2025 pool cabana, concrete masonry unit walls, and rolling gate in Kailua, O‘ahu.
25-  5-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the construction
96,  14-  of a new single-unit dwelling with an attached garage, paved driveway,
CD1  2025 perimeter concrete rubble masonry walls, and front gate; and the installation
          of an individual wastewater system in Pūpūkea, O‘ahu.
25-  5-   Granting a special management area major permit to allow for improvements to
108, 14-  the Waikīkī Aquarium supply water intake system at 2777 Kalākaua Avenue in
CD1  2025 Waikīkī, O‘ahu.
          Granting a special management area major permit to allow for alterations and
25-  6-4- additions to an existing single-unit dwelling, including a new attached
120, 2025 garage, front gate, and shade structure; replacement of an existing driveway;
CD1       relocation of an existing swimming pool; decommission of an existing sand
          volleyball court; and landscaping improvements in Kailua, O‘ahu.
25-  6-4- Granting a special management area major permit to allow for the demolition of
144, 2025 an existing single-unit dwelling, and the construction of a new single-unit
CD1       dwelling with an attached garage and swimming pool in Lā‘ie, O‘ahu.
           
 
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 25, Appendix 25-1)
APPENDIX 25-2: SPECIAL MANAGEMENT AREA MAPS*
Editor’s note:
   * The Special Management Area maps were initially adopted in Ord. 84-4 and
adopted in amended form in Ord. 85-105.
 
Ord. No. Approval Date
                       Exhibit A (amending portions of the special management
89-110   8-15-1989     area map for Koolaupoko by changing the mauka boundary
                       of the special management area to include Kaiwa Ridge,
                       Lanikai). CCL
                       Exhibit A (amending portions of the boundaries of the
94-63    9-15-1994     special management area map for Ewa to recognize the
                       currently proposed configuration of the Ewa Marina
                       community). DLU (Amended by Ord. 07-34)
                       Exhibit A (amending portions of the boundaries of the
07-34    7-20-2007     special management area map for Ewa to conform the SMA
                       boundary to the current configuration of the Hoakalei
                       Marina (Ewa Marina). DPP (Amends Ord. 94-63)
                       Exhibit A (amending portions of the boundaries of the
                       special management area map for Ewa to reflect the
16-28    10-21-2016    proposed development of an enclosed lagoon rather than a
                       marina with direct access to the Pacific Ocean). DPP
                       (Amends Ord. 07-34)
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 25, Appendix 25-2)
CHAPTER 26: SHORELINE SETBACKS
Article
   
1.   Shoreline Setbacks
ARTICLE 1: SHORELINE SETBACKS
Sections
   
26-1.1   Authority
   
26-1.2   Purpose and intent
   
26-1.3   Definitions
   
26-1.4   Establishment of the shoreline setback line
   
26-1.5   Prohibitions within the shoreline setback area
   
26-1.6   Nonconforming structures
   
26-1.7   Subdivision actions
   
26-1.8   Criteria for granting a shoreline setback variance
   
26-1.9   Conditions on shoreline setback variances
   
26-1.10   Authority to act on shoreline setback variance applications
   
26-1.11   Public hearings
   
26-1.12   Application review and processing fees
   
26-1.13   Civil fines
   
26-1.14   Enforcement
   
26-1.15   Illegal shore protection structures
   
26-1.16   Rules
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 23-3 does not affect any shoreline setback variances that have been
approved prior to March 9, 2023.
§ 26-1.1 Authority.
   Pursuant to the authority conferred by HRS Chapter 205A, the standards and
procedures contained in this chapter are hereby established and shall apply to
all lands within the shoreline setback area of the city.
(1990 Code, Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.1) (Added by Ord. 92-34) (Am. Ord. 23-3)
§ 26-1.2 Purpose and intent.
(a)   It is a primary policy of the city to:
(1)   Reduce exposure to coastal hazards and increase the resilience of the
community;
(2)   Protect and preserve the natural shoreline, coastal zone environments,
and associated ecosystems, especially sandy beaches, coastal dunes, wetlands,
and reefs;
(3)   Protect and preserve public pedestrian access laterally along the
shoreline and to the sea;
(4)   Maintain, protect, and preserve open space and coastal scenic resources;
and
(5)   Prohibit shoreline hardening unless necessary for coastal restoration or
where it would result in a clear public benefit.
(b)   To carry out these policies and to comply with the mandate stated in HRS
Chapter 205A, it is the specific purpose of this chapter to establish standards
and authorize the department of planning and permitting to adopt rules pursuant
to HRS Chapter 91 which generally prohibit within the shoreline setback area
any structure or activity that may adversely affect beach processes, public
access along the shoreline, or shoreline open space.
(c)   Finally, it is the purpose of this chapter to name the director of
planning and permitting as the council’s designee to exercise certain powers
and functions granted, and duties imposed, pursuant to HRS Chapter 205A, Part
III.
(1990 Code, Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.2) (Added by Ord. 92-34) (Am. Ord. 23-3)
§ 26-1.3 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Activity. Any action relating to construction, reconstruction, repair,
improvement, grubbing, grading, or stockpiling.
Annual Coastal Erosion Rate. The average annual rate of coastal erosion
applicable to each zoning lot as determined by historical analysis and shown on
the Hawaii Shoreline Study web map as of March 9, 2023, and as thereafter
updated by the director by rule to reflect updated data in the Hawaii Shoreline
Study web map.
Applicant. Any individual, organization, partnership, firm, association, trust,
estate, or corporation, and any agency of the federal, the State, or county
government.
Beach. A coastal landform primarily composed of sand from eroded rock, coral,
or shell material, or any combination thereof, established and shaped by wave
action and tidal processes. A beach includes sand deposits in nearshore
submerged areas, sand dunes, and upland beach deposits landward of the
shoreline that provide benefits for public use and recreation, coastal
ecosystems, and as a natural buffer against coastal hazards.
Beach Processes. Natural sand movement from wave, current, or wind action,
including erosion or accretion of sand.
Buildable Area. That portion of a zoning lot excluding the shoreline setback
area, required yards, street setbacks, stream or wetland setbacks, easements,
and flag lot stems.
Coastal Accretion. A seaward trend in shoreline movement.
Coastal Dune. One of possibly several continuous or nearly continuous mounds or
ridges of unconsolidated sand contiguous and parallel to the beach, situated so
that it may provide some form of protection from wave run-up and be accessible
to storm waves and seasonal high waves for release to the beach or offshore
waters.
Coastal Erosion. A landward trend in shoreline movement.
Coastal Hazards. Natural processes that place people, property, or the
environment at risk for injury or damage, including but not limited to tsunami,
hurricane, wind, wave, storm surges, high tide, flooding, erosion, sea level
rise, subsidence, or point and nonpoint source pollution.
Department. The department of planning and permitting, which agency shall act
as the county planning department under applicable HRS sections.
Director. The director of planning and permitting.
Dwelling Unit. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1. For the purposes of this chapter, dwelling units include farm
dwellings, ohana units, accessory dwelling units, and caretaker units.
Earth Material. Any sand, coral or coral rubble, rocks, soil, fill, or marine
deposits.
Excavation or Cut. Any act by which earth material is cut into, dug, or moved,
and any condition resulting therefrom.
Fill. Any act by which earth material is placed or deposited by artificial
means, and any condition resulting therefrom.
Grading. Any excavation or fill, or any combination thereof.
Grubbing. Any act by which vegetation, including trees, shrubs, or other flora,
is dislodged or uprooted from the surface of the ground.
Hawaii Sea Level Rise Viewer. The interactive viewer prepared by the Pacific
Islands Ocean Observing System through coordination with the Hawaii Sea Grant
Program and the State department of land and natural resources to support the
Hawaii Sea Level Rise Vulnerability and Adaptation Report.
Hawaii Sea Level Rise Vulnerability and Adaptation Report. The 2017 report
prepared by Tetra Tech, Inc. and the State department of land and natural
resources, office of conservation and coastal lands, and adopted by the Hawaii
climate change mitigation and adaptation commission.
Hawaii Shoreline Study. The coastal erosion data compiled by the coastal
geology group in the school of ocean and earth science and technology at the
University of Hawaii.
Hawaii Shoreline Study Web Map. The map created by the coastal geology group in
the school of ocean and earth science and technology at the University of
Hawaii to visualize and share data from the Hawaii Shoreline Study.
Landscaping. The modification of landscape or soils for an aesthetic or
functional purpose, including but not limited to planting of vegetation. It
does not include plants or hedges that may act as a shoreline hardening
barrier.
Makai. Seaward or in a seaward direction toward the ocean.
Mauka. Landward or in a landward direction from the ocean.
Minor Shoreline Structure. A structure authorized to be located in the
shoreline setback area through an approved minor shoreline structure permit
that does not adversely affect beach processes, artificially fix the shoreline,
interfere with public access or views to and along the shoreline, impede the
natural processes or  movement of the shoreline or sand dunes, alter the grade
of the shoreline setback area, or endanger public health, safety, or welfare.
Nonconforming Structure. A structure or portion of a structure that was
previously lawful but is currently located within the shoreline setback area as
a result of subsequent beach erosion, or as a result of changes in the law
relating to the shoreline setback area.
Person. Any individual, organization, partnership, firm, association, trust,
estate, public or private corporation, the State or any of its political
subdivisions, or any other legal entity.
Practicable Alternative. An alternative to the proposed project that is
available and achievable, taking into consideration existing technology and
logistics, which would accomplish the basic purpose of the project while
avoiding or decreasing adverse impacts on the shoreline setback area.
Public Interest. Principally benefitting the general public by promoting
natural beach processes, expanding public access to the shoreline, enhancing
public views, supporting public health, safety, and welfare, and prioritizing
the welfare of the public over the welfare of an individual or individual
household.
Reconstruction. Rebuilding a lawfully established structure when a licensed
professional engineer or architect has valued the cost of the reconstruction at
50 percent or more of the current replacement cost of the structure, or if
significant portions of the structure are proposed for replacement, including
exterior walls, support beams, floors, ceilings, and the foundation.
Repair. Renovating or fixing ordinary damage to a structure if a licensed
professional engineer or architect values the cost of the work at less than 50
percent of the current replacement cost of the structure, except as provided in
§
26-1.6(a) for the repair or alteration of nonconforming structures. Repairs do
not involve enlarging, adding to, or expanding a structure; increasing the size
or degree of nonconformity of a structure; or intensifying the use of a
structure or its impact on coastal processes. Repairs do not involve
substantial improvements to a structure, like-for-like replacement of
structural materials, or reconstruction.
Sea Level Rise Exposure Area. The mapped zone on the Hawaii Sea Level Rise
Viewer, or its successor, representing the aggregate of the following coastal
hazard layers: passive flooding (still water high tide flooding), annual high
wave flooding (overwash during the largest wave events of the year), and
coastal erosion.
Shoreline. The upper reaches of the wash of the waves, other than storm and
seismic waves, at high tide during the season of the year in which the highest
wash of the waves occurs, usually evidenced by the edge of vegetation growth,
or the upper limit of debris left by the wash of the waves.
Shoreline Hardening. The process of fortifying the shoreline or shoreline
setback area with structures or landscaping, including but not limited to
seawalls, revetments, the placement of loose rocks and boulders, geotextile
erosion abatement measures, and the planting, watering, and maintenance of
landscaping features like naupaka where it will interfere with the natural
beach processes.
Shoreline Lot. A zoning lot of record, any portion of which lies within the
shoreline setback area, or if no certified shoreline survey exists, any portion
of which lies within 130 feet of the natural vegetation line or debris line. A
zoning lot may be determined to be a shoreline lot notwithstanding the
existence of a second zoning lot or parcel situated between the first zoning
lot and the shoreline.
Shoreline Setback Area. All of the land area between the shoreline and the
shoreline setback line.
Shoreline Setback Line. That line established by this chapter that runs mauka
from and parallel to the certified shoreline at the horizontal plane.
Shoreline Survey. A survey map rendered by a registered land surveyor for the
purpose of determining the location of the shoreline, in accordance with
applicable Hawaii Administrative Rules. A shoreline survey is considered a
certified shoreline survey when the location of the regulatory shoreline has
been determined by the State board of land and natural resources or the State
surveyor in accordance with HRS § 205A-42, or its successor, and the rules
adopted pursuant thereto.
Stockpiling. The temporary open storage of materials, including earth
materials.
Structure. Any portion of any building, pavement, road, pipe, flume, utility
line, fence, groin, wall, or revetment; or anything constructed or erected with
a fixed location at or under the ground, or requiring a fixed location on or
under the ground, or attached to something having or requiring a fixed location
on or below the ground.
(1990 Code, Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.3) (Added by Ord. 92-34) (Am. Ord. 23-3)
Editor’s note:
   “March 9, 2023” is substituted for “the effective date of this ordinance.”
§ 26-1.4 Establishment of the shoreline setback line.
(a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the shoreline setback line
is established 40 feet mauka from the certified shoreline until July 1, 2024,
after which the shoreline setback line will be established at the following
distances mauka from the certified shoreline:
(1)   Sixty feet plus 70 times the annual coastal erosion rate, up to a maximum
setback of 130 feet, on zoning lots within all development plan and sustainable
communities plan areas except the Primary Urban Center Development Plan area;
provided that any property owner who believes the annual erosion rate
applicable to a specific zoning lot does not accurately represent the actual
erosion rate for that zoning lot may submit an application to the director
requesting approval of an alternative coastal erosion rate methodology and data
for the zoning lot in accordance with the procedures and informational
requirements set forth in the department’s rules implementing this chapter.
(2)   Sixty feet on zoning lots within the Primary Urban Center Development
Plan area.
(3)   Sixty feet on zoning lots where historical erosion data has not been
collected for the Hawaii shoreline study, or its successor, where the
historical erosion data show coastal accretion, or where the historical erosion
data show an annual coastal erosion rate of zero.
(b)   Where the buildable area of a zoning lot is reduced to less than 1,500
square feet, the shoreline setback line may be adjusted to allow a minimum
buildable area of 1,500 square feet, subject to review and confirmation by the
director; provided that:
(1)   The adjusted shoreline setback line may not be reduced to less than 40
feet from the certified shoreline;
(2)   The shoreline setback line may only be reduced to the minimum extent
required to permit construction and repair within the reduced buildable area,
including the minimum necessary area for wastewater treatment structures,
required parking spaces, and other accessory structures;
(3)   The proposed structure or activity is positioned in the farthest mauka
location on the zoning lot;
(4)   The buildable area is measured as a standard polygon with no angle
exceeding 120 degrees;
(5)   On zoning lots that exceed 60 feet in width, the side yards may be
increased so that the buildable area depth is 30 feet;
(6)   The front yard may be increased if the department of health requires
wastewater treatment to be located within the front yard setback area; provided
that the required front yard for the underlying zoning district may not be
increased by more than 10 feet;
(7)   The proposal does not involve new shoreline hardening;
(8)   If a proposed structure is within a special flood hazard area, as defined
in
Chapter 21A, structural design and construction must be resilient to existing
and increasing flood hazards with a finished lowest floor elevation a minimum
of 3 feet above the flood insurance rate map base flood elevation; and
(9)   If a proposed structure is outside of the special flood hazard area but
within the sea level rise exposure area under the scenario envisioning 3.2 feet
of sea level rise by the year 2100, the lowest floor of the structure must be a
minimum of 3 feet above the highest adjacent grade.
(c)   Once a shoreline has been certified and a shoreline setback line has been
established, no shoreline setback line may be established farther seaward as
the result of a subsequent certified shoreline survey.
(d)   A shoreline setback line determination approved by the director for
zoning lots with erosion-rate-based setbacks may be issued at a property
owner’s request prior to the issuance of any land use, development, or building
permits, or any subdivision actions.
(e)   Prior to the commencement of grubbing, grading, or construction
activities, the shoreline and shoreline setback line must be identified on the
ground and posted with markers, posts, or other appropriate reference marks by
a surveyor licensed in the State.
(1990 Code, Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.4) (Added by Ord. 92-34) (Am. Ord. 23-3)
Editor’s note:
   Any application for a shoreline setback variance submitted to the Director
of Planning and Permitting and accepted as complete prior to July 1, 2024, is
not affected by the determination of the shoreline setback line under § 26-1.4
or any successor ordinance.
§ 26-1.5 Prohibitions within the shoreline setback area.
(a)   The mining or taking of any earth material from the shoreline setback
area is prohibited, with the following exceptions:
(1)   The inadvertent taking from the shoreline setback area of materials, such
as those inadvertently carried away on the body, and on clothes, toys,
recreational equipment, and bags;
(2)   Where the mining or taking is authorized by a shoreline setback variance
granted pursuant to this chapter;
(3)   The clearing of materials from existing drainage pipes, canals, and the
mouths of streams, including clearing for purposes allowed under HRS § 46-11.5;
provided that sand removed must be placed on adjacent areas unless the
placement would result in significant turbidity, or unsanitary or undesirable
conditions;
(4)   The clearing of the shoreline setback area for State or city maintenance
purposes, including clearing for purposes under HRS § 46-12; provided that sand
removed must be placed on adjacent areas, unless the placement would result in
significant turbidity, or unsanitary or undesirable conditions;
(5)   The taking of driftwood, shells, beach glass, glass floats, or seaweed:
(6)   The exercise of traditional cultural practices as authorized by law or as
permitted by the department pursuant to Article XII, Section 7, of the Hawaii
State Constitution; or
(7)   For the response to a public emergency or a State or local disaster.
(b)   Structures and activities are prohibited within the shoreline setback
area, with the following exceptions:
(1)   Minor structures and activities permitted under rules adopted by the
department that will not, within the lifetime of the structure or duration of
the activity, affect beach processes or artificially fix the shoreline and will
not interfere with public access, public views, or open space along the
shoreline. If, due to beach erosion or other cause, the director determines
that a minor structure permitted under this section may affect beach processes
or public access, or has become located seaward of the shoreline, the director
or other governmental agency having jurisdiction may order its removal;
(2)   Minor structures and activities necessary for or ancillary to
continuation, but not expansion, of agriculture or aquaculture in the shoreline
setback area on June 16, 1989; provided that traditional Hawaiian fishpond
systems may be restored or expanded as allowed under State law;
(3)   A structure or activity that is necessary for or ancillary to a public
shoreline-dependent facility or improvement, including but not limited to
boating, maritime, aviation, public infrastructure, recreation-related, or
lifeguard facilities; provided that the structure or activity will not
interfere with beach processes or public beach access;
(4)   Maintenance, repair, reconstruction, and minor additions to or
alterations of lawfully established structures included in subdivision (3);
provided that privately owned boating, maritime, or ocean sports recreational
facilities are specifically not included in this exception;
(5)   Nonconforming structures or structures that have received a shoreline
setback variance;
(6)   Construction, installation, maintenance, repair, and replacement of
public warning or signal devices and sirens; or
(7)   Beach and sand dune restoration and maintenance activities permitted by
the State department of land and natural resources.
(1990 Code, Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.5) (Added by Ord. 92-34; Am. Ord. 10-32)
(Am. Ord. 23-3)
§ 26-1.6 Nonconforming structures.
(a)   A nonconforming structure may be repaired or altered; provided that the
repairs or alterations do not increase or intensify the nonconformity, and the
cumulative valuation of the repairs or alterations:
(1)   Does not exceed 50 percent of the replacement cost over a 10-year period
of that portion of the structure that is nonconforming and located 40 feet or
less from the certified shoreline; or
(2)   Does not exceed 75 percent of the replacement cost over a 10-year period
of that portion of the structure that is nonconforming and located more than 40
feet from the certified shoreline but makai of the shoreline setback line.
(b)   If a nonconforming structure is destroyed by any means to an extent of
more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it may
not be reconstructed except in conformity with this chapter and the shoreline
setback rules, as may be amended or superseded.
(c)   Reconstruction of a nonconforming structure within the shoreline setback
area requires a shoreline setback variance.
(1990 Code, Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.6) (Added by Ord. 92-34) (Am. Ord. 23-3)
§ 26-1.7 Subdivision actions.
(a)   Except as provided in this chapter, no new subdivision action, including
the subdivision or consolidation of land, involving an existing shoreline lot
and the creation of new zoning lots may be approved, unless each new lot:
(1)   Can accommodate a shoreline setback line established at 60 feet mauka
from the certified shoreline until July 1, 2024, after which each newly created
shoreline zoning lot must accommodate a shoreline setback line established at
130 feet mauka from the certified shoreline; provided that an exception may be
granted to subdivision actions involving the subdivision or consolidation of
land only for the purpose of creating easements or adjusting zoning lot lines
that will not result in any increase in the number of permitted dwelling units,
nonresidential structures, or zoning lots; and
(2)   Has a buildable area adequate to accommodate the proposed structures or
activities, including accessory uses and structures, such as parking.
Accreted lands obtained from the State pursuant to HRS § 501-33 may not be
included as part of the land area when calculating the zoning lot size
available for subdivision.
(b)   Subdivision of existing shoreline lots for the purpose of widening
roadways designated on the public infrastructure maps adopted pursuant to
Chapter 4, Article 8, may be permitted upon the review and approval of the
director.
(c)   New residential zoning lots may not be approved, unless each new lot:
(1)   Has a buildable area of at least 5,000 square feet;
(2)   Has a buildable area outside of the shoreline setback area with a minimum
depth and width of at least 50 feet;
(3)   Is subdivided perpendicular to the shoreline to create deep lots that
maximize opportunities to place structures far from the shoreline; and
(4)   Is not a flag lot.
(1990 Code, Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.7) (Added by Ord. 92-34; Am. Ord. 10-32)
(Am. Ord. 23-3)
Editor’s note:
   Any application for a subdivision action submitted to the Director of
Planning and Permitting and accepted as complete prior to July 1, 2024, is not
affected by the determination of the shoreline setback line for subdivision
actions involving an existing shoreline zoning lot and the creation of new
zoning lots under § 26-1.7(a)(1) or any successor ordinance.
§ 26-1.8 Criteria for granting a shoreline setback variance.
(a)   The director, as provided in §
26-1.10, may grant a shoreline setback variance upon finding that, based upon
the record presented, the proposed structure or activity is necessary for or
ancillary to:
(1)   Cultivation of crops;
(2)   Aquaculture;
(3)   Landscaping; provided that the proposed structure or activity will not
adversely affect beach processes and will not artificially fix the shoreline;
or
(4)   Moving of sand from one location seaward of the shoreline to another
location seaward of the shoreline; provided that the director also finds that
the moving of sand will not adversely affect beach processes, will not diminish
the size of a public beach and will be necessary to stabilize an eroding
shoreline.
(b)   The director may also grant a shoreline setback variance upon finding
that, based upon the record presented, the proposed structure or activity meets
one of the following standards:
(1)   Shoreline-dependent facility standard. A shoreline setback variance may
be granted for a structure or activity that is necessary for or ancillary to a
shoreline-dependent facility or improvement, including but not limited to
public infrastructure, drainage facilities, and boating, maritime, or water
sport recreational facilities; provided that the proposal is the practicable
alternative that best conforms to the purpose of the shoreline setback rules.
(2)   Public interest standard. A shoreline setback variance may be granted for
a structure or activity that is necessary for or ancillary to facilities or
improvements by a public agency or public utility regulated under HRS Chapter
269, or necessary for or ancillary to private facilities or improvements that
are clearly in the public interest; provided that the proposal is the
practicable alternative that best conforms to the purpose of this chapter and
the shoreline setback rules.
(3)   Hardship standard.
(A)   A shoreline setback variance may be granted for a structure or activity
if hardship will result to the applicant if the facilities or improvements are
not allowed within the shoreline setback area.
(B)   For the purposes of this subsection, hardship may be found only if all of
the following are met:
(i)   The structures will neither adversely affect beach processes nor
artificially fix the shoreline, and the applicant and landowner would be
deprived of reasonable use of the land if required to comply fully with this
chapter and the shoreline setback rules;
(ii)   The applicant’s proposal is due to unique circumstances, does not draw
into question the reasonableness of this chapter and the shoreline setback
rules, is consistent and compatible with surrounding land uses, and is unlikely
to adversely impact neighboring properties; and
(iii)   The proposal is the practicable alternative that best conforms to the
purpose of this chapter and the shoreline setback rules. The analysis of the
practicable alternatives must include a thorough assessment of potential
impacts and consideration of mitigation measures to avoid or minimize impacts,
including but not limited to the relocation or reconfiguration of structures
and the restoration of coastal resources.
(C)   A shoreline setback variance to artificially fix the shoreline may not be
granted in areas with sandy beaches or dunes, or where artificially fixing the
shoreline may interfere with existing recreational and waterline activities or
natural sand and sediment replenishment that occur as part of beach processes,
unless the granting of the shoreline setback variance is clearly demonstrated
to be in the public interest.
(D)   Before granting a shoreline setback variance on the basis of hardship,
the director must determine that the applicant’s proposal is a reasonable use
of the land. Because of the dynamic nature of the shoreline environment,
inappropriate development may easily pose a risk to individuals or to the
public health and safety. For this reason, the determination of the
reasonableness of the use of land should properly consider factors such as
shoreline conditions, erosion, surf and flood conditions, and the geography of
the zoning lot.
(E)   Hardship may not be determined as a result of a zone change, plan review
use approval, subdivision approval, cluster housing approval, planned
development housing approval, conditional use permit, or any other
discretionary land use permit granted after June 16, 1989.
(1990 Code, Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.8) (Added by Ord. 92-34; Am. Ord. 10-32)
(Am. Ord. 23-3)
§ 26-1.9 Conditions on shoreline setback variances.
(a)   No shoreline setbacak variance may be granted unless appropriate
conditions are imposed:
(1)   To maintain safe access to and along the shoreline or adequately
compensate for its loss;
(2)   To minimize risk of adverse impacts to coastal, beach, and marine
processes;
(3)   To minimize risk of existing legal or proposed structures falling and
becoming loose rocks, sharp or otherwise dangerous debris, or rubble on public
property; and
(4)   To minimize adverse impacts on public views to, from, and along the
shoreline.
(b)   The director may condition the approval of a shoreline setback variance
for structures, activities, and uses within the shoreline setback area on the
property being ineligible for subsequent shoreline setback variances to
construct shoreline hardening within the shoreline setback area, and stipulate
that hardship may not be determined as a result of the prior shoreline setback
variance approval.
(c)   The city is not liable for any losses, liabilities, claims, or demands
arising out of or resulting from damages to structures or property within the
shoreline setback area approved by a shoreline setback variance.
(1990 Code, Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.9) (Added by Ord. 92-34) (Am. Ord. 23-3)
§ 26-1.10 Authority to act on shoreline setback variance applications.
(a)   The director shall act upon all shoreline setback variance applications
according to the criteria set forth in this chapter.
(b)   The applicant shall give reasonable notice of an application for a
shoreline setback variance under this chapter to abutting property owners,
affected neighborhood boards and community associations, and persons that have
requested receipt of a notice.
(1990 Code, Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.10) (Added by Ord. 92-34) (Am. Ord. 23-3)
§ 26-1.11 Public hearings.
(a)   The director shall hold a public hearing on each shoreline setback
variance application that has been accepted as complete.
(b)   The director shall give reasonable notice of the public hearing for a
shoreline setback variance application to the applicant, affected neighborhood
boards and community associations, and persons that have requested notice of
the public hearing. The applicant must mail notices to neighboring property
owners within 300 feet of the zoning lot, and persons that have requested
receipt of a notice; provided that if a neighboring property is a condominium
project, notice to the association of apartment owners of the condominium
project will serve as notice to the owners of the units in the project.
(1990 Code, Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.11) (Added by Ord. 92-34) (Am. Ord. 23-3)
§ 26-1.12 Application review and processing fees.
(a)   The following table sets forth application review and processing fees,
which are not refundable. The review fees cover the costs of determining
whether an application is complete or incomplete.
 
Application Type           Review Fee Processing Fee       TOTAL FEE
Shoreline Setback Variance $400       $2,000               $2,400
Environmental Assessment   $200       $1,000               $1,200
Environmental Impact       $400       $2,000               $2,400
Statement
Minor Shoreline Structure  $100       $500                 $600
Permit
Shoreline Setback Line     No fee     $600 per tax map key $600 per tax map key
Determination
Confirmation of Shoreline
Structure Nonconforming    No fee     $600 per tax map key $600 per tax map key
Status
 
(b)   When an application is submitted, it must include all required fees. The
nonrefundable application review fee will immediately be applied to the review
of the application. If the application is accepted for processing, the
processing fee will be applied to the application. If the application is
determined to be incomplete, the processing fee will be returned.
(c)   Review fees and processing fees will be doubled for permits and
environmental disclosure documents submitted:
(1)   After a notice of violation has been issued for the activity or
construction; or
(2)   After the proposed work is completed.
(d)   Fees may be waived for city projects.
(1990 Code, Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.12) (Added by Ord. 92-34; Am. Ords. 03-12,
13-16, 14-4, 20-18, 23-3)
§ 26-1.13 Civil fines.
(a)   Any person violating this chapter, any rule adopted pursuant thereto, any
permit issued pursuant thereto, or any condition of a shoreline setback
variance will, upon notice issued pursuant to §
26-1.14, be deemed to have committed a civil violation and will be subject to
an initial civil fine not to exceed $100,000 per violation and a maximum daily
fine of $10,000 until the violation is corrected or a shoreline setback
variance is granted.
(b)   Any order to pay civil fines will not be stayed by the submittal of a
shoreline setback variance application after the applicant has initiated,
completed, or been cited for the activity.
(1990 Code, Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.13) (Added by Ord. 92-34) (Am. Ord. 23-3)
§ 26-1.14 Enforcement.
(a)   Issuance of notice of violation and order. If the director determines
that any person is violating this chapter, any rule adopted thereunder, any
permit issued pursuant thereto, or any condition of a shoreline setback
variance, the director may have the person served with a written notice of
violation and order in compliance with the agency’s administrative rules.
(1)   Contents of the notice of violation. The notice must include at least the
following information:
(A)   Date of notice;
(B)   The name and address of the person given notice;
(C)   The section number of the ordinance or rule that has been violated;
(D)   The nature of the violation; and
(E)   The location of the violation and the date and time that the violation
was discovered.
(2)   Contents of the order. The order may require the person to do any or all
of the following:
(A)   Cease and desist from the violation;
(B)   Correct the violation at the person’s own expense, which may include
removal of any structure and restoration of land to previous conditions;
(C)   Pay a civil fine not to exceed $100,000 in the manner, at the place, and
before the date specified in the order;
(D)   Pay a civil fine not to exceed $10,000 per day for each day in which the
violation persists, in the manner, at the place, and before the date specified
in the order; and
(E)   Appear before the director at a time and place specified in the order and
answer the charges specified in the notice of violation.
The order must advise the person that the order will become final 30 days after
the date of its service unless written request for a hearing is mailed or
delivered to the director prior to expiration of the 30-day period.
(b)   Effect of order-right to hearing. The order issued by the director under
this section will become final 30 days after the date of the service of the
order. The person in receipt of the notice may request a hearing before the
director. A request for a hearing will not stay any provision of the order.
The request for a hearing will be considered timely if a written request is
delivered or mailed and postmark dated to the director within the 30-day
period.
Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the director shall specify a time and
place for the person subject to the order to appear and be heard. The hearing
will be conducted by the director or the director’s designee in accordance with
HRS Chapter 91. Following the hearing, the director or the director’s designee
may affirm, modify, or rescind the order, as the director or the director’s
designee deems appropriate.
(c)   Judicial enforcement of order. The director may institute a civil action
in any court of competent jurisdiction for the enforcement of any order issued
pursuant to this section.
Where the civil action has been instituted to enforce the civil fine imposed by
an order, the director need only show that a notice of violation and order was
served, a hearing was held or the 30-day period during which a hearing may be
requested had expired without such a request, a civil fine was imposed, and the
fine imposed has not been paid.
The director may institute a civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction for injunctive relief to prevent violation of this chapter, any
rule adopted thereunder, any permit issued pursuant thereto, or any condition
of any shoreline setback variance in addition to any other remedy provided for
under this chapter.
(d)   Nonexclusiveness of remedies. The remedies provided in this chapter for
enforcement of this chapter, any rule adopted thereunder, any permit issued
pursuant thereto, or any condition of any shoreline setback variance will be in
addition to any other remedy as may be provided by law.
(e)   Appeal in accordance with statute. If any person is aggrieved by the
order issued by the director pursuant to this section, the person may appeal
the order in the manner provided in HRS Chapter 91; provided that no provision
of an order will be stayed on appeal, unless specifically ordered by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(1990 Code, Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.14) (Added by Ord. 92-34) (Am. Ord. 23-3)
§ 26-1.15 Illegal shore protection structures.
   Where the shoreline is affected by a structure that has not been authorized
pursuant to governmental agency permits required by law:
(1)   If any part of the structure is located within the current tax map
boundaries of a privately-owned parcel, then for purposes of enforcement of
this chapter, the structure will be construed as being located entirely within
the shoreline setback area; and
(2)   No building permit or grading permit will be granted on a shoreline lot
unless and until the illegal structure is removed or corrected.
(1990 Code, Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.15) (Added by Ord. 92-34) (Am. Ord. 23-3)
§ 26-1.16 Rules.
   The director shall adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 to implement this
chapter and HRS Chapter 205A, Part III. The rules:
(1)   May identify high-quality sandy beaches that should be preserved;
(2)   May include guidelines or prohibitions relating to the types of shore
protection structures that may or may not be permitted on high-quality beaches
and other beaches;
(3)   May, after the initial determination of the average annual rate of
coastal erosion on March 9, 2023*, update the determination of the average
annual rate of coastal erosion as necessary to reflect updated data in the
Hawaii Shoreline Study web map; and
(4)   Must set forth the procedures and informational requirements by which a
property owner may submit an application requesting approval of an alternative
coastal erosion rate methodology and data if the property owner believes the
annual erosion rate applicable to the zoning lot does accurately represent the
actual erosion rate for that zoning lot.
(1990 Code, Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.16) (Added by Ord. 92-34) (Am. Ord. 23-3)
Editor’s note:
   *“March 9, 2023” is substituted for “the effective date of this ordinance.”
CHAPTER 27: COMMUNITY FACILITIES DISTRICTS
Articles
   
1.   General Provisions
   
2.   Proceedings
   
3.   Special Tax
   
4.   Changes in Term of District, Authorized Special Improvement, and Special
Tax
   
5.   Early Termination of District
   
6.   Annexation of Territory
   
7.   Bonds
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections
   
27-1.1   Definitions
   
27-1.2   Provision of alternate method of financing special improvements
   
27-1.3   Superiority over conflicting provision of other ordinance
   
27-1.4   Limitation on challenges
   
27-1.5   Types of special improvements
   
27-1.6   Payment of existing assessments or debt service
   
27-1.7   Advances of funds, work, or property in-kind
   
27-1.8   Construction of chapter
   
27-1.9   Validity of proceedings
§ 27-1.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Bond Ordinance. An ordinance which authorizes the issuance of community
facilities district bonds.
Bonds. Community facilities district bonds (including refunding bonds) issued
pursuant to this chapter.
City Clerk. The city clerk of the City and County of Honolulu.
Community Facilities District or District. A district of land established by
the city pursuant to this chapter for financing special improvements.
Cost of a Special Improvement. Includes the following:
(1)   Cost of acquiring, constructing, installing, improving, or rehabilitating
a special improvement;
(2)   Cost of acquiring real property or right-of-way for a special
improvement;
(3)   Payment of water, sewer, or other utility connection fee necessary for a
special improvement;
(4)   Payment of a planning, architectural, engineering, inspection, legal,
financial, or other consultant fee for a special improvement;
(5)   Reimbursement of an advance of funds for acquiring, constructing,
installing, improving, or rehabilitating a special improvement or
administrative proceedings to establish a district;
(6)   Contribution to a reserve fund for the payment of debt service on bonds
issued for a special improvement;
(7)   Not more than two years’ worth of interest on bonds for a special
improvement; or
(8)   Cost of issuance of bonds for a special improvement, including but not
limited to payment of bond counsel or other legal fee, trustee fee, bond
insurance premium, or letter of credit or other credit enhancement cost.
Debt. Any binding obligation to repay a sum of money, including obligations in
the form of bonds, certificates of participation, long-term leases, or loans
from government agencies, banks, other financial institutions, private
businesses, or individuals.
Financing Special Improvements by a District or Financing Special Improvements.
Paying for the following:
(1)   The costs of special improvements through the special taxes levied within
a district or community facilities district bond proceeds; or
(2)   The debt service on community facilities district bonds, the proceeds of
which have been used to pay for special improvements.
Improvement Area. An area within a district designated in accordance with §
27-2.15.
Incidental Expense of a District. Includes the following:
(1)   Administrative expense of the city associated with the proceedings
undertaken pursuant to this chapter, collection of special taxes, or payment of
debt service on bonds; or
(2)   Any other expense incidental to the creation or operation of a district.
Landowner or Owner of Land. Is subject to the following:
(1)   The term means the owner of land as shown on the real property tax
assessment list, except as otherwise provided under subdivision (2) or (3);
(2)   The term means a lessee of land who is not shown as the owner on the
list, unless the fee simple owner files with the council either of the
following before the close of the public hearing on the establishment of a
district or annexation of land to an existing district, as applicable:
(A)   A written statement that the lease does not require the lessee to pay any
proposed special tax and a written undertaking by the owner to pay any special
tax and to refrain from imposing the obligation to pay any special tax upon any
successor lessee; or
(B)   A written waiver of any requirement in the lease that the lessee pay any
special tax and a written undertaking by the owner to pay any proposed special
tax and to refrain from imposing the obligation to pay any special tax upon any
successor lessee.
   If the fee simple owner files either with the council, the fee simple owner
shall be deemed the “landowner”; and
(3)   The term does not include an entity of the federal, State, or city
government. Such an entity shall have no right to petition under §
27-2.1, 27-2.7, 27-2.10, 27-4.3, or 27-5.3 or to protest under §
27-2.9, 27-4.8, 27-5.8, or 27-6.6. The entity and its land shall be disregarded
when computing the total number of landowners and amount of land eligible for
petition or protest purposes.
Each parcel of land shall be deemed to have one owner, even if owned by a
corporation, partnership, joint tenancy, tenancy by the entirety, tenancy in
common, or other group of persons.
Ordinance of Annexation. An ordinance which annexes additional land to a
district.
Ordinance of Consideration. An ordinance which changes the term of a district,
special improvements to be financed, or rate or method of apportionment of a
special tax or an ordinance, which levies a new special tax within an existing
district.
Ordinance of Early Termination. An ordinance which terminates a district before
the expiration of the term specified in the ordinance of formation.
Ordinance of Formation. An ordinance which establishes a district.
Resolution of Intention. A resolution, the adoption of which institutes
proceedings to establish a district.
Special Improvement. A special improvement referred to in §
27-1.5.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 1, § 34-1.1) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-1.2 Provision of alternate method of financing special improvements.
   This chapter is established pursuant to HRS § 46-80.1. The council may use
this chapter in addition to, in combination with, or instead of any other law
for or related to the creation of improvement districts, the levying,
assessment, and collection of special assessments, the financing of
improvements, the issuance of bonds, or other matters covered by this chapter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 1, § 34-1.2) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-1.3 Superiority over conflicting provision of other ordinance.
   When this chapter conflicts with any other provision of an ordinance, this
chapter shall prevail.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 1, § 34-1.3) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-1.4 Limitation on challenges.
   Pursuant to HRS § 46-80.1, no action or proceeding to question the validity
of or enjoin any ordinance, action, or proceeding undertaken pursuant to this
chapter (including the determination of the amount of any special tax levied
with respect to any property or the levy or assessment thereof) or any bonds
issued or to be issued under this chapter shall be maintained, unless begun
within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance, determination, levy,
assessment, or other act, as the case may be.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 1, § 34-1.4) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-1.5 Types of special improvements.
   A district may be established to finance the acquisition, planning, design,
construction, installation, improvement, or rehabilitation of any real property
or structure with a useful life estimated by the council to be five years or
longer. Special improvements may be physically located within or outside a
district and may benefit land within or outside the district.
   Special improvements which may be financed by a district include but are not
limited to the following:
(1)   Streets, roads, highways, bikeways, pedestrian malls, sidewalks, or
alleyways, including grading, paving, or otherwise improving the foregoing;
(2)   Public parking facilities;
(3)   Lighting systems, including traffic signals, for any public right-of-way;
(4)   Local park, recreation, child care, parkway, and open-space facilities;
(5)   Libraries, museums, and other cultural facilities;
(6)   The undergrounding of natural gas pipeline facilities, telephone lines,
facilities for the transmission or distribution of electrical energy, cable
television lines, and other utility facilities. The city may enter into an
agreement with a public utility to use those facilities to provide a particular
service and for the conveyance of those facilities to the public utility. If
the facilities are conveyed to the public utility, the agreement may provide
for a refund by the public utility to the district or improvement area thereof
for the cost of the facilities. Any reimbursement made to the district shall be
used to reduce the special tax levied within the district or improvement area
or construct or acquire additional special improvements within the district or
improvement area, as specified in the ordinance of formation. For the purpose
of this subdivision only, a cable television company shall be deemed a “public
utility”;
(7)   Water systems;
(8)   Police, criminal justice (including jails), fire suppression (including
fire stations), and paramedic facilities;
(9)   Wastewater, storm drainage, sewage removal or treatment, solid waste
disposal, and recycling or resource recovery systems or facilities;
(10)   Transit or transportation systems;
(11)   Telecommunications systems; and
(12)   Any other facilities which the city is authorized by law to contribute
revenue to or construct, own, maintain, or operate.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 1, § 34-1.5) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-1.6 Payment of existing assessments or debt service.
   The district may pay in full all amounts necessary to eliminate or reduce
any assessment liens, repay, or defease in whole or in part any indebtedness
secured by any tax, fee, charge, or assessment levied within a district, or pay
debt service on that indebtedness.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 1, § 34-1.6) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-1.7 Advances of funds, work, or property in-kind.
   After the formation of a district, the council may accept advances of funds,
work, or property in-kind from any source. The council may enter into an
agreement, by resolution, with the person or entity advancing the funds, work,
or property in-kind to repay all or a portion of the funds advanced or to
reimburse the person or entity for the value or cost, whichever is less, of the
work or property in-kind, as determined by the council, with or without
interest; provided that the proposal to repay the funds or reimburse the value
or cost of the work or property in-kind is included in the ordinance of
formation for the district. Any such agreement shall not constitute a debt or
liability of the city or be payable from sources other than the proceeds of the
special taxes levied or proceeds of bonds issued pursuant to this chapter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 1, § 34-1.7) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-1.8 Construction of chapter.
   This chapter shall be liberally construed to effectuate its purposes. No
error, irregularity, or informality and no neglect or omission of any officer
in any procedure taken under this chapter, which does not directly affect the
jurisdiction of the city to order the provision of a special improvement shall
void or invalidate such proceeding or any levy for the costs of such
improvement.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 1, § 34-1.8) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-1.9 Validity of proceedings.
   The failure of any person to receive a notice, resolution, ordinance, order,
or other matter shall not affect in any way the validity of any proceedings
taken under this chapter or prevent the council from proceeding with any
hearing so noticed or other action.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 1, § 34-1.9) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
ARTICLE 2: PROCEEDINGS
Sections
   
27-2.1   Institution of proceedings
   
27-2.2   Petition requesting institution of proceedings
   
27-2.3   Adoption of resolution of intention
   
27-2.4   Report on special improvements
   
27-2.5   Notice of public hearing on proposed district
   
27-2.6   Mailed notice of hearing
   
27-2.7   Waiver of hearing
   
27-2.8   Protests against establishment of district
   
27-2.9   Protest by more than 55 percent
   
27-2.10   Duration of hearing—Determination
   
27-2.11   Approval of ordinance of formation
   
27-2.12   District boundaries
   
27-2.13   District term
   
27-2.14   Financing of special improvements and payment of incidental expenses
identified in ordinance of formation
   
27-2.15   Designation of improvement area
   
27-2.16   Property owners’ election to perform work
§ 27-2.1 Institution of proceedings.
(a)   Proceedings for the establishment of a district may be instituted by the
council on its own initiative.
(b)   Proceedings for the establishment of a district shall be instituted by
the council after receipt by the city clerk of the following:
(1)   A petition requesting the institution of the proceedings signed by the
owners of at least 25 percent of the land in the proposed district; and
(2)   A fee which the council determines is necessary to compensate the city
for the costs of proceedings to establish the proposed district.
When required to institute proceedings after the receipt of a petition and fee,
the council shall do so at the first regular meeting for which notice of a
resolution of intention may be posted pursuant to HRS Chapter 92. The fee shall
be nonrefundable, even if the council does not establish the proposed district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.1) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-2.2 Petition requesting institution of proceedings.
   A petition requesting the institution of proceedings for the establishment
of a district shall include all of the following:
(1)   A request that the council institute proceedings to establish a district
pursuant to this chapter;
(2)   A description of the boundaries of the proposed district;
(3)   A description of the special improvements to be financed by the proposed
district; and
(4)   The signatures of the owners of land comprising at least the minimum
percentage required under §
27-2.1. If the council finds that the petition is signed by the owners of the
requisite percentage of land, the finding shall be final and conclusive.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.2) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-2.3 Adoption of resolution of intention.
   Proceedings for the establishment of a district shall be instituted by the
adoption of a resolution of intention to establish the district. The resolution
shall do all of the following:
(1)   State that a district is proposed to be established under the terms of
this chapter;
(2)   State the name of the proposed district in substantially the following
form: “City and County of Honolulu Community Facilities District No. ______”.
One or more additional descriptive words may be used in the name of the
proposed district to indicate its geographic area;
(3)   State the term of the proposed district. The term shall be a specified
calendar period and shall not expire until all debt service on bonds and
incidental expenses related thereto are due to be fully paid;
(4)   Describe the boundaries of the proposed district. The boundaries may be
described by reference to a map on file in the office of the city clerk showing
the proposed district;
(5)   Identify the special improvements to be financed by the proposed
district. If the purchase of completed special improvements or the incurring of
incidental expenses is proposed, the resolution shall identify the improvements
or expenses, as the case may be;
(6)   Identify the incidental expenses to be paid from special taxes;
(7)   State that, except when funds are otherwise available, a special tax
sufficient to pay for the costs of the special improvements and incidental
expenses shall be annually levied within the proposed district. The resolution
shall describe the estimated rate and proposed method of apportionment of the
special tax in sufficient detail to allow each landowner within the proposed
district to estimate the maximum annual amount that the landowner will have to
pay;
(8)   Specify the principal amount of bonds proposed to be issued to finance
the special improvements;
(9)   Fix a time and place for a public hearing on the establishment of the
proposed district, which shall not be less than 30 or more than 60 days from
the adoption of the resolution of intention; and
(10)   Describe the protest procedure.
   If an improvement area is proposed to be established, the resolution of
intention shall also so state and describe the boundaries of the proposed
improvement area, the name proposed for the improvement area, the special
improvements proposed to be financed by the improvement area, and whether and
to what extent it is proposed that special taxes shall be levied in the
improvement area for purposes of financing such improvements.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.3) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-2.4 Report on special improvements.
   At the time of the adoption of the resolution of intention to establish a
district, the council shall direct the chief engineer to study the proposed
district. The council also shall direct the chief engineer to file with the
council a report on the study at least 10 days before the public hearing on the
proposed district. The report shall include but not be limited to an estimate
of the cost of providing the proposed special improvements. In preparing the
report, which may be general and preliminary and need not be based on detailed
plans and specifications, the chief engineer may consult with or rely on
reports and materials prepared by other city or State officers or any financial
feasibility or other consultant retained by the city or any landowner to assist
in the proceeding.
   For the purpose of this section, “chief engineer” means the director of
facility maintenance or, as designated by the director of budget and fiscal
services, such other appropriate department director responsible for one or
more of the special improvements in the proposed district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.4) (Added by Ord. 96-18; Am. Ord. 00-22)
§ 27-2.5 Notice of public hearing on proposed district.
(a)   The city clerk shall publish a notice of the public hearing on a proposed
district twice, at least one week apart, in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city. Publication shall be completed at least 10 days before the date of
the hearing.
(b)   The notice shall contain all of the following information:
(1)   A summary of the resolution of intention to establish the district and
the name, address, and telephone number of a city department or officer from
whom a copy of the resolution of intention can be obtained (alternatively, the
notice may contain the full text of the resolution);
(2)   The time and place of the hearing on the establishment of the district;
and
(3)   A statement that, at the hearing, the testimony of all interested persons
and landowners for or against the establishment of the district, the extent of
the district, the financing of specified special improvements, or the levy of a
special tax will be heard. The notice shall also summarize the protest
procedure, including the respective rights of an owner and the effect of
protests against the establishment of the district, the extent of the district,
the financing of specified special improvements, or the levy of a specified
special tax.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.5) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-2.6 Mailed notice of hearing.
   In addition to publishing notice as provided in §
27-2.5, the city clerk shall give notice of the hearing by first-class mail to
each owner of land within the proposed district which the city clerk has
identified. The notice shall be mailed at least 15 days before the hearing and
shall contain the same information as required in the published notice pursuant
to §
27-2.5. Failure to give notice to any owner or failure of any owner to receive
such notice shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the hearing or
any other proceedings taken under this chapter or any special tax levied under
this chapter if the council determines that a reasonable effort was made to
give such notice. The council’s determination shall be final and conclusive.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.6) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-2.7 Waiver of hearing.
   The owners of land proposed to be included in a district may petition for
the waiver of the public hearing required under this article on the
establishment of a district. Waiver petitions shall be submitted in writing to
the city clerk.
   If the owners of 100 percent of the land proposed to be included in a
district submit waiver petitions at least 10 days before the hearing, the
council shall not hold the hearing. If a hearing is not held because of the
petitions, the owners shall be deemed to have waived the right to protest under
§
27-2.8.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.7) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-2.8 Protests against establishment of district.
   Protests against the establishment of the district, the extent of the
district, the financing of specified special improvements, or the levy of the
special tax may be made in writing by landowners. All written protests shall be
filed with the city clerk before or at the hearing. The council may waive any
irregularities in the form or content of any written protest. Written protests
may be withdrawn in writing at any time before the conclusion of the hearing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.8) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-2.9 Protest by more than 55 percent.
   If the owners of more than 55 percent of the land or if more than 55 percent
of the owners of the land proposed to be included in the district file written
protests with the council before or at the hearing against the establishment of
the district and if protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the amount of
the protests to 55 percent or less, the proceedings to create the specified
district shall cease. No proceedings to create the district shall again be
undertaken for a period of one year from the close of the hearing.
   If the more than 55 percent protests are only against the furnishing of a
specified special improvement or against levying a specified special tax, then
proceedings to create the district may continue, but the specified special
improvement or special tax shall not be part of the applicable ordinance of
formation (if approved).
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.9) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-2.10 Duration of hearing—Determination.
   The hearing may be continued from time to time, but shall be completed
within 30 days; except that, if the council finds that the complexity of the
proposed district or the need for public participation requires additional
time, the hearing may be continued from time to time for a period not to exceed
six months.
   The council may eliminate proposed special improvements, change the rate or
method of apportionment of the proposed special tax, or remove land from the
proposed district. Or, the council may add land to the proposed district, but
only upon petition of the owners of 100 percent of the additional land.
   After the hearing, the council may abandon the proposed establishment of the
district or, after considering all protests and such other relevant factors
(such as the general plan or development plan) as it deems appropriate, may
proceed with establishing the district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.10) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-2.11 Approval of ordinance of formation.
(a)   If the council determines to establish the district, it shall approve an
ordinance of formation. The ordinance of formation shall contain the following,
but no provision which was successfully protested pursuant to §
27-2.9 shall be included:
(1)   The name of the district;
(2)   The term of the district;
(3)   The boundaries of the district;
(4)   The special improvements to be financed by the district;
(5)   The incidental expenses to be paid from the special tax;
(6)   The rate and method of apportionment of the special tax levied within the
district;
(7)   The principal amount of bonds to be issued for financing the special
improvements of the district; and
(8)   Any other information required by this chapter.
(b)   When the ordinance of formation is passed on third reading, the council
shall determine whether all proceedings were valid and in conformity with the
requirements of this chapter. If the council so determines, it shall make a
finding to that effect. The finding shall be final and conclusive.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.11) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-2.12 District boundaries.
(a)   A community facilities district may include areas of land that are not
contiguous.
(b)   Land may be included in more than one community facilities district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.12) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-2.13 District term.
   The term of a district shall be a specified calendar period. Under an
ordinance of formation, the expiration of the term shall not be earlier than
the date on which all outstanding debt service on bonds and incidental expenses
for the district are due to be fully paid.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.13) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-2.14 Financing of special improvements and payment of incidental expenses
identified in ordinance of formation.
(a)   Only the special improvements identified in the ordinance of formation
for a district may be financed by the district under the authority of this
chapter.
(b)   Only the incidental expenses identified in the ordinance of formation may
be paid from the special taxes levied within a district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.14) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-2.15 Designation of improvement area.
   For the purpose of financing specified special improvements, the council may
designate a portion of a district as an improvement area. The designation shall
be made in the ordinance of formation for the district. An improvement area
shall be known as “Improvement Area No. ______ of City and County of Honolulu
Community Facilities District No. __________.” After the designation of an
improvement area, all proceedings to levy special taxes for the financing of
the specified special improvements shall apply only to the improvement area,
except to the extent otherwise provided in the ordinance of formation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.15) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-2.16 Property owners’ election to perform work.
(a)   Subsection (b) shall not apply to any contract for the acquisition of
special improvements, and shall apply to contracts other than contracts for the
acquisition of special improvements only if permissible under HRS Chapter 103D,
the Hawaii Public Procurement Code.
(b)   The owners of three-fourths of the area of land subject to a special tax
shall not be required to present sealed proposals or bids when the director of
budget and fiscal services calls for bids preparatory to letting a contract to
do work financed pursuant to this chapter, but may, within 10 days after the
publication of the notice of the award of the contract, elect to perform the
work and enter into a written contract to do the whole work at a price not
exceeding the bid price of the bidder to whom the contract would otherwise have
been awarded. All work done under the contract shall be subject to any
conditions as may be prescribed by the council.
If, within the 10-day period, the owners elect not to perform the work, a
contract may be entered into by the director of budget and fiscal services with
the bidder to whom the contract was awarded at the price specified in the bid.
If, in the opinion of the council, the public interest will not be served by
allowing the landowners to enter into a contract in accordance with this
subsection, the council may prohibit such a contract in the applicable
ordinance of formation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.16) (Added by Ord. 96-18; Am. Ord. 00-22)
ARTICLE 3: SPECIAL TAX
Sections
   
27-3.1   Special tax apportionment
   
27-3.2   Special tax levy
   
27-3.3   Minimum special taxes for payment of bond principal and interest
   
27-3.4   Prepayment of special taxes
   
27-3.5   Exemptions
   
27-3.6   Special tax maximum for residential parcel
   
27-3.7   Special tax collection
   
27-3.8   Special tax lien
   
27-3.9   Special tax notice to owners of land
   
27-3.10   Special tax notice to prospective buyer or lessee of parcel of land
   
27-3.11   Special tax obligation for parcel acquired by city
§ 27-3.1 Special tax apportionment.
(a)   There is no requirement that the special tax levied pursuant to this
chapter be fixed in amount or apportioned on the basis of special benefit to a
parcel of land in the district or that the special improvement financed convey
a special benefit to the parcel. The only requirement is that the special tax
benefit the parcel in a general manner.
(b)   A special tax levied pursuant to this chapter may be based on benefit
received by a parcel, the cost of making a special improvement available to a
parcel, the stage or type of development or use of a parcel, the happening of
one or more specified events related to the development or improvement of all
or certain parcels, or any other reasonable basis or formula as determined by
the council. Any determination of the reasonableness of any special tax or the
rate or method of the apportionment thereof by the council shall be final and
conclusive.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.1) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-3.2 Special tax levy.
   Special taxes shall be levied and apportioned pursuant to the rate and
method specified in the ordinance of formation. The director of budget and
fiscal services shall be delegated the authority to:
(1)   Determine the annual amount due from each landowner subject to the
special tax; and
(2)   Make an adjustment to the annual amount due when required by the special
tax base or formula in the applicable ordinance of formation.
   Special taxes shall only be used to pay for the costs of special
improvements, debt service on bonds issued to pay the costs, and incidental
expenses permitted under this chapter. Special taxes shall be levied only as
long as needed to pay the costs, debt service, and incidental expenses.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.2) (Added by Ord. 96-18; Am. Ord. 00-22)
§ 27-3.3 Minimum special taxes for payment of bond principal and interest.
   Annual special taxes from a district shall at least equal the required
annual bond principal and interest payments for the district. In addition, the
special taxes may generate an amount sufficient to accumulate or replenish bond
reserve funds, reimburse credit enhancement expenses or prior debt service
contributions, or pay other costs or incidental expenses related to the bonds.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.3) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-3.4 Prepayment of special taxes.
   The council may prohibit the prepayment of special taxes or specify
conditions under which special taxes may be prepaid and permanently satisfied.
The conditions may include periods during which prepayment shall not be
permitted or a requirement that a premium be paid upon prepayment.
   If the council has specified conditions under which special taxes may be
prepaid and permanently satisfied and if the special taxes are so prepaid and
permanently satisfied as to a particular parcel of land, the director of budget
and fiscal services shall prepare a notice of cancellation of the special taxes
for the parcel. The director of budget and fiscal services shall transmit a
copy of the notice to the owner, who may file it with the bureau of conveyances
or land court. The director of budget and fiscal services may charge a fee for
preparation of the notice.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.4) (Added by Ord. 96-18; Am. Ord. 00-22)
§ 27-3.5 Exemptions.
(a)   Properties of entities of the federal, State, or city governments shall
be exempt from the special tax, except as otherwise provided by subsection (b).
No other properties or entities within a district shall be exempt from the
special tax, unless expressly exempted in the ordinance of formation.
(b)   If a federal, State, or city entity owning property, including property
held in trust for any beneficiary, grants a leasehold or other possessory
interest in the property to a nonexempt person or entity, the special tax
shall, notwithstanding subsection (a), be levied on the leasehold or possessory
interest and shall be payable by the owner of the leasehold or possessory
interest.
When entering into a lease or other written contract creating a possessory
interest for a nonexempt person or entity, the federal, State, or city entity
shall include in the contract a statement that the property interest shall be
subject to special taxation pursuant to this chapter. Failure to comply with
the requirement shall not, however, invalidate the contract or affect the
special tax or the obligation of the nonexempt person or entity to pay the
special tax.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.5) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-3.6 Special tax maximum for residential parcel.
(a)   The special tax on a residential parcel in a district shall be levied in
a manner which complies with the following:
(1)   A maximum annual special tax amount for the residential parcel shall be
established and expressed in dollars;
(2)   The special tax amount for the residential parcel shall not be increased
by more than 2 percent annually, unless a greater increase is required because
of a change in use, development, improvement, subdivision, or consolidation of
the parcel; and
(3)   The special tax amount for the residential parcel in any year shall not
be more than that established or calculated under subdivision (1) or (2),
unless a higher amount is warranted because of a change in use, development,
improvement, subdivision, or consolidation of the parcel. If the change in use,
development, improvement, subdivision, or consolidation of the parcel warrants
a higher special tax amount for a year than that established or calculated
under subdivision (1) or (2), then the higher amount shall be collected for
that year. After that year, however, the special tax amount shall not be
increased by more than 2 percent annually, unless the parcel is again subject
to a change in use, development, improvement, subdivision, or consolidation.
   This subsection shall be included in the applicable ordinance of formation.
(b)   For the purposes of this section, “residential parcel” means a parcel
classified as residential for real property tax purposes.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.6) (Added by Ord. 96-18; Am. Ord. 07-10)
§ 27-3.7 Special tax collection.
   Special taxes shall be collected by the director of budget and fiscal
services on a monthly, semiannual, or annual basis. Except as otherwise
provided by the council, the same penalties provided for delinquent payment of
improvement district assessments shall apply to special tax delinquencies. The
director of budget and fiscal services shall deduct from special taxes
collected the administrative expenses incurred in collection.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.7) (Added by Ord. 96-18; Am. Ord. 00-22)
§ 27-3.8 Special tax lien.
(a)   The special tax levied on a parcel shall be a lien against the land and
improvements of the parcel. The lien shall attach from the effective date of
the ordinance levying the special tax and shall be extinguished when the
special tax is fully paid or terminated.
(b)   The lien of the special tax shall have priority over all other liens,
except the lien of general real property taxes and the lien of assessments
levied under HRS § 46-80. The lien of the special tax shall be on a parity with
the lien of general real property taxes and the lien of assessments levied
under HRS § 46-80, unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance. All liens of
special taxes made pursuant to this chapter shall be on a parity without regard
to when made or for what purpose.
(c)   If any special tax is not paid when due, the department of budget and
fiscal services may, after not less than two months of delinquency, foreclose
the lien of the special tax to collect the delinquent amount and any penalty,
interest, and costs. Foreclosure shall be by way of advertisement and sale
without suit, and shall be made by the director of budget and fiscal services
in the same manner, except as otherwise approved by the council, under the same
conditions and penalties, and with the same effect as provided by general law
for sales of real property pursuant to default in payment of property taxes.
In any event, the department of budget and fiscal services shall foreclose the
lien before the end of the sixth year of a delinquency.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.8) (Added by Ord. 96-18; Am. Ord. 00-22)
§ 27-3.9 Special tax notice to owners of land.
   Within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance of formation
levying a special tax, the director of budget and fiscal services shall notify
all owners of parcels of land subject to the special tax. Notices shall be sent
by certified mail or registered mail with request for return receipt. Each of
the notices shall set forth the amount of the special tax levied, the rate and
method of apportionment of the special tax, and the date when the special tax
is due. Failure to give or receive such notice to or by any landowner shall not
affect the validity of the special tax nor entitle the landowner to an
extension of time within which to pay the special tax.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.9) (Added by Ord. 96-18; Am. Ord. 00-22)
§ 27-3.10 Special tax notice to prospective buyer or lessee of parcel of land.
   Before entering into an agreement to sell or lease a parcel of land subject
to a special tax levy and lien, the parcel owner shall notify the prospective
buyer or lessee of the existence of the levy and lien.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.10) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-3.11 Special tax obligation for parcel acquired by city.
(a)   If a parcel subject to a special tax is acquired by the city through a
negotiated transaction or eminent domain proceeding, the conveyor shall pay the
special tax out of the purchase price or eminent domain award in an amount
sufficient to pay the bond principal and interest that would have been payable
from the special tax on the parcel.
(b)   If a parcel subject to a special tax is acquired by the city by
foreclosure or gift or devise, the parcel shall be sold as soon as practicable,
and either:
(1)   The special tax shall be paid from the sales price in an amount equaling
the bond principal and interest that would have been payable from the special
tax on the parcel; or
(2)   The purchaser of the parcel shall take title subject to the lien of the
special tax and shall be required to pay the special taxes becoming due from
and after the sale date.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.11) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
ARTICLE 4: CHANGES IN TERM OF DISTRICT, AUTHORIZED SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT,
AND SPECIAL TAX
Sections
   
27-4.1   Authorization to change term, special improvement, or special tax
   
27-4.2   Ordinance of consideration
   
27-4.3   Petition for changes in term, special improvement, or special tax
   
27-4.4   Director of budget and fiscal services’ recommendation to change rate
or method of apportionment of an existing special tax
   
27-4.5   Contents of proposed ordinance of consideration
   
27-4.6   Notice of hearing on proposed ordinance of consideration
   
27-4.7   Protests against the proposed ordinance of consideration
   
27-4.8   Protest by more than 55 percent
   
27-4.9   Duration of hearing—Determination
   
27-4.10   Filing of notice
§ 27-4.1 Authorization to change term, special improvement, or special tax.
   The council may change the term of an established district, the authorized
special improvements, or the rate or method of apportionment of a special tax
or require the levy of a new special tax. The change or new levy shall be
accomplished in accordance with this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 4, § 34-4.1) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-4.2 Ordinance of consideration.
(a)   Except as provided in subsection (b), if the council determines that the
public convenience and necessity require a change permitted under §
27-4.1 or require the levy of a new special tax, the council may approve an
ordinance of consideration to do so. The council shall have the full discretion
to commence proceedings to make the change or new levy when deemed appropriate.
The receipt of a petition under §
27-4.3 shall not require or obligate the council to commence the proceedings.
(b)   The council shall not approve an ordinance of consideration to reduce the
term of a district, reduce the realization from a special tax, or terminate the
levy of a special tax if doing so will jeopardize the payment of debt service
on bonds issued for the district or impair the security for the bonds.
(c)   An ordinance of consideration for a district shall be an amendment of the
ordinance of formation for the district. The ordinance of consideration shall
contain the pertinent information required by §
27-4.5.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 4, § 34-4.2) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-4.3 Petition for changes in term, special improvement, or special tax.
   The council may commence proceedings to approve an ordinance of
consideration if receiving the following:
(1)   A petition signed by the owners of at least 25 percent of the land within
the district requesting a change permitted under §
27-4.1 or the levy of a new special tax; and
(2)   A fee which the council determines is necessary to compensate the city
for the costs of proceedings to review the requested change or new levy.
   The fee shall be nonrefundable, even if the council does not make the change
or levy.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 4, § 34-4.3) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-4.4 Director of budget and fiscal services’ recommendation to change rate
or method of apportionment of an existing special tax.
(a)   The director of budget and fiscal services may recommend to the council a
change to the rate or method of apportionment of an existing special tax for a
district when:
(1)   The annual special taxes from the district are in excess of the annual
debt service and reserve requirements for and incidental expenses of the
district; and
(2)   The excess of annual special taxes is projected to continue in each year
until expiration of the district.
The recommended change shall result in a rate or method of apportionment which
reduces the annual special taxes from the district to an amount not less than
the annual debt service and reserve requirements for and incidental expenses of
the district.
The recommendation shall be accompanied by a justification and proposed
ordinance of consideration.
(b)   The council shall review and may approve the ordinance of consideration
in accordance with this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 4, § 34-4.4) (Added by Ord. 96-18; Am. Ord. 00-22)
§ 27-4.5 Contents of proposed ordinance of consideration.
   A proposed ordinance of consideration shall do all of the following:
(1)   State the name of the district;
(2)   Describe the boundaries of the district;
(3)   Specify the proposed change to the term of the district or special
improvements to be financed;
(4)   Specify any proposed new special tax which will be levied to finance new
or existing special improvements; and
(5)   Specify the proposed change to the rate or method of apportionment of an
existing special tax.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 4, § 34-4.5) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-4.6 Notice of hearing on proposed ordinance of consideration.
   The council shall fix the time and place for a hearing on the proposed
ordinance of consideration. The date of the hearing shall not be less than 30
or more than 60 days from the date of introduction of the proposed ordinance.
   The city clerk shall publish notice of the hearing in the same manner as
required under §
27-2.5 for notice of a hearing on a resolution of intention. In addition, the
city clerk shall mail the notice to each owner of land in the district at least
15 days before the hearing.
   The notice shall contain all of the following information:
(1)   A summary of the proposed ordinance and the name, address, and telephone
number of a city department or officer from whom a copy of the proposed
ordinance can be obtained (alternatively, the notice may contain the full text
of the proposed ordinance);
(2)   The time and place of the hearing; and
(3)   A statement that, at the hearing, the testimony of all interested persons
and landowners for or against the proposed changes will be heard. The notice
shall also summarize the protest procedure, including the respective rights of
an owner and the effect of protests made against the proposed changes.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 4, § 34-4.6) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-4.7 Protests against the proposed ordinance of consideration.
   Protests against the proposed ordinance of consideration may be made in
writing by landowners. All written protests shall be filed with the city clerk
before or at the hearing. The council may waive any irregularities in the form
or content of any written protest. Written protests may be withdrawn in writing
at any time before the conclusion of the hearing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 4, § 34-4.7) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-4.8 Protest by more than 55 percent.
   If the owners of more than 55 percent of the land or if more than 55 percent
of the owners of the land in the district file written protests with the
council before or at the hearing against a provision in the proposed ordinance
of consideration and if protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the amount
of the protests to 55 percent or less, the provision specified in the written
protests shall not be in the approved ordinance of consideration. No
proceedings to include the provision in another ordinance of consideration
shall again be undertaken for a period of one year from the close of the
hearing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 4, § 34-4.8) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-4.9 Duration of hearing—Determination.
   The hearing may be continued from time to time, but shall be completed
within 30 days; except that, if the council finds that the complexity of the
proposed changes or the need for public participation requires additional time,
the hearing may be continued from time to time for a period not to exceed six
months. At the conclusion of the hearing, the council may abandon the
proceedings or, after considering all protests and such other relevant factors
(such as the general plan or development plan) as it deems appropriate, may
approve the ordinance of consideration (in the form in which it was introduced
or with such changes as determined by council). The approved ordinance shall
not contain provisions successfully protested in accordance with §
27-4.8.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 4, § 34-4.9) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-4.10 Filing of notice.
   After the effective date of an ordinance of consideration, the director of
budget and fiscal services shall provide notice of any special tax change or
levy in the manner specified under §
27-3.9.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 4, § 34-4.10) (Added by Ord. 96-18; Am. Ord. 00-22)
ARTICLE 5: EARLY TERMINATION OF DISTRICT
Sections
   
27-5.1   Authorization to terminate district before expiration of term
specified in ordinance of formation
   
27-5.2   Ordinance of early termination
   
27-5.3   Petition for early termination
   
27-5.4   Director of budget and fiscal services’ recommendation on early
termination
   
27-5.5   Contents of proposed ordinance of early termination
   
27-5.6   Notice of hearing on proposed ordinance of early termination
   
27-5.7   Protests against the proposed ordinance of early termination
   
27-5.8   Protest by more than 55 percent
   
27-5.9   Duration of hearing—Determination
   
27-5.10   Construction of article
§ 27-5.1 Authorization to terminate district before expiration of term
specified in ordinance of formation.
   The council may terminate a district before the expiration of the term
specified in the ordinance of formation. An early termination shall be
accomplished in accordance with this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 5, § 34-5.1) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-5.2 Ordinance of early termination.
(a)   Except as provided in subsection (b), if the council determines that the
public convenience and necessity will be promoted by terminating a district
before the expiration of the term specified in the applicable ordinance of
formation, the council may approve an ordinance of early termination. The
council shall have the full discretion to commence proceedings for the early
termination of a district when deemed appropriate. The receipt of a petition
under §
27-5.3 shall not require or obligate the council to commence the proceedings.
(b)   The council shall not approve an ordinance of early termination for a
district, unless provisions are included to assure the payment of the following
from the special taxes or accumulated reserves of the district:
(1)   All outstanding debt service on bonds issued for the district; and
(2)   All outstanding incidental expenses accrued for the district.
(c)   An ordinance of early termination of a district shall amend the term of
the district as specified in the ordinance of formation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 5, § 34-5.2) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-5.3 Petition for early termination.
   The council may commence proceedings to approve an ordinance of early
termination if receiving the following:
(1)   A petition signed by the owners of at least 25 percent of the land within
a district requesting the early termination of the district; and
(2)   A fee which the council determines is necessary to compensate the city
for the costs of proceedings to review the proposed early termination of the
district.
   The fee shall be nonrefundable, even if the council does not approve the
early termination.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 5, § 34-5.3) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-5.4 Director of budget and fiscal services’ recommendation on early
termination.
   The director of budget and fiscal services may recommend to the council that
a district be terminated before the expiration of the term specified in the
ordinance of formation. The recommendation shall be made if the director
determines that the public convenience and necessity will be promoted by the
early termination. A recommendation shall be accompanied by a proposed
ordinance of early termination.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 5, § 34-5.4) (Added by Ord. 96-18; Am. Ord. 00-22)
§ 27-5.5 Contents of proposed ordinance of early termination.
   A proposed ordinance of early termination shall do all of the following:
(1)   State the name of the district;
(2)   Describe the boundaries of the district;
(3)   Identify the proposed early termination date of the district;
(4)   Give a narrative justification for the proposed early termination;
(5)   With respect to the debt service on bonds issued for the district:
(A)   Specify the method by which the debt service will be fully paid before
the early termination of the district; or
(B)   Establish a trust or other fund in the city treasury with a balance
sufficient to pay the debt service outstanding after the early termination of
the district; and
(6)   With respect to incidental expenses accrued for the district:
(A)   Guarantee the payment of the incidental expenses before the early
termination of the district; or
(B)   Establish a method by which incidental expenses, if any, will be paid
after the early termination of the district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 5, § 34-5.5) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-5.6 Notice of hearing on proposed ordinance of early termination.
   The council shall fix the time and place for a hearing on the proposed
ordinance of early termination. The date of the hearing shall not be less than
30 or more than 60 days from the date of introduction of the proposed
ordinance.
   The city clerk shall publish notice of the hearing in the same manner as
required under §
27-2.5 for notice of a hearing on a resolution of intention. In addition, the
city clerk shall mail the notice to each owner of land in the district at least
15 days before the hearing.
   The notice shall contain all of the following information:
(1)   A summary of the proposed ordinance and the name, address, and telephone
number of a city department or officer from whom a copy of the proposed
ordinance can be obtained (alternatively, the notice may contain the full text
of the proposed ordinance);
(2)   The time and place of the hearing; and
(3)   A statement that, at the hearing, the testimony of all interested persons
and landowners for or against the proposed early termination will be heard. The
notice shall also summarize the protest procedure, including the respective
rights of an owner and the effect of protests made against the proposed early
termination.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 5, § 34-5.6) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-5.7 Protests against the proposed ordinance of early termination.
   Protests against the proposed ordinance of early termination may be made in
writing by landowners. All written protests shall be filed with the city clerk
before or at the hearing. The council may waive any irregularities in the form
or content of any written protest. Written protests may be withdrawn in writing
at any time before the conclusion of the hearing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 5, § 34-5.7) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-5.8 Protest by more than 55 percent.
   If the owners of more than 55 percent of the land or if more than 55 percent
of the owners of the land in the district file written protests with the
council before or at the hearing against a provision in the proposed ordinance
of early termination and if protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the
amount of the protests to 55 percent or less, the provision specified in the
written protests shall not be in the approved ordinance of early termination.
No proceedings to again include the provision in another ordinance of early
termination shall be undertaken for a period of one year from the close of the
hearing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 5, § 34-5.8) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-5.9 Duration of hearing—Determination.
   The hearing may be continued from time to time, but shall be completed
within 30 days; except that, if the council finds that the complexity of the
proposed early termination or the need for public participation requires
additional time, the hearing may be continued from time to time for a period
not to exceed six months. At the conclusion of the hearing, the council may
abandon the proceedings or, after considering all protests and such other
relevant factors as it deems appropriate, may approve the ordinance of early
termination. The approved ordinance shall not contain any provision which is
contrary to this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 5, § 34-5.9) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-5.10 Construction of article.
   This article shall not be construed as requiring an ordinance to effectuate
the termination of each district. A district shall automatically terminate upon
reaching the expiration of the term specified in the ordinance of formation.
   This article applies only if the council desires to terminate a district
earlier than the expiration date specified in the ordinance of formation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 5, § 34-5.10) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
ARTICLE 6: ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY
Sections
   
27-6.1   Authorization to annex—Contiguity not required
   
27-6.2   Ordinance of annexation
   
27-6.3   Contents of proposed ordinance of annexation
   
27-6.4   Notice of hearing on proposed ordinance of annexation
   
27-6.5   Protests against proposed ordinance of annexation
   
27-6.6   Protest by more than 55 percent
   
27-6.7   Duration of hearing—Determination
   
27-6.8   Filing of notice
§ 27-6.1 Authorization to annex—Contiguity not required.
   The council may annex an area of land to an existing district in accordance
with this article. The annexed land need not be contiguous to the existing
district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 6, § 34-6.1) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-6.2 Ordinance of annexation.
   If the council determines that the public convenience and necessity require
the addition of land to an existing district, the council may approve an
ordinance of annexation adding the land. The ordinance of annexation adding
land to an existing district shall be deemed an amendment of the ordinance of
formation for that district.
   The council shall have the full discretion to commence proceedings for the
annexation of land when deemed appropriate.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 6, § 34-6.2) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-6.3 Contents of proposed ordinance of annexation.
   A proposed ordinance of annexation shall do all of the following:
(1)   State the name and term of the existing district;
(2)   Describe the boundaries of the existing district and the area proposed to
be annexed;
(3)   Identify the special improvements financed by the existing district, the
special improvements to be financed by the area proposed to be annexed, and the
special improvements to be financed in common by both;
(4)   Specify the proposed new special tax which will be levied within the area
proposed to be annexed; and
(5)   Specify any proposed change to the special tax within the existing
district as a result of the proposed annexation. The special tax rate in the
existing district shall not be increased as a result of annexation proceedings
pursuant to this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 6, § 34-6.3) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-6.4 Notice of hearing on proposed ordinance of annexation.
   The council shall fix the time and place for a hearing on the proposed
ordinance of annexation. The date of the hearing shall not be less than 30 or
more than 60 days from the date of introduction of the proposed ordinance.
   The city clerk shall publish notice of the hearing in the same manner as
required under §
27-2.5 for notice of a hearing on a resolution of intention. In addition, the
city clerk shall mail the notice to each owner of land in the existing district
and area proposed to be annexed. The notice shall be mailed at least 15 days
before the hearing.
   The notice shall contain all of the following information:
(1)   A summary of the proposed ordinance and the name, address, and telephone
number of a city department or officer from whom a copy of the proposed
ordinance can be obtained (alternatively, the notice may contain the full text
of the proposed ordinance);
(2)   The time and place of the hearing; and
(3)   A statement that, at the hearing, the testimony of all interested persons
and landowners for or against the proposed annexation will be heard. The notice
shall also summarize the protest procedure, including the respective rights of
an owner and the effect of protests made against the proposed annexation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 6, § 34-6.4) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-6.5 Protests against proposed ordinance of annexation.
   Protests against the proposed ordinance of annexation may be made in writing
by landowners. All written protests shall be filed with the city clerk before
or at the hearing. The council may waive any irregularities in the form or
content of any written protest. Written protests may be withdrawn in writing at
any time before the conclusion of the hearing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 6, § 34-6.5) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-6.6 Protest by more than 55 percent.
(a)   If the owners of more than 55 percent of the applicable land or if more
than 55 percent of the owners of the applicable land file written protests with
the council before or at the hearing against the proposed annexation and if
protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the amount of the protests to 55
percent or less, the annexation proceedings shall cease. No proceedings to
again annex the land shall be undertaken for a period of one year from the
close of the hearing.
(b)   For the purpose of this section, “applicable land” means land in the
existing district, land in the area proposed to be annexed, or land in both the
existing district and area proposed to be annexed.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 6, § 34-6.6) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-6.7 Duration of hearing—Determination.
   The hearing may be continued from time to time, but shall be completed
within 30 days; except that, if the council finds that the complexity of the
proposed annexation or the need for public participation requires additional
time, the hearing may be continued from time to time for a period not to exceed
six months. At the conclusion of the hearing, the council may abandon the
proceedings or, after considering all protests and such other relevant factors
(such as the general plan or development plan) as it deems appropriate, may
approve the ordinance of annexation (in the form in which it was introduced or
with such changes as determined by the council and permitted by this part).
Thereafter, the city may levy the special tax on the annexed land.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 6, § 34-6.7) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-6.8 Filing of notice.
   After the effective date of an ordinance of annexation, the director of
budget and fiscal services shall provide notice of any special tax change or
levy in the manner specified under §
27-3.9.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 6, § 34-6.8) (Added by Ord. 96-18; Am. Ord. 00-22)
ARTICLE 7: BONDS
Sections
   
27-7.1   Bond ordinance
   
27-7.2   Costs includable in bond principal
   
27-7.3   Minimum value-to-lien ratio
   
27-7.4   Covenant to pursue foreclosure sale to collect delinquent special
taxes
   
27-7.5   Signing of bonds
   
27-7.6   Manner of sale
   
27-7.7   Bond fund
   
27-7.8   Refunding bonds
   
27-7.9   Prohibition on issuance of general obligation bonds secured by general
credit
   
27-7.10   Debt limit calculation
§ 27-7.1 Bond ordinance.
(a)   Whenever the council deems it necessary or appropriate that community
facilities district bonds be issued to finance the cost of special improvements
or to reimburse the cost thereof previously paid, the council may authorize the
issuance of bonds. The issuance shall be authorized by a bond ordinance
approved with or after the approval of the ordinance of formation levying the
special tax to finance the special improvements. The bond ordinance shall
provide for the following:
(1)   The issuance of the bonds in one or more series;
(2)   The date the bonds shall bear;
(3)   The maturity date or dates of the bonds, which shall not be more than 30
years after the issuance date of the bonds;
(4)   The rate or maximum rate of interest on the bonds, which shall not exceed
the maximum rate permitted by law and which may be fixed or variable and simple
or compound;
(5)   The time or times at which interest shall be payable;
(6)   The denomination of the bonds;
(7)   The form of the bonds;
(8)   The conversion or registration privileges carried by the bonds;
(9)   The rank or priority of the bonds;
(10)   The manner of execution of the bonds;
(11)   The medium of payment of the bonds;
(12)   The place or places of payment;
(13)   The terms of redemption and the redemption price or prices to which the
bonds are subject;
(14)   The pledge or assignment of all or part of the special taxes collected
from the district or improvement area thereof, the liens securing such special
taxes, or any other funds which are intended by the council to secure payment
of the bonds. The pledge shall be superior to all other claims on the special
taxes (except to the extent otherwise provided in the bond ordinance);
(15)   The establishment and handling of a separate special fund or funds to
pay or secure the bonds or to pay for the special improvements or incidental
expenses;
(16)   The obligations in which may be invested the proceeds of the bonds and
any other funds (including special taxes) pledged to secure payment of the
bonds; and
(17)   Any other provisions for the issuance, payment, security, credit
enhancement, handling of funds, default, remedy, or other matter related to the
bonds which the council deems appropriate.
(b)   The bond ordinance may provide that any or all of the terms listed in
this section or elsewhere in this article may be fixed by or set out in a
certificate signed by the director of budget and fiscal services at or before
the delivery of the bonds or in an indenture, trust agreement, or fiscal agent
agreement between the city and a corporate trustee or fiscal agent located
within or without the State.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 7, § 34-7.1) (Added by Ord. 96-18; Am. Ord. 00-22)
§ 27-7.2 Costs includable in bond principal.
   The principal amount of bonds authorized to be issued may include all costs
and estimated costs of special improvements and incidental expenses associated
with issuing the bonds.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 7, § 34-7.2) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-7.3 Minimum value-to-lien ratio.
   The principal amount of bonds issued and outstanding under an indenture or
certificate pursuant to which such bonds are issued for a district shall not
exceed one-third of the value of the real property upon which a special tax is
levied for payment of the debt service on the bonds. The “value of the real
property” shall be the fair market value of the land and special improvements,
within the meaning of §
27-1.5, to be constructed within the district, as shown upon an appraisal of
the subject property made by an M.A.I. real estate appraiser.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 7, § 34-7.3) (Added by Ord. 96-18; Am. Ord. 00-22)
§ 27-7.4 Covenant to pursue foreclosure sale to collect delinquent special
taxes.
   The director of budget and fiscal services may covenant, for the benefit of
bond owners, to commence and diligently pursue to completion any foreclosure by
advertisement and sale regarding delinquent special taxes. The covenant may
specify a deadline for commencement of the foreclosure sale and any other terms
and conditions the director of budget and fiscal services determines reasonable
regarding the foreclosure sale.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 7, § 34-7.4) (Added by Ord. 96-18; Am. Ord. 00-22)
§ 27-7.5 Signing of bonds.
   Unless otherwise specified in the bond ordinance, the bonds shall be signed
by the mayor and countersigned by the director of budget and fiscal services or
the director’s deputy. Signatures on the bonds may be manual or facsimile. If
any officer whose signature appears on the bonds vacates the office before the
delivery of the bonds, the signature shall be as effective as if the officer
had remained in office.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 7, § 34-7.5) (Added by Ord. 96-18; Am. Ord. 00-22)
§ 27-7.6 Manner of sale.
   The director of budget and fiscal services may sell bonds at public or
private sale at the times, for the price or prices, and in the manner the
council determines to be appropriate and in the public interest (such
determination being final and conclusive).
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 7, § 34-7.6) (Added by Ord. 96-18; Am. Ord. 00-22)
§ 27-7.7 Bond fund.
   All of the collections for payment of principal of and interest on bonds and
incidental expenses shall be paid into a district bond or reserve fund and
shall be used solely for the payment of the principal of and interest on the
outstanding bonds of the district and incidental expenses, all as provided in
the bond ordinance.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 7, § 34-7.7) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-7.8 Refunding bonds.
(a)   The council may authorize the issuance of bonds to refund any or all of
the district bonds outstanding that have been issued pursuant to this article.
The refunding bonds shall be authorized by a bond ordinance.
(b)   Except as otherwise approved by the council, refunding bonds shall not be
issued if the total net interest cost to maturity on the refunding bonds plus
the principal amount of the refunding bonds exceeds the total net interest cost
to maturity on the bonds to be refunded plus the principal amount of the bonds
to be refunded. Subject to such limitations, the principal amount of the
refunding bonds may be more than, less than, or the same as the principal
amount of the bonds to be refunded. The principal amount of such refunding
bonds shall not count against any maximum amount of bonds authorized in the
original bond ordinance.
(c)   The designated costs of issuing refunding bonds shall be paid from
proceeds of the refunding bonds, interest earned on those proceeds, or special
taxes from the district. However, any interest or special taxes paid for the
designated costs shall be added to the total net interest costs to maturity on
the refunding bonds in determining whether the issuance of the refunding bonds
complies with subsection (b).
“Designated costs of issuing the refunding bonds” means any of the following
costs and expenses designated by the council in the bond ordinance authorizing
the issuance of the refunding bonds:
(1)   All expenses incident to the calling, retiring, or paying of the bonds to
be refunded and incident to the issuance of refunding bonds, including the
charges of any agent in connection with the issuance of the refunding bonds or
the redemption or retirement of the bonds to be refunded;
(2)   The interest upon the refunding bonds from the date of sale of the
refunding bonds to the date of payment of the bonds to be refunded or the date
upon which the bonds to be refunded will be paid pursuant to call or agreement
with the holders of the bonds;
(3)   Any premium necessary in the calling or retiring of the bonds to be
refunded;
(4)   Any insurance premium or fee payable to the issuer of a bond insurance
policy or letter of credit insuring all or part of the principal or interest,
or both, due on the refunding bonds; and
(5)   Any other incidental expense related to the issuance or carrying of the
refunding bonds or the redemption or refunding of the bonds to be refunded.
(d)   The saving achieved through the issuance of refunding bonds shall be used
by the council to reduce:
(1)   The special taxes levied in the district; or
(2)   The term of the district within which the special taxes are levied.
   When the council authorizes the issuance of refunding bonds, the council
also shall reduce the special taxes levied in or term of the district. The
reduction shall be made through an ordinance of consideration.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 7, § 34-7.8) (Added by Ord. 96-18; Am. Ord. 00-22)
§ 27-7.9 Prohibition on issuance of general obligation bonds secured by general
credit.
   No general obligation bonds secured by the city’s general credit shall be
issued to finance special improvements identified in an ordinance of formation
or pay for the incidental expenses of a district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 7, § 34-7.9) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
§ 27-7.10 Debt limit calculation.
   Bonds issued under this article, when the only security is the special tax
levy or lien in a district, shall be excluded from any determination of the
power of the city to issue general obligation bonds or funded debt for purposes
of § 13 of Article VII of the State Constitution.
(1990 Code, Ch. 34, Art. 7, § 34-7.10) (Added by Ord. 96-18)
CHAPTER 28: SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
Editor’s note:
   * The Waikiki special improvement district No. 1, also known as the City and
County of Honolulu business improvement district No. 1 (Waikiki), was
established by Ord. 00-40. Section 3 of Ord. 00-40 and § 9(c) of Exhibit A of
that ordinance were amended by Ord. 01-22.
   The Fort Street Mall special improvement district No. 2 was established by
Ord. 02-48.
   Ord. 07-44 amended the Fort Street Mall special improvement district plan,
designated as Exhibit A in Ord. 02-48, by revising the boundaries.
   The Waikiki Beach special improvement district No. 3 was established by Ord.
15-11.
   The Waikiki Transportation Management special improvement district No. 4 was
established by Ord. 17-58.
Articles
   
1.   General Provisions
   
2.   Proceedings
   
3.   Special Assessment
   
4.   Changes in Authorized Supplemental Services, Improvements, and Special
Assessment
   
5.   Annexation of Territory
   
6.   Termination of District
   
7.   Bonds
   
Appendix 28-A: Specific Special Improvement District Ordinances
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections
   
28-1.1   Definitions
   
28-1.2   Provision of alternate method of financing supplemental services and
improvements
   
28-1.3   Superiority over conflicting provision of other ordinance
   
28-1.4   Limitation on challenges
   
28-1.5   Types of supplemental services and improvements
   
28-1.6   Payment of existing special assessments
   
28-1.7   Advances of funds, work, or property in-kind
   
28-1.8   Construction of chapter
   
28-1.9   Validity of proceedings
§ 28-1.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Assessed Value of Real Property. The gross value of a parcel of land, as
defined below, as assessed by the real property tax office of the city,
including the assessed value of any improvements thereon.
Bonds. Special improvement district bonds (including refunding bonds) issued
pursuant to this chapter.
Bond Ordinance. An ordinance of the council which authorizes bonds.
City Clerk. The city clerk of the city.
Costs of Supplemental Improvements. Includes the following:
(1)   Cost of acquiring, constructing, installing, improving, or rehabilitating
supplemental improvements;
(2)   Cost of acquiring land or right-of-way for supplemental improvements;
(3)   Payment of any water, sewer, or other utility connection fee necessary
for supplemental improvements;
(4)   Payment of fees and expenses for planning, architectural, engineering,
inspection, legal, financial, or other consultants for supplemental
improvements;
(5)   Reimbursement of an advance of funds for acquiring, constructing,
installing, improving, or rehabilitating supplemental improvements;
(6)   Contribution to a reserve fund for the payment of debt service on bonds
issued to finance the costs of supplemental improvements;
(7)   Not more than two years of interest on bonds issued to finance the costs
of supplemental improvements; or
(8)   Costs of issuance related to the issuance of bonds issued to finance the
costs of supplemental improvements, including but not limited to payment of
legal fees and expenses (including bond counsel), trustee fees and expenses,
bond insurance premium, letter of credit, or other credit enhancement fees and
expenses.
Costs of Supplemental Services and Improvements. Includes the following:
(1)   Cost of obtaining the supplemental services and improvements other than
costs of supplemental improvements financed from the proceeds of bonds;
(2)   Payment of any water, sewer, or other utility connection fee necessary
for supplemental services and improvements;
(3)   Payment of fees and expenses for planning, architectural, engineering,
inspection, legal, financial, or other consultants for supplemental services
and improvements; and
(4)   Reimbursement of an advance of funds for the costs of obtaining
supplemental services and improvements.
District. Has the same meaning as special improvement district.
District Association. An association established pursuant to §
28-2.9.
District Board. The board of directors of a district association.
Financing Supplemental Services and Improvements by a District or Financing
Supplemental Services and Improvements. Paying for the costs of supplemental
services and improvements through the special assessment levied within a
district or paying the costs of supplemental improvements from the proceeds of
bonds.
Incidental Expenses of a District. Includes the following:
(1)   Administrative expenses of the city associated with the proceedings
undertaken pursuant to this chapter or collection of special assessments;
(2)   Management and administrative costs incurred by the district association;
and
(3)   Any other expense incidental to the creation or operation of a district.
Land or Parcel of Land. The real property identified by a tax map key parcel
number within the district. For purposes of §§
28-2.4,
28-4.7, and
28-5.6, apartments of a condominium property regime shall be one parcel of
land.
Landowner or Owner of Land. The owner to whom the real property tax is assessed
as shown on the real property tax assessment list, which may be the fee simple
owner or the lessee of land, or both, regardless of whether such owner is
exempt from the payment of such tax. Each parcel of land shall be deemed to
have one fee simple owner and one lessee of land, if any, even if owned by a
corporation, partnership, joint tenancy, tenancy by the entirety, tenancy in
common, or other group of persons. The real property tax assessed value of such
parcel of land shall be counted once for purposes of determining the aggregate
value of all land in a district or proposed district as provided in §§
28-2.4,
28-4.7, and
28-5.6, even if there is a fee simple owner and a lessee of land for a parcel
of land.
Ordinance of Annexation. An ordinance which annexes additional land to a
district.
Ordinance of Consideration. An ordinance which changes the authorized
supplemental services and improvements, the supplemental improvements to be
financed, the rate or apportionment of a special assessment, or the boundaries
of the district other than an annexation provided in
Article 5, or which requires the levy of a new special assessment.
Ordinance Terminating the District. An ordinance which terminates a district at
the expiration of the then- occurring five-year term.
Special Improvement District or District. A district of land established by the
city pursuant to this chapter for providing and financing supplemental services
and improvements.
Supplemental Improvements. Any of the undertakings itemized in §
28-1.5(b).
Supplemental Services and Improvement Area. An area within a district as set
forth in §
28-2.2(a).
Supplemental Services and Improvements. A supplemental service or improvement,
or both, referred to in §
28-1.5.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 1, § 36-1.1) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-1.2 Provision of alternate method of financing supplemental services and
improvements.
   Pursuant to HRS § 46-80.5, the council may use this chapter in addition to,
in combination with, or instead of any other law for or related to the creation
of improvement districts, the levying, assessment, and collection of special
assessments, the financing of supplemental services and improvements, the
issuance of bonds, or other matters covered by this chapter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 1, § 36-1.2) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-1.3 Superiority over conflicting provision of other ordinance.
   When this chapter conflicts with any other provision or ordinance, this
chapter shall prevail.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 1, § 36-1.3) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-1.4 Limitation on challenges.
   Pursuant to HRS § 46-80.5, no action or proceeding to object to or question
the validity of or enjoin any ordinance, action, or proceeding undertaken
pursuant to this chapter (including the liability for or the determination of
the amount of any special assessment levied with respect to any property or the
levy or assessment thereof) shall be maintained, unless begun within 30 days of
the effective date of the ordinance, determination, levy, assessment, or other
act, as the case may be.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 1, § 36-1.4) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-1.5 Types of supplemental services and improvements.
   A district may be established to provide and finance supplemental services
and improvements as follows:
(a)   A district may be established to provide for and finance additional
maintenance, security, or other additional services required for the enjoyment
and protection of the public and the promotion and enhancement of such
district, whether in conjunction with improvements authorized by this section,
including:
(1)   Services to enhance the security of persons and property within the
district;
(2)   Landscaping services;
(3)   Enhanced sanitation services;
(4)   Services promoting and advertising activities within the district;
(5)   Marketing education for businesses within the district;
(6)   Decorations and lighting for seasonal and holiday purposes; and
(7)   Delegable transportation management services, including traffic
operations, parking control and supply development, mobility enhancements for
all modes of travel, physical and operational access improvements, information
displays and the installation and maintenance of related electronic devices.
(b)   A district may be established to provide and finance, to the extent
permitted by law, supplemental improvements located on or within the city or
the district, which will restore or promote business activity in the district,
including:
(1)   Construction and installation of landscaping, planting and park areas;
(2)   Construction of lighting facilities;
(3)   Construction of physically aesthetic and decorative safety fixtures,
equipment and facilities;
(4)   Construction of improvements to enhance security of persons and property
within the district;
(5)   Construction of pedestrian overpasses and underpasses and connections
between buildings;
(6)   Closing, opening, widening or narrowing of existing streets;
(7)   Construction of ramps, sidewalks, plazas, and pedestrian malls;
(8)   Rehabilitation or removal of existing structures as required;
(9)   Removal and relocation of utilities and utility vaults as required;
(10)   Construction of parking lot and parking garage facilities;
(11)   Construction of fixtures, equipment, facilities and appurtenances as may
enhance the movement, convenience, and enjoyment of the public and be of
economic benefit to district properties, such as: bus stop shelters; benches
and street furniture; booths, kiosks, display cases and exhibits; signs;
receptacles; canopies; pedestrian shelters; and fountains; and
(12)   Construction of shoreline improvement, restoration, and protection
projects.
(c)   A district may be established to provide for the operation, maintenance,
removal and replacement of any supplemental service or improvement.
(d)   Any supplemental service or improvement undertaken by a district shall
conform with all applicable laws and rules.
(e)   It is the intent of the council that the level of services being provided
by the city in a district as of the effective date of the ordinance
establishing such district not be affected by that ordinance or the levying of
the special assessments. The ordinance establishing such district shall
describe such level of services.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 1, § 36-1.5) (Added by Ord. 00-13; Am. Ords. 15-10,
17-57)
§ 28-1.6 Payment of existing special assessments.
   A district may pay in full all amounts necessary to eliminate or reduce any
special assessment liens.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 1, § 36-1.6) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-1.7 Advances of funds, work, or property in-kind.
   After the formation of a district, the district board may accept advances of
funds, work, or property in-kind from any source. The district board may enter
into an agreement with the person or entity advancing the funds, work, or
property in-kind to repay all or a portion of the funds advanced or to
reimburse the person or entity for the value or cost, whichever is less, of the
work or property in-kind, as determined by the district board, with or without
interest; provided that the proposal to repay the funds or reimburse the value
or cost of the work or property in kind is included in the ordinance of
formation for the district. Any such agreement shall not constitute a debt or
liability of the city or be payable from sources other than the proceeds of the
special assessments levied pursuant to this chapter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 1, § 36-1.7) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-1.8 Construction of chapter.
   This chapter shall be liberally construed to effectuate its purposes. No
error, irregularity, or informality and no neglect or omission of any officer
in any procedure taken under this chapter which does not directly affect the
jurisdiction of the city to create a district for the provision of supplemental
services and improvements shall void or invalidate such proceeding or any levy
for the costs of such services or improvements.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 1, § 36-1.8) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-1.9 Validity of proceedings.
   The failure of any person to receive a notice, ordinance, order, or other
matter shall not affect in any way the validity of any proceedings taken under
this chapter or prevent the council from proceeding with any hearing so noticed
or other action.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 1, § 36-1.9) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
ARTICLE 2: PROCEEDINGS
Sections
   
28-2.1   Institution of proceedings
   
28-2.2   Ordinance establishing the district
   
28-2.3   Mailed notice of hearing
   
28-2.4   Protest by more than 51 percent
   
28-2.5   District boundaries
   
28-2.6   District term
   
28-2.7   Financing of supplemental services and improvements—Payment of debt
service on any bonds issued to finance improvements—Payment of incidental
expenses identified in ordinance establishing the district
   
28-2.8   Designation of supplemental service and improvement area
   
28-2.9   District association
   
28-2.10   Financial records
§ 28-2.1 Institution of proceedings.
(a)   Proceedings for the establishment of a district may be instituted by the
council on its own initiative or shall be instituted by the council at the
request of the mayor.
(b)   Proceedings for the establishment of a district shall be instituted by
the council after receipt by the city clerk of a petition requesting the
institution of the proceedings signed by landowners owning lands within the
proposed district that have a real property tax assessed value of at least 25
percent of the total real property tax assessed value of all land in the
proposed district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 2, § 36-2.1) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-2.2 Ordinance establishing the district.
(a)   If the council determines to establish a district, it shall do so by
ordinance. The ordinance establishing the district shall at least do all of the
following:
(1)   State that a district is established under the terms of this chapter;
(2)   State the name of the district in substantially the following form: “City
and County of Honolulu Business Improvement District No. ____.” One or more
additional descriptive words may be used in the name of the district to
indicate its geographic area;
(3)   State that the initial term of the proposed district is for five years,
which is automatically renewed, unless an ordinance of termination is adopted,
in which case operations of the district shall cease although the term shall
not expire until all debt service on bonds and incidental expenses and
supplemental services expenses related thereto are fully paid or irrevocable
provision for such payment has been made;
(4)   List the parcels of land to be assessed within the district identified by
tax key number;
(5)   State the general boundaries of the district or provide a map generally
showing the same, or both. Should any discrepancy exist between the map and the
description of the boundaries of the district, the map shall control;
(6)   State the supplemental services and improvements to be provided and
financed by the district and the total annual amount proposed to be expended
for the supplemental services and improvements in the first operating year. If
the incurring of incidental expenses is proposed, the ordinance shall identify
the estimated expenses;
(7)   Specify the principal amount of bonds to be issued, if any, to finance
supplemental improvements in the district;
(8)   State the incidental expenses to be paid from the special assessment;
(9)   If a service area within the district is proposed to be established,
state and describe the boundaries of the proposed service area, the name
proposed for the service area, the supplemental services and improvements
proposed to be financed by the district for the service area, and to what
extent it is proposed that the district special assessments will be used in the
service area for purposes of financing such services and improvements;
(10)   State the rate and method of apportionment pursuant to which the first
year’s special assessment is to be levied;
(11)   Prescribe the procedures for approval by the appropriate agency of the
city for the design, plans, and specifications of any supplemental improvements
to be undertaken in a district; and
(12)   Include any other information required by HRS § 46-80.5 or this chapter.
(b)   When the ordinance establishing the district is passed on third reading,
the council shall determine whether all proceedings were valid and in
conformity with the requirements of this chapter. If the council so determines,
it shall make a finding to that effect. The finding shall be final and
conclusive.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 2, § 36-2.2) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-2.3 Mailed notice of hearing.
(a)   The council shall fix the time and place for a hearing on the proposed
ordinance establishing the district. The date of the hearing shall not be less
than 30 or more than 90 days from the date of introduction of the proposed
ordinance.
(b)   In addition to the public notice given pursuant to applicable law, the
city clerk shall also send by first-class mail notice of the council public
hearing to each owner of land proposed to be included and assessed in the
proposed district. The notice shall be sent to the same address to which the
real property tax assessment notice is sent. When more than one person is
listed as fee owner or as lessee, one notice sent to one fee owner and to one
lessee, as applicable, shall be sufficient for this subsection. The notice
shall be mailed at least 15 days before the council public hearing and shall
contain the following information:
(1)   A summary of the ordinance establishing the district and the fact that
the ordinance and the district plan are on file in the city clerk’s office for
public inspection;
(2)   The time and place of the first public hearing on the establishment of
the district;
(3)   A statement that, at the hearing, the testimony of all interested persons
and landowners for or against the establishment of the district, the extent of
the district, and the levy of a special assessment will be heard; and
(4)   A summary of the protest procedure and the form of any protests.
(c)   Failure to give notice to any owner or failure of any owner to receive
such notice shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the hearing or
any other proceedings taken under this chapter or any special assessment levied
under this chapter if the council determines that a reasonable effort was made
to give such notice. The council’s determination shall be final and conclusive.
(d)   The hearing may be continued from time to time, but shall be completed
within 30 days; except that, if the council finds that the complexity of the
proposed changes or the need for public participation requires additional time,
the hearing may be continued from time to time for a period not to exceed 90
days from the date of the original hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing,
the council, after considering all protests and such other relevant factors
(such as the general plan or development plan) as it deems appropriate, may
approve the ordinance establishing the district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 2, § 36-2.3) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-2.4 Protest by more than 51 percent.
(a)   Protests against the proposed ordinance establishing the district may be
made in writing by landowners and if made shall be in such form as may be
prescribed by the city clerk. All written protests shall be filed with the city
clerk before or at the hearing. The council may waive any irregularities in the
form or content of any written protest. Written protests may be withdrawn in
writing by the owner who protested at any time before the conclusion of the
hearing.
(b)   If the landowners owning lands proposed to be assessed within the
district that have a real property tax assessed value of more than 51 percent
of the total real property tax assessed value of all land proposed to be
assessed in the district or if more than 51 percent of the owners of land
proposed to be assessed in the district file written protests with the council
before or at the public hearing against the proposed ordinance establishing the
district and if protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the amount of the
protests to 51 percent or less, the proceedings to create the specified
district shall cease. No proceedings to create the district shall again be
undertaken for a period of 90 days from the date on which proceedings cease.
Council may continue the public hearing or recess the meeting to provide the
city clerk time to count the protests and any withdrawals.
(c)   For the purpose of determining whether 51 percent of the owners of land
have filed protests, the owner of each apartment in a condominium property
regime that is specially assessed or proposed to be specially assessed shall
have a vote equal to the following fraction: 1/the number of apartments in the
condominium property regime which are, or are proposed to be, specially
assessed.
(d)   For the purpose of a protest regarding a parcel of land for which a fee
owner and lessee appear on the real property assessment list, a protest by the
fee owner, or the lessee, or both, shall be counted as a protest for that
parcel of land.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 2, § 36-2.4) (Added by Ord. 00-13 )
§ 28-2.5 District boundaries.
(a)   A special improvement district may include areas of land that are not
contiguous.
(b)   Land may be included in more than one special improvement district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 2, § 36-2.5) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-2.6 District term.
   The initial term of a district shall be for five years unless earlier
terminated under
Article 6. The term shall automatically renew for additional five-year terms,
unless an ordinance terminating the district is adopted, in which case the
operations of the district shall cease except for payment, or providing
irrevocably for payment, of all debt service on bonds, supplemental services
expenses, and incidental expenses related thereto.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 2, § 36-2.6) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-2.7 Financing of supplemental services and improvements—Payment of debt
service on any bonds issued to finance improvements—Payment of incidental
expenses identified in ordinance establishing the district.
(a)   Only the expenses of supplemental services and improvements identified in
the ordinance establishing a district may be paid from the special assessments
levied within a district.
(b)   Only the debt service on any bonds issued to finance costs of
supplemental improvements within the district and identified in the ordinance
establishing the district may be paid from the special assessments levied
within a district.
(c)   Only the incidental expenses identified in the ordinance establishing the
district may be paid from the special assessments levied within a district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 2, § 36-2.7) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-2.8 Designation of supplemental service and improvement area.
   For the purpose of financing specified supplemental services and
improvements, the council may designate a portion of a special improvement
district as a supplemental service and improvement area. The designation shall
be made in the ordinance establishing the district or an amendment thereto. A
specified supplemental service and improvement area shall be known as “Service
Area No. _______ of City and County of Honolulu Business Improvement District
No. __________.” After the designation of a service area, all proceedings to
levy special assessments for the financing of the specified supplemental
services and improvements shall apply only to the service area, except to the
extent otherwise provided in the ordinance establishing the district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 2, § 36-2.8) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-2.9 District association.
(a)   There shall be a district association for each special improvement
district established pursuant to this chapter. The district association shall
be a nonprofit corporation and shall have one or more classes of membership,
voting or nonvoting. The purpose of the association shall be the carrying out
of such activities as may be prescribed in the district plan. The articles of
incorporation or bylaws of such association shall provide for voting
representation of fee simple owners and lessees of land within the district and
may provide that the votes of members who are owners of land be weighted in
proportion to the special assessment levied or to be levied against the parcels
of land within the district, and that members whose properties are exempt from
the special assessment are nonvoting members. Alternatively, if no special
assessment is imposed upon any property under the provisions of
Article 3 of this chapter, the voting representation shall be established by
the district board in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance
establishing the district.
(b)   The district board shall be composed of representatives of fee simple
owners, lessees of land, and tenants of commercial space within the district;
provided, however, that not less than a majority of the district board members
shall represent fee simple owners and lessees of land; and provided further,
that tenants of commercial space within the district shall also be represented
on the district board. The district board shall also include the following, all
of whom shall serve as the incorporators of the association pursuant to the
Hawaii Nonprofit Corporation Act:
(1)   The chief engineer of the department of facility maintenance or the
director’s designated representative, who shall be nonvoting member;
(2)   The director of budget and fiscal services or the director’s designated
representative, who shall be a nonvoting member;
(3)   The mayor or the mayor’s designee, who shall be a voting member; and
(4)   The councilmember of the district within which the majority of the land
area within which the district is located or the councilmember’s designated
representative, who shall be a voting member.
The district association may be incorporated prior to the effective date of any
district established pursuant to this chapter. If no special assessment is
imposed upon any property under the ordinance establishing the district, the
voting and non-voting representation shall be established by the district board
in accordance with the ordinance establishing the district.
(c)   In addition to such other powers as are conferred to it by law or this
chapter, the district board shall have the power to carry out the activities
prescribed in the district plan including but not limited to:
(1)   Determining the scope and specifications for the performance standards;
(2)   Letting contracts for the supplemental services or for the management of
operations of the district;
(3)   Entering into contracts for any one or more of the following: the
development of plans, design, construction or renovation of supplemental
improvements; and
(4)   Adopting the annual budget for the district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 2, § 36-2.9) (Added by Ord. 00-13; Am. Ord. 17-57)
§ 28-2.10 Financial records.
   The district board shall maintain financial records regarding the operation
of the district and the contracts for supplemental services and improvements.
   The district board shall make such financial records available to the public
during regular business hours upon reasonable notice to the district board.
   If required by the ordinance establishing the district, such financial
records shall be audited by a certified public accountant and the audit report
made available to the council and the public.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 2, § 36-2.10) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
ARTICLE 3: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
Sections
   
28-3.1   Special assessment apportionment
   
28-3.2   Special assessment levy
   
28-3.3   Exemptions
   
28-3.4   Special assessment payment and collection
   
28-3.5   Special assessment lien
   
28-3.6   Special assessment notice to owners of land
   
28-3.7   Special assessment notice to prospective buyer or lessee of parcel of
land
   
28-3.8   Special assessment obligation for parcel of land acquired by city
§ 28-3.1 Special assessment apportionment.
   A special assessment levied pursuant to this chapter may be based on benefit
received by a parcel of land, the cost of making a supplemental service
available to a parcel of land, the cost of supplemental services and
improvements benefitting a parcel of land, the stage or type of development or
use of a parcel of land, the happening of one or more specified events related
to the development or improvement of all or certain parcels of land, or any
other reasonable basis or formula as determined by the council. Any
determination of the reasonableness of any special assessment or the rate or
method of the apportionment thereof by the council in the ordinance
establishing the district shall be final and conclusive.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 3, § 36-3.1) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-3.2 Special assessment levy.
(a)   During the first special assessment year, special assessments shall be
levied and apportioned pursuant to the rate and method specified in the
ordinance establishing the district. Prior to the commencement of the second
and each subsequent special assessment year, the district board shall prepare
and submit a report to the council that shall include the anticipated surplus
or deficit from the preceding special assessment year as well as any proposed
new rate or method of special assessment for the next special assessment year.
The report shall be due by the date set in the ordinance establishing the
district or, if the ordinance does not include such a date, the 30th day
preceding the commencement of the next special assessment year.
(1)   If the proposed special assessment for a special assessment year does not
exceed 110 percent of the preceding special assessment year’s total annual
special assessment, the new rate based upon the method of special assessment
specified in the ordinance establishing the district shall take effect upon the
new special assessment year.
(2)   If the proposed special assessment for a special assessment year exceeds
110 percent of the preceding special assessment year’s total annual special
assessment, the district board may recommend to the council a change to the
rate or method of apportionment of an existing special assessment for a
district and the recommendation shall be accompanied by a justification and
proposed ordinance of consideration.
(3)   The council shall review and may approve the ordinance of consideration
in accordance with this article.
(b)   The district board shall have the power to:
(1)   Determine the annual amount due from each landowner subject to the
special assessment; and
(2)   Make an adjustment to the annual amount due when required by the special
assessment base or formula in the applicable ordinance establishing the
district.
(c)   An owner of land who was not entitled to protest a proposed ordinance
under §§
28-2.4, 28-4.7, or 28-5.6 shall not be subject to a special assessment levied
on that owner’s land pursuant to such ordinance.
(d)   Special assessments shall be levied only as long as needed to pay costs
of supplemental services and improvements, debt service, and incidental
expenses.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 3, § 36-3.2) (Added by Ord. 00-13; Am. Ord. 01-02)
§ 28-3.3 Exemptions.
   The properties owned by the United States except for property and leases of
government property subject to real property taxation under §§
8-10.14, 8-10.15, and 8-10.16, shall be exempt from any special assessment. The
properties owned by the State and the city, except for property and leases of
government property subject to real property taxation under §§
8-10.14, 8-10.15, and 8-10.16, may be exempt from any special assessment. No
other properties or entities within a district shall be exempt from the special
assessment, unless expressly exempted in the ordinance establishing the
district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 3, § 36-3.3) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-3.4 Special assessment payment and collection.
(a)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall collect the special
assessment for a district on a basis to be agreed upon by the city, through its
director of budget and fiscal services and the district board. The director of
budget and fiscal services shall deposit all moneys so collected in an account
for the district in the general trust fund, unless another city fund is
identified as the depository in the ordinance establishing the district.
(b)   All special assessments levied shall be due and payable according to
terms established by the district board.
(c)   Failure to pay the amount assessed when due shall thereafter bear penalty
and interest at rates and terms determined by the district board. Any penalties
and interest collected shall be deposited in that district’s fund.
(d)   The director of budget and fiscal services may deduct from special
assessments collected the administrative expenses directly incurred in
collection.
(e)   Special assessments collected shall be transmitted to the district within
15 days after the date that they are due and payable to the city.
(f)   By a date set in the ordinance establishing the district or written
agreement between the district board and city, the director of budget and
fiscal services shall prepare and submit a report to the district board
summarizing the special assessments collected or that remain unpaid by parcel
of land and landowner, the amount of interest and penalties collected, the
amount of moneys paid out for district purposes, and the amount of
administrative expenses directly incurred in the collection of special
assessments, that were deducted from the amounts collected.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 3, § 36-3.4) (Added by Ord. 00-13; Am. Ord. 01-02)
§ 28-3.5 Special assessment lien.
(a)   The special assessment levied on a parcel of land and the applicable
penalty, interest, and costs of collection shall be a lien against the land and
improvements of the parcel of land. The lien shall attach from the effective
date of the ordinance establishing a district and levying the special
assessment on the parcel of land and shall be extinguished when the special
assessment and any applicable penalty, interest, and costs of collection are
fully paid or terminated.
(b)   The lien of the special assessment shall have priority over all other
liens, except the lien of general real property taxes and shall be on a parity
with the lien of assessments levied under HRS §§ 46-80 and 46-80.1 and
Chapter 27 herein. All liens of special assessments made pursuant to this
chapter shall be on a parity as to each other without regard to when made or
for what purpose.
(c)   If any special assessment is not paid when due, the department of budget
and fiscal services may, after not less than two months of delinquency,
foreclose the lien of special assessment to collect the delinquent amount and
any penalty, interest, and costs, in the same manner as the foreclosure of the
lien of real property taxes.
(d)   In any event, the department of budget and fiscal services shall
foreclose the lien before the end of the 6th year of a delinquency.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 3, § 36-3.5) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-3.6 Special assessment notice to owners of land.
   For the first special assessment year of a district, notices of the special
assessments shall be sent to all assessed landowners at the address shown on
the real property tax assessment list. The notice shall be sent by the date set
in the ordinance establishing the district or, if the ordinance does not
include such a date, by the date agreed to by the district board and city. Each
notice shall set forth the amount of the special assessment levied, the rate
and method of apportionment of the special assessment, and the date when the
special assessment is due. Failure to give or receive such notice to or by any
landowner shall not affect the validity of the special assessment, nor entitle
the landowner to an extension of time within which to pay the special
assessment.
   After the first special assessment year, notice of special assessments may
be sent annually to the assessed landowners; provided that the date of such
annual notice may be adjusted by the city in accordance with the ordinance
establishing the district.
   The notices of special assessment for the first year and any subsequent year
shall be sent by the director of budget and fiscal services or by the district
association on behalf of the director if so agreed to by the director and
district board.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 3, § 36-3.6) (Added by Ord. 00-13; Am. Ord. 01-02, 02-
49)
§ 28-3.7 Special assessment notice to prospective buyer or lessee of parcel of
land.
   Before entering into an agreement to sell or lease a parcel of land subject
to a special assessment levy and lien, the landowner shall notify the
prospective buyer or lessee of the existence of the levy and lien in writing.
Failure to give or receive such notice to or by any landowner shall not affect
the validity of the special assessment nor entitle the landowner to an
extension of time within which to pay the special assessment.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 3, § 36-3.7) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-3.8 Special assessment obligation for parcel of land acquired by city.
   If a parcel of land subject to a special assessment is acquired by the city
by foreclosure or gift or devise, the parcel of land shall be sold as soon as
practicable, and the purchaser of the parcel of land shall take title subject
to the lien of the special assessment and shall be required to pay the special
assessments then due as part of the purchase price and the special assessments
becoming due from and after the sale date.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 3, § 36-3.8) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
ARTICLE 4: CHANGES IN AUTHORIZED SUPPLEMENTAL SERVICES, IMPROVEMENTS,
AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
Sections
   
28-4.1   Authorization to change supplemental service and improvements or
special assessment
   
28-4.2   Ordinance of consideration
   
28-4.3   Request for changes
   
28-4.4   Contents of proposed ordinance of consideration
   
28-4.5   Notice of hearing on proposed ordinance of consideration
   
28-4.6   Protests against the proposed ordinance of consideration
   
28-4.7   Protest by more than 51 percent
   
28-4.8   Duration of hearing—Determination
   
28-4.9   Filing of notice
§ 28-4.1 Authorization to change supplemental service and improvements or
special assessment.
(a)   Upon request of the district board, the council may change the authorized
supplemental services and improvements, the supplemental services and
improvements to be financed, the rate or method of apportionment of a special
assessment, or the boundaries of the district other than an annexation provided
in
Article 5, or the council may require the levy of a new special assessment.
Such change or new levy shall be accomplished in accordance with this article.
(b)   Any other amendments to the ordinance establishing the district not
specifically controlled by this chapter may be accomplished by ordinance but
need not comply with this article,
Article 5, or
Article 6.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 4, § 36-4.1) (Added by Ord. 00-13; Am. Ord. 01-10)
§ 28-4.2 Ordinance of consideration.
(a)   If the council determines that the public convenience and necessity
require a change permitted under §
28-4.1(a) or require the levy of a new special assessment, the council may
approve an ordinance of consideration to do so.
The council shall commence proceedings only upon receipt of a request from the
board directors.
(b)   An ordinance of consideration for a district shall be an amendment of the
ordinance establishing the district. The ordinance of consideration shall
contain the pertinent information required by §
28-4.4.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 4, § 36-4.2) (Added by Ord. 00-13; Am. Ord. 01-10)
§ 28-4.3 Request for changes.
   The council may commence proceedings to approve an ordinance of
consideration if receiving a request from the district board requesting a
change permitted under §
28-4.1(a) or the levy of a new special assessment.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 4, § 36-4.3) (Added by Ord. 00-13; Am. Ord. 01-10)
§ 28-4.4 Contents of proposed ordinance of consideration.
   A proposed ordinance of consideration shall do all of the following:
(1)   State the name of the district;
(2)   Describe the boundaries of the district;
(3)   Specify the proposed change to the supplemental services or improvements,
the supplemental services or improvements to be financed or the boundaries;
(4)   Specify whether the issuance and sale of bonds to finance any
supplemental improvements is required;
(5)   Specify any proposed new special assessment which will be levied to
finance new or existing supplemental services and improvements or payment of
debt service for supplemental improvements; and
(6)   Specify any proposed change to the rate or method of apportionment of an
existing special assessment.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 4, § 36-4.4) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-4.5 Notice of hearing on proposed ordinance of consideration.
(a)   The council shall fix the time and place for a hearing on the proposed
ordinance of consideration. The date of the hearing shall not be less than 30
or more than 90 days from the date of introduction of the proposed ordinance.
(b)   The city clerk shall publish notice of the hearing in the same manner as
required under §
28-2.3 for notice of a hearing to owners of land within a proposed district. In
addition, the city clerk shall mail the notice to each owner of land assessed
or proposed to be assessed in the district at least 15 days before the hearing
in the manner described in §
28-2.3.
(c)   The notice shall contain all of the following information:
(1)   A summary of the proposed ordinance and a statement that the proposed
ordinance is on file in the city clerk’s office for public inspection
(alternatively, the notice may contain the full text of the proposed
ordinance);
(2)   The time and place of the hearing;
(3)   A statement that, at the hearing, the testimony of all interested persons
and landowners for or against the proposed changes will be heard; and
(4)   A summary of the protest procedure and the form of any protest, including
the respective rights of an owner and the effect of protests made against the
proposed changes.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 4, § 36-4.5) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-4.6 Protests against the proposed ordinance of consideration.
   Protests against the proposed ordinance of consideration may be made in
writing by landowners and if made shall be in such form as may be prescribed by
the city clerk. All written protests shall be filed with the city clerk before
or at the hearing. The council may waive any irregularities in the form or
content of any written protest. Written protests may be withdrawn in writing by
the owner who protested at any time before the conclusion of the hearing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 4, § 36-4.6) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-4.7 Protest by more than 51 percent.
   If the landowners owning lands which are assessed or proposed to be assessed
within the district that have a real property tax assessed value of more than
51 percent of the total real property tax assessed value of all land assessed
or proposed to be assessed in the district, or if more than 51 percent of the
owners of land assessed or proposed to be assessed in the district file written
protests with the council before or at the public hearing against the proposed
ordinance of consideration, and if protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce
the amount of the protests to 51 percent or less, the ordinance of
consideration shall not be approved. No proceedings to include the provision in
another ordinance of consideration shall again be undertaken for a period of 90
days from the close of the hearing.
   Section 28-2.4(c) and (d) shall apply to protests under this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 4, § 36-4.7) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-4.8 Duration of hearing—Determination.
   The hearing may be continued from time to time, but shall be completed
within 30 days; except that, if the council finds that the complexity of the
proposed changes or the need for public participation requires additional time,
the hearing may be continued from time to time for a period not to exceed 90
days from the date of the original hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing,
the council, after considering all protests and such other relevant factors
(such as the general plan or development plan) as it deems appropriate, may
approve the ordinance of consideration.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 4, § 36-4.8) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-4.9 Filing of notice.
   After the effective date of an ordinance of consideration, the director of
budget and fiscal services shall provide notice of any change in the district
or the special assessment or levy in the manner specified under §
28-3.6.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 4, § 36-4.9) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
ARTICLE 5: ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY
Sections
   
28-5.1   Authorization to annex—Contiguity not required
   
28-5.2   Ordinance of annexation
   
28-5.3   Contents of proposed ordinance of annexation
   
28-5.4   Notice of hearing on proposed ordinance of annexation
   
28-5.5   Protests against proposed ordinance of annexation
   
28-5.6   Protest by more than 51 percent
   
28-5.7   Duration of hearing—Determination
   
28-5.8   Filing of notice
§ 28-5.1 Authorization to annex—Contiguity not required.
   The council may annex an area of land to an existing district in accordance
with this article. The annexed land need not be contiguous to the existing
district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 5, § 36-5.1) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-5.2 Ordinance of annexation.
   Upon request of the district board, if the council determines that the
public convenience and necessity require the addition of land to an existing
district, the council may approve an ordinance of annexation adding the land.
The ordinance of annexation adding land to an existing district shall be deemed
an amendment of the ordinance of formation for that district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 5, § 36-5.2) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-5.3 Contents of proposed ordinance of annexation.
(a)   A proposed ordinance of annexation shall do all of the following:
(1)   State the name and term of the existing district;
(2)   Describe the boundaries of the existing district and the area proposed to
be annexed;
(3)   Identify the supplemental services and improvements provided and financed
by the existing district, the supplemental services and improvements to be
provided and financed by the area proposed to be annexed, and the supplemental
services and improvements to be provided and financed in common by both;
(4)   Specify the proposed new special assessment which will be levied within
the area proposed to be annexed; and
(5)   Specify any proposed change to the special assessment within the existing
district as a result of the proposed annexation.
(b)   The special assessment rate in the existing district shall not be
increased as a result of annexation proceedings pursuant to this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 5, § 36-5.3) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-5.4 Notice of hearing on proposed ordinance of annexation.
(a)   The council shall fix the time and place for a hearing on the proposed
ordinance of annexation. The date of the hearing shall not be less than 30 or
more than 90 days from the date of introduction of the proposed ordinance.
(b)   The city clerk shall publish notice of the hearing in the same manner as
required under §
28-2.3 for notice of a hearing to owners of land within a proposed district. In
addition, the city clerk shall mail the notice to each owner of land assessed
or proposed to be assessed in the existing district and area proposed to be
annexed. The notice shall be mailed at least 15 days before the hearing in the
manner described in §
28-2.3.
(c)   The notice shall contain all of the following information:
(1)   A summary of the proposed ordinance and a statement that the proposed
ordinance is on file in the city clerk’s office for public inspection
(alternatively, the notice may contain the full text of the proposed
ordinance);
(2)   The time and place of the hearing;
(3)   A statement that, at the hearing, the testimony of all interested persons
and landowners for or against the proposed annexation will be heard; and
(4)   A summary of the protest procedure and the form of any protests,
including the rights of an owner of land and the effect of protests made
against the proposed annexation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 5, § 36-5.4) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-5.5 Protests against proposed ordinance of annexation.
   Protests against the proposed ordinance of annexation may be made in writing
by landowners of land in the existing district or by landowners of land in the
area proposed to be annexed and, if made, shall be in such form as may be
prescribed by the city clerk. All written protests shall be filed with the city
clerk before or at the hearing. The council may waive any irregularities in the
form or content of any written protest. Written protests may be withdrawn in
writing by the owner who protested at any time before the conclusion of the
hearing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 5, § 36-5.5) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-5.6 Protest by more than 51 percent.
(a)   If either:
(1)   The landowners owning lands which are specially assessed in the existing
district that have a real property tax assessed value of more than 51 percent
of the total real property tax assessed value of land specially assessed in the
existing district;
(2)   The landowners owning lands which are proposed to be annexed and
specially assessed that have a real property tax assessed value of more than 51
percent of the total real property tax assessed value of land proposed to be
annexed and specially assessed;
(3)   More than 51 percent of the owners of lands which are specially assessed
in the existing district; or
(4)   More than 51 percent of the owners of land which are proposed to be
annexed and specially assessed;
file written protests with the council before or at the public hearing against
the proposed annexation and if protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the
amount of the protests to 51 percent or less, the annexation proceedings shall
cease.
   Section 28-2.4(c) and (d) shall apply to protests under this section.
(b)   If the annexation proceedings cease pursuant to subsection (a), no
proceedings to annex the land shall be undertaken for a period of 90 days from
the close of the hearing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 5, § 36-5.6) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-5.7 Duration of hearing—Determination.
   The hearing may be continued from time to time, but shall be completed
within 30 days; except that, if the council finds that the complexity of the
proposed annexation or the need for public participation requires additional
time, the hearing may be continued from time to time for a period not to exceed
90 days from the date of the original hearing. At the conclusion of the
hearing, the council, after considering all protests and such other relevant
factors (such as the general plan or development plan) as it deems appropriate,
may approve or disapprove the ordinance of annexation (in the form in which it
was introduced or with such changes as determined by the council and permitted
by this part). Thereafter, the city may levy the special assessment on the
annexed land.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 5, § 36-5.7) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-5.8 Filing of notice.
   After the effective date of an ordinance of annexation, the director of
budget and fiscal services shall provide notice of any special assessment
change or levy in the manner specified under §
28-3.6.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 5, § 36-5.8) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
ARTICLE 6: TERMINATION OF DISTRICT
Sections
   
28-6.1   Authorization to terminate the district
   
28-6.2   Ordinance terminating the district
   
28-6.3   Contents of proposed ordinance terminating the district
   
28-6.4   Notice of hearing on proposed ordinance terminating the district
§ 28-6.1 Authorization to terminate the district.
(a)   The council may terminate a district at any time for cause due to the
wilful misconduct or gross negligence on the part of the district board. The
council shall initiate proceedings to terminate the district for cause by a
resolution and shall terminate the district by an ordinance.
(b)   The council, on its own initiative, may terminate a district at the
expiration of the then-occurring five-year term in accordance with this
article. The council shall initiate proceedings to terminate a district at the
expiration of the then-occurring five-year term by a resolution and shall
terminate the district by an ordinance.
(c)   The council may terminate a district at any time upon request from the
district board. A termination shall be accomplished in accordance with this
article.
(d)   Except as set forth herein, the council may not initiate proceedings to
terminate a district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 6, § 36-6.1) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-6.2 Ordinance terminating the district.
(a)   Upon its own initiative or receipt of the request from the district
board, both as set forth in §
28-6.1, if the council determines that the public convenience and necessity
will be promoted by terminating a district, the council may approve an
ordinance terminating the district.
(b)   The council shall not approve an ordinance terminating a district,
unless:
(1)   Provisions are included to assure the payment of all outstanding debt
service on any bonds issued to finance improvements within the district from
the special assessments or accumulated reserves of the district or as council
otherwise deems necessary; and
(2)   Provisions are included to assure the payment of all outstanding
incidental expenses and supplemental services expenses accrued for the district
from the special assessments or accumulated reserves of the district or as
council otherwise deems necessary.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 6, § 36-6.2) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-6.3 Contents of proposed ordinance terminating the district.
   A proposed ordinance terminating the district shall do all of the following:
(1)   State the name of the district;
(2)   Describe the boundaries of the district;
(3)   Identify the proposed termination date of the district;
(4)   Give a narrative justification for the proposed termination;
(5)   With respect to bonds issued to finance improvements for the district:
(A)   Guarantee the payment of the bonds before the termination of the
district; or
(B)   Establish a method by which the bonds will be paid after the termination
of the district;
(6)   With respect to incidental expenses accrued for the district:
(A)   Guarantee the payment of the incidental expenses before the termination
of the district; or
(B)   Establish a method by which incidental expenses, if any, will be paid
after the termination of the district; and
(7)   With respect to supplemental services expenses accrued for the district:
(A)   Guarantee the payment of the supplemental services expenses before the
termination of the district; or
(B)   Establish a method by which supplemental services expenses, if any, will
be paid after the termination of the district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 6, § 36-6.3) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-6.4 Notice of hearing on proposed ordinance terminating the district.
   The council shall fix the time and place for a hearing on the proposed
ordinance terminating the district. The date of the hearing shall not be less
than 30 or more than 90 days from the date of introduction of the proposed
ordinance.
   The city clerk shall publish notice of the hearing in the same manner as
required under §
28-2.3 for notice of a hearing to institute proceedings. In addition, the city
clerk shall mail the notice to each owner of land assessed in the district at
least 15 days before the hearing.
   The notice shall contain all of the following information:
(1)   A summary of the proposed ordinance and the fact that the proposed
ordinance is on file in the city clerk’s office for public inspection
(alternatively, the notice may contain the full text of the proposed
ordinance);
(2)   The time and place of the hearing; and
(3)   A statement that, at the hearing, the testimony of all interested persons
and landowners for or against the proposed termination will be heard.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 6, § 36-6.4) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
ARTICLE 7: BONDS
Sections
   
28-7.1   Bond ordinance
   
28-7.2   Costs includable in bond principal
   
28-7.3   Minimum value-to-lien ratio
   
28-7.4   Covenant to pursue foreclosure action to collect delinquent special
assessments
   
28-7.5   Signing of bonds
   
28-7.6   Manner of sale
   
28-7.7   Bond fund
   
28-7.8   Refunding bonds
   
28-7.9   Prohibition on issuance of general obligation bonds secured by general
credit
   
28-7.10   Debt limit calculation
§ 28-7.1 Bond ordinance.
(a)   Whenever the council deems it necessary or appropriate that special
improvement district bonds be issued to finance the cost of supplemental
improvements or to reimburse the cost thereof previously paid, the council may
authorize the issuance of bonds. The issuance shall be authorized by a bond
ordinance approved with or after the approval of the ordinance establishing the
district and levying the special assessment to finance the costs of
supplemental improvements. The bond ordinance shall provide for the following:
(1)   The issuance of the bonds in one or more series;
(2)   The date the bonds shall bear;
(3)   The maturity date or dates of the bonds, which shall not be more than 30
years after the issuance date of the bonds;
(4)   The rate or maximum rate of interest on the bonds, which shall not exceed
the maximum rate permitted by law and which may be fixed or variable and simple
or compound;
(5)   The time or times at which interest shall be payable;
(6)   The denomination of the bonds;
(7)   The form of the bonds;
(8)   The conversion or registration privileges carried by the bonds;
(9)   The rank or priority of the bonds;
(10)   The manner of execution of the bonds;
(11)   The medium of payment of the bonds;
(12)   The place or places of payment;
(13)   The terms of redemption and the redemption price or prices to which the
bonds are subject;
(14)   The pledge or assignment of all or part of the special assessments
collected from the district thereof, the liens securing such special
assessments, or any other funds which are intended by the council to secure
payment of the bonds. The pledge shall be superior to all other claims on the
special assessments (except to the extent otherwise provided in this chapter
and the bond ordinance);
(15)   The establishment and handling of a separate special fund or funds to
pay or secure the bonds or to pay for the costs of supplemental improvements or
incidental expenses;
(16)   The obligations in which may be invested the proceeds of the bonds and
any other funds (including special assessments) pledged to secure payment of
the bonds; and
(17)   Any other provisions for the issuance, payment, security, credit
enhancement, handling of funds, default, remedy, or other matter related to the
bonds which the council deems appropriate.
(b)   The bond ordinance may provide that any or all of the terms listed in
this section or elsewhere in this article may be determined and fixed by the
director of budget and fiscal services at or before the delivery of the bonds
or in an indenture, trust agreement, or fiscal agent agreement between the city
and a corporate trustee or fiscal agent located within or without the State.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 7, § 36-7.1) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-7.2 Costs includable in bond principal.
   The principal amount of bonds authorized to be issued may include all costs
and estimated costs of supplemental improvements and related expenses.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 7, § 36-7.2) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-7.3 Minimum value-to-lien ratio.
   The principal amount of bonds authorized to be issued for a district shall
not exceed one-third of the value of the real property upon which a special
assessment is levied for payment of the debt service on the bonds. The “value
of the real property” shall be the fair market value of the land, the
improvements thereon and the improvements, within the meaning of §
28-1.5, to be constructed within the district, as shown by the real property
tax assessed values of the subject property.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 7, § 36-7.3) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-7.4 Covenant to pursue foreclosure action to collect delinquent special
assessments.
   The director of budget and fiscal services may covenant, for the benefit of
bond owners, to commence and diligently pursue to completion any foreclosure
action regarding delinquent special assessments. The covenant may specify a
deadline for commencement of the foreclosure action and any other terms and
conditions the director of budget and fiscal services determines reasonable
regarding the foreclosure action.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 7, § 36-7.4) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-7.5 Signing of bonds.
   Unless otherwise specified in the bond ordinance, the bonds shall be signed
by the mayor and countersigned by the director of budget and fiscal services or
the director’s deputy. Signatures on the bonds may be manual or facsimile. If
any officer whose signature appears on the bonds vacates the office before the
delivery of the bonds, the signature shall be as effective as if the officer
had remained in office.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 7, § 36-7.5) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-7.6 Manner of sale.
   The director of budget and fiscal services may sell bonds at public or
private sale at the times, for the price or prices, and in the manner the
council determines to be appropriate and in the public interest (such
determination being final and conclusive).
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 7, § 36-7.6) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-7.7 Bond fund.
   All of the collections for payment of principal of and interest on bonds and
related expenses shall be paid into a district bond or reserve fund and shall
be used solely for the payment of the principal of and interest on the
outstanding bonds of the district and related expenses, all as provided in the
bond ordinance.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 7, § 36-7.7) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-7.8 Refunding bonds.
(a)   The council may authorize the issuance of bonds to refund any or all of
the district bonds outstanding that have been issued pursuant to this article.
The refunding bonds shall be authorized by a bond ordinance.
(b)   Refunding bonds shall not be issued if the total net interest cost to
maturity on the refunding bonds plus the principal amount of the refunding
bonds exceeds the total net interest cost to maturity on the bonds to be
refunded plus the principal amount of the bonds to be refunded. Subject to such
limitations, the principal amount of the refunding bonds may be more than, less
than, or the same as the principal amount of the bonds to be refunded. The
principal amount of such refunding bonds shall not count against any maximum
amount of bonds authorized in the original bond ordinance.
(c)   The designated costs of issuing refunding bonds shall be paid from
proceeds of the refunding bonds, interest earned on such proceeds, or special
assessments from the district. However, any interest or special assessments
paid for the designated costs shall be added to the total net interest costs to
maturity on the refunding bonds in determining whether the issuance of the
refunding bonds complies with subsection (b).
“Designated costs of issuing the refunding bonds” means any of the following
costs and expenses designated by the council in the bond ordinance authorizing
the issuance of the refunding bonds:
      (1)   All expenses incident to the calling, retiring, or paying of the
bonds to be refunded and incident to the issuance of refunding bonds, including
the charges of any agent in connection with the issuance of the refunding bonds
or the redemption or retirement of the bonds to be refunded;
      (2)   The interest upon the refunding bonds from the date of sale of the
refunding bonds to the date of payment of the bonds to be refunded or the date
upon which the bonds to be refunded will be paid pursuant to call or agreement
with the holders of the bonds;
      (3)   Any premium necessary in the calling or retiring of the bonds to be
refunded;
      (4)   Any insurance premium or fee payable to the issuer of a bond
insurance policy or letter of credit insuring all or part of the principal or
interest, or both, due on the refunding bonds; and
      (5)   Any other incidental expense related to the issuance or carrying of
the refunding bonds or the redemption or refunding of the bonds to be refunded.
(d)   The saving achieved through the issuance of refunding bonds shall be used
by the council to reduce the special assessment levied in the district.
At the time the council authorizes the issuance of refunding bonds, the council
also shall reduce the special assessments levied in the district. The reduction
shall be made through an ordinance of consideration pursuant to
Article 4.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 7, § 36-7.8) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-7.9 Prohibition on issuance of general obligation bonds secured by general
credit.
   No general obligation bonds secured by the city’s general credit shall be
issued to finance the costs of improvements identified in an ordinance
establishing a district or pay for the incidental expenses of a district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 7, § 36-7.9) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
§ 28-7.10 Debt limit calculation.
   Bonds issued under this article, when the only security is the special
assessments levy or lien in a district, shall be excluded from any
determination of the power of the city to issue general obligation bonds or
funded debt for purposes of § 13 of Article VII of the State constitution.
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Art. 7, § 36-7.10) (Added by Ord. 00-13)
APPENDIX 28-A: SPECIFIC SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT ORDINANCES
 
Ord. Approval  
No.  Date
00-  6-20-    Establishes Waikiki special improvement district No. 1 (eff. 7-1-
40   2000     2000)
01-  5-9-2001 Section 3 of Ord. 00-40 and § 9(c) of Exhibit A amended by Ord. 01-
22            22
02-  10-10-   Establishes the Fort Street Mall special improvement district No. 2
48   2002     (amended by Ord. 07-44)
07-  10-29-   Amends the Fort Street Mall special improvement district plan,
44   2007     designated as Exhibit A in Ord. 02-48, by revising the boundaries
15-  5-18-    Establishes Waikiki special improvement district No. 3
11   2015
17-  10-17-   Establishes the Waikiki Transportation Management special
58   2017     improvement district No. 4
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 36, Appendix 36-A)
CHAPTER 29: AFFORDABLE HOUSING REQUIREMENTS
Article
   
1.   General Affordable Housing Requirements
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL AFFORDABLE HOUSING REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
29-1.1   Purpose
   
29-1.2   Definitions
   
29-1.3   Applicability
   
29-1.4   Affordable housing requirement
   
29-1.5   Affordability period
   
29-1.6   Marketing period
   
29-1.7   Appeals
   
29-1.8   Procedures
   
29-1.9   Violation
   
29-1.10   Administration and fees
   
29-1.11   Rules
§ 29-1.1 Purpose.
   This chapter establishes a regulatory scheme for the development and use of
real property within the city to promote the public welfare. It requires
certain projects intended for residential use to contribute to the affordable
housing supply by either constructing new dwelling units, substantially
rehabilitating existing dwelling units, or providing improved land for
affordable housing.
(Added by Ord. 18-10)
§ 29-1.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Accessory Dwelling Unit. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Area Median Income or AMI. The median income determined by HUD annually for the
Honolulu Metropolitan Statistical Area as adjusted for household size.
Common Entrance. Any area regularly used by any resident for ingress to and
egress from a multi-unit dwelling.
Declarant. The person executing the affordable housing agreement and the
declaration of restrictive covenants required by §
29-1.8.
Department. The department of planning and permitting.
Development. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Development Agreement. Has the same meaning as described and authorized under
Chapter 33.
Development Plan Area. The area specified within the city’s approved
development plan or sustainable communities plan for that specific region of
Oahu.
Director. The director of planning and permitting or the director’s authorized
representative.
Dwelling Unit. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
First Marketing Period. The first 120 days during which an affordable dwelling
is marketed, and may be rented or sold, as applicable, to households earning
the applicable AMI.
Floor Area. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Group Living. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Hotel. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1, and also includes condo-hotels owned under a condominium property
regime.
HUD. The United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
HUD AMI Income Limit. The maximum household income limit for a household to be
eligible for HUD assisted housing programs, as published annually by HUD.
Interim Planned Development-Transit Project or IPD-T Project. A project for
which an application for a permit is submitted pursuant to §
21-9.100-5.
Legal Obligation. An obligation or duty that is enforceable by a court of law,
including but not limited to requirements or conditions imposed by unilateral
agreements, development agreements, HRS Chapter 201H, or the State of Hawaii’s
low-income housing tax credit program.
Micro-Unit. A dwelling unit totaling 300 square feet or less of floor area.
Multi-Unit Dwelling. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Off-Site. Construction or other activities that occur on a zoning lot other
than the project site.
Ohana Unit. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
On-Site. Construction or other activities that occur on the project site.
Person. An individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability
company, or any other form of legal entity.
Planned Development-Transit Project or PD-T Project. A project for which an
application is submitted pursuant to §
21-9.100-10.
Principal Project. A project containing a building or group of buildings with
dwelling units and as to which the requirement to provide affordable dwelling
units is imposed pursuant to this chapter.
Project Site. One or more zoning lots that are developed under a single or
unified project concept.
Rail Transit Station Area. The TOD special district, as defined in §
21-9.100. Where there is no adopted boundary under
Chapter 21, then the boundaries reflected in the adopted neighborhood TOD plan
will apply. Where there is no adopted neighborhood TOD plan, then the
boundaries reflected in the draft neighborhood TOD plan at the time the
application for the principal project is submitted to the department and
accepted as complete will apply. As used herein, “draft neighborhood TOD plan”
means the most current version of the plan then under consideration by the
department or the council, commencing with the first public review draft
released by the director to the community for review and comment. Council
committee drafts of a plan are deemed under consideration by the council after
they have been placed on a full council agenda for public hearing or adoption.
Council floor drafts of a plan are deemed under consideration by the council
after the council has amended the plan to the floor draft version. Where there
is no neighborhood TOD plan that has been adopted or that is under
consideration, then the area within, including properties intersecting, a 0.5
mile radius of a future rail transit station identified in the Honolulu High
Capacity Transit Corridor Project Environmental Impact Statement, accepted by
the Governor of the State of Hawaii on December 16, 2010, and any future
amendments or supplements thereto, will apply.
Rental or For-Rental. A dwelling unit that is leased or rented for a term of
between 30 days and 30 years in length.
Sale or For-Sale. A dwelling unit that is for sale in fee simple or in
leasehold with a term of 30 years or more.
Second Marketing Period. The 120-day period immediately following the first
marketing period, during which an affordable dwelling is marketed, and may be
rented or sold, as applicable, to households earning the applicable AMI.
Special Needs Housing. Housing that is used to provide living accommodations
and, in some cases, care services for certain segments of the population with
special living requirements, which include the elderly; persons with physical,
mental, or behavioral disabilities; persons with human immunodeficiency virus/
acquired immune deficiency syndrome; or persons with alcohol or drug addiction.
Often such housing includes special features, such as congregate dining and
social rooms; laundry, housekeeping, and personal assistance services; shuttle
bus services for project residents; and skilled nursing beds or physical
therapy clinics.
Substantial Rehabilitation. Including:
(1)   Improvement of a property to a decent, safe, and sanitary condition that
requires more than routine or minor repairs or improvements. It may include but
is not limited to gutting and extensive reconstruction of a dwelling unit, or
cosmetic improvements coupled with the curing of a substantial accumulation of
deferred maintenance; or
(2)   Renovation, alteration, or remodeling to convert or adapt structurally
sound property to the design and condition required for a specific use, such as
conversion of a hotel to housing for elders.
Third Marketing Period. The 120-day period immediately following the second
marketing period, during which an affordable dwelling is marketed, and may be
rented or sold, as applicable, to households earning the applicable AMI.
Timeshare Unit. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
TOD. Transit-oriented development.
TOD Special District Project. A project for which an application for a major
TOD special district permit is submitted pursuant to §
21-9.100-9.
Unilateral Agreement. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-2.80.
Zoning Lot. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
(Added by Ord. 18-10) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 29-1.3 Applicability.
(a)   This chapter applies to any of the following:
(1)   New construction of 10 or more for-sale dwelling units developed under a
single or unified project concept, on one or more zoning lots;
(2)   Any subdivision of land creating 10 or more zoning lots for residential
use in residential, apartment, apartment mixed-use, business mixed-use,
country, or agricultural zoning districts;
(3)   Conversion of hotels, offices, or other uses into multi-unit dwellings
containing 10 or more total for-sale dwelling units; or conversion of rental
dwelling units into for-sale dwelling units containing 10 or more total for-
sale dwelling units; or
(4)   Any of the following that include 10 or more for-sale dwelling units:
(A)   Cluster housing permits;
(B)   Planned development housing permits; or
(C)   Multi-unit dwellings.
(b)   This chapter does not apply to any of the following:
(1)   Any development subject to a unilateral agreement or development
agreement approved by the city and recorded prior to April 3, 2018;
(2)   Any subdivision granted tentative approval of the preliminary subdivision
map prior to April 3, 2018;
(3)   Any building permit, cluster housing permit, or planned development
housing permit application submitted and accepted as complete prior to April 3,
2018;
(4)   Any development that meets or exceeds all aspects of the applicable
affordable housing requirements of this chapter pursuant to affordable housing
requirements imposed by a legal obligation;
(5)   Micro-units;
(6)   Accessory dwelling units;
(7)   Ohana units;
(8)   Facilities used for group living;
(9)   Special needs housing;
(10)   Timeshare units; or
(11)   Any development for which:
(A)   At least 75 percent of the total number of dwelling units in the
development are sold to households earning 120 percent and below of the AMI; or
(B)   All of the dwelling units in the development are sold to households
earning no more than the HUD AMI income limit, and at least 20 percent of those
units are sold to households earning 100 percent and below of the AMI.
(Added by Ord. 18-10) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 29-1.4 Affordable housing requirement.
 
(a)   The affordable housing requirements set forth in
Table 29-1.4 of this subsection apply to all projects subject to this chapter
pursuant to §
29-1.3. The requirements must be met by satisfying one or a combination of the
options in this section subject to the director’s approval. If a combination of
options is used, the declarant shall designate the proportionate share of the
affordable housing requirement that each option will fulfill, and the sum of
the proportionate shares must equal or exceed one. Fulfillment of the
requirement may account for varying unit sizes, lower income ranges, rounding,
or other factors, subject to the director’s approval, as established in rules
adopted pursuant to §
29-1.11. Affordable for-sale dwelling units must be owner occupied.
TABLE 29-1.4
AFFORDABLE HOUSING REQUIREMENT PROVISIONS, AS A PERCENTAGE OF THE TOTAL
NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS IN THE PRINCIPAL PROJECT
Principal Project For Sale1 or For On-Site     Off-Site    Conveyance of Land
Location          Rental2          Production3 Production3
TABLE 29-1.4
AFFORDABLE HOUSING REQUIREMENT PROVISIONS, AS A PERCENTAGE OF THE TOTAL NUMBER
OF DWELLING UNITS IN THE PRINCIPAL PROJECT
Principal Project For Sale1 or For On-Site     Off-Site       Conveyance of
Location          Rental2          Production3 Production3    Land
The following requirements take effect on April 3, 2018.
IPD-T projects,                    30 percent5 30 percent8,5
PD-T projects, or                              35 percent9,5
TOD special       For Sale         20 percent6 20 percent8,6  Conveyance of
district projects                              25 percent9,6  land12
seeking bonus                      10 percent7 10 percent8,7
height or                                      15 percent9,7
density, or both4 For Rental       15 percent
All areas,                         15 percent5 15 percent10,5
excluding IPD-                                 20 percent11,5
T projects, PD-   For Sale         10 percent6 10 percent10,6
T projects, or                                 15 percent11,6 Conveyance of
TOD special                        5 percent7  5 percent10,7  land12
district projects                              10 percent11,7
seeking bonus
height or         For Rental       5 percent
density, or both
(1)   For-sale affordable dwelling units must be sold to households earning
120 percent and below of the AMI. At least one-half of those units must be
sold to households earning 100 percent and below of the AMI.
(2)For-rental affordable dwelling units must be rented to households earning
80 percent and below of the AMI.
(3)Any on-site or off-site affordable dwelling unit provided through
substantial rehabilitation will count as one unit.
(4)   The affordable housing requirements for IPD-T projects, PD-T projects,
or TOD special district projects seeking bonus height or density, or both, are
base affordable housing requirements. If affordable dwelling units are being
provided as a community benefit to justify increased height or density, or
both, the affordable dwelling units being provided as a community benefit must
be in addition to the base affordable housing requirements for IPD-T, PD-T, or
TOD special district projects.
(5)   For-sale affordable dwelling units must remain affordable for not less
than five years after the date when the unit is initially sold to a qualified
buyer.
(6)   For-sale affordable dwelling units must remain affordable for not less
than 10 years after the date when the unit is initially sold to a qualified
buyer.
(7)   For-sale affordable dwelling units must remain affordable for not less
than 30 years after the date when the unit is initially sold to a qualified
buyer.
(8)   Applies to off-site production of affordable housing that is located
within the same rail transit station area as the principal project.
(9)   Applies to off-site production of affordable housing that is located
outside of rail transit station area in which the principal project is
located.
(10)   Applies to off-site production of affordable housing that is located
within the same rail transit station area as the principal project; or, if the
principal project is not located in a rail transit station area, the off-site
production of affordable housing that is located within the same development
plan area as the principal project.
(11)   Applies to off-site production of affordable housing that is located
outside of rail transit station area in which the principal project is
located; or, if the principal project is not located in a rail transit station
area, the off-site production of affordable housing that is located outside of
the development plan area in which the principal project is located.
(12)   The appraised value of the real property conveyed must, at a minimum,
be equal to an amount that will be established and may be periodically
adjusted by rules adopted by the director pursuant to Section
29-1.11.
 
(b)   On-site production. Affordable dwelling units, for-rental or for-sale,
are constructed on the same project site as the principal project. The required
number of affordable dwelling units constructed on-site is specified in
Table 29-1.4. Affordable units and market-rate units in the same multifamily
dwelling must share common entrances.
(c)   Off-site production. Affordable dwelling units, for-rental or for-sale,
are constructed off-site from the project site on which the principal project
is located. The required number of affordable dwelling units constructed off-
site is specified in
Table 29-1.4.
(1)   Off-site production of for-rental dwelling units to satisfy the
affordable housing requirement for principal projects located within a rail
transit station area must be satisfied within the same rail transit station
area in which the principal project is located; provided that upon a showing of
good cause, and subject to terms and conditions approved by the director, the
director shall have the discretion to allow the satisfaction of off-site
production in other areas of the city.
(2)   Off-site production of for-rental dwelling units to satisfy the
affordable housing requirement for principal projects located outside of any
rail transit station area must be satisfied within the same development plan
area in which the principal project is located; provided that upon a showing of
good cause, and subject to terms and conditions approved by the director, the
director shall have the discretion to allow the satisfaction of off-site
production in other areas of the city.
(3)    Off-site production of for-sale dwelling units to satisfy the affordable
housing requirement for principal projects located within a rail transit
station area may be satisfied within or outside of the same rail transit
station area in which the principal project is located, in accordance with the
required percentage amounts in
Table 29-1.4.
(4)    Off-site production of for-sale dwelling units to satisfy the affordable
housing requirement for principal projects located outside of any rail transit
station area may be satisfied within or outside of the same development plan
area in which the principal project is located, in accordance with the required
percentage amounts in
Table 29-1.4.
(d)   Conveyance of land. The provision of on-site or off-site units are the
preferred options for the affordable housing requirements established by this
section, and the conveyance of land is only allowed if no suitable on-site or
off-site location is available, or if the developer’s financing arrangements
preclude the developer’s participation in off-site projects. Under the
foregoing circumstances, the director may approve the conveyance of improved
land in fee simple to the city or a third party. Such land may be located on-
site or off-site of the project site at a location approved by the director,
must be zoned and suitable for the construction of affordable dwelling units,
and must be improved with all necessary off-site infrastructure completed to
city standards to the property boundary line.
The appraised value of the real property conveyed must, at a minimum, be equal
to an amount that will be established and may be periodically adjusted by rules
adopted by the director pursuant to §
29-1.11; provided that effective January 1 of each year, the director shall
adjust the amount by a factor equal to the most recently published Consumer
Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U), with the base year established as
of April 3, 2018. The city may refuse to accept any real property if it
requires the payment by the city for any market value in excess of the
foregoing specified amount. The director, with the advice and consent of the
director of land management, shall determine whether to accept and approve such
land to satisfy the affordable housing requirement.
(Added by Ord. 18-10)
§ 29-1.5 Affordability period.
(a)    For-rental affordable dwelling units created in compliance with this
chapter must be rented to households earning the percentage of the AMI
specified in
Table 29-1.4, at prices affordable to such households, and must remain
affordable for not less than 30 years after the date when the unit is initially
rented to a qualified renter.
(b)    For-sale affordable dwelling units created in compliance with this
chapter must be offered for sale to households earning the percentage of the
AMI specified in
Table 29-1.4, at prices affordable to such households, and must remain
affordable for not less than the period specified in
Table 29-1.4, based on the applicable percentage of the total number of
dwelling units in the principal project being provided as affordable dwelling
units.
(Added by Ord. 18-10)
§ 29-1.6 Marketing period.
   For-rental and for-sale affordable dwelling units created in compliance with
this chapter must be marketed as follows:
(a)   During the first marketing period, affordable dwelling units must be
marketed, and may be rented or sold, as applicable, to households earning the
percentage of the AMI specified in
Table 29-1.4, at prices affordable to such households.
(b)   If, at the end of the first marketing period, the declarant has been
unable to obtain a contract for the rental or sale of an affordable dwelling
unit to a qualified renter or purchaser, then during the second marketing
period, the affordable dwelling unit may be marketed, and rented or sold, as
applicable, to households earning the percentage of the AMI that is 20 percent
higher than the percentage of the AMI specified in the first marketing period,
provided that the percentage of the AMI cannot exceed the HUD AMI income limit;
but at prices affordable to households earning the percentage of the AMI
specified in
Table 29-1.4.
(c)   If, at the end of the second marketing period, the declarant has been
unable to obtain a contract for the rental or sale of an affordable dwelling
unit to a qualified renter or purchaser, then during the third marketing
period, the affordable dwelling unit may be marketed, and rented or sold, as
applicable, to households earning the percentage of the AMI that is 20 percent
higher than the percentage of the AMI specified in the second marketing period,
provided that the percentage of AMI cannot exceed the HUD AMI income limit; but
at prices affordable to households earning the percentage of the AMI specified
in
Table 29-1.4.
(d)   If, at the end of the third marketing period, the declarant has been
unable to obtain a contract for the rental or sale of an affordable dwelling
unit to a qualified renter or purchaser, then the affordable dwelling unit may
be marketed, and rented or sold, as applicable, to households earning not more
than the HUD AMI income limit; but at prices affordable to households earning
the percentage of the AMI specified in
Table 29-1.4.
(Added by Ord. 18-10)
§ 29-1.7 Appeals.
   Appeals from the decision of the director must be filed within 30 days of
the mailing or service of the director’s decision.
(Added by Ord. 18-10)
§ 29-1.8 Procedures.
(a)   As a condition of and prior to final approval of any permit or approval
for a project that contains ten or more for-sale dwelling units or lots,
including without limitation subdivision applications, cluster housing permits,
planned development housing permits, or building permits, the permit applicants
shall execute an affordable housing agreement acceptable to the director and
execute and record a declaration of restrictive covenants that encumbers the
project site and any off-site zoning lot that is used to satisfy the affordable
housing requirement imposed in connection with the principal project and that
describes the affordable housing requirements acceptable to the director,
including without limitation, the enforcement of such requirements. If the
permit applicants are not the fee owners of the project site and any applicable
off-site zoning lot used to satisfy the affordable housing requirement, the
affordable housing agreement and the declaration of restrictive covenants must
also be executed by all of the fee owners of those parcels. The director may
defer the requirement to record the declaration of restrictive covenants until
a time not later than issuance of the first building permit for a dwelling unit
or as otherwise acceptable to the director. The form and content of the
declaration will be subject to the director’s approval and the city must be a
party. The declaration must be recorded in the bureau of conveyances (regular
system) or the office of the assistant registrar of the land court of the State
of Hawaii, or both, as appropriate. The term of the declaration of restrictive
covenants must be for the period of affordability and shall run with the land
and bind and give notice to all subsequent grantees, assignees, mortgagees,
lienors, and any other person who claims an interest in the project site or any
zoning lot on which the affordable housing requirement is being satisfied.
(b)   On an annual basis, the declarant shall submit a written status report to
the director documenting the declarant’s compliance with the affordable housing
requirement of this article. The status report must be submitted to the
director by December 31 of each year until such time as the term of the
declaration of restrictive covenants expires.
(Added by Ord. 18-10)
§ 29-1.9 Violation.
   A breach of the restrictive covenants recorded under §
29-1.8 with respect to a project may result in civil enforcement and the city
may seek to enforce the terms of the restrictive covenants by appropriate
action at law or suit in equity against the parties and their successors and
assigns. The director may take appropriate action to terminate or stop the
project until applicable conditions are met, including but not limited to
revoking any permits issued for the project and withholding issuance of other
permits related to the project.
(Added by Ord. 18-10)
§ 29-1.10 Administration and fees.
(a)   The director shall administer this chapter.
(b)   Fees for the administration and implementation of this chapter will be
assessed on the owners of for-sale affordable dwelling units and the occupants
of for-rental affordable dwelling units subject to this chapter.
(c)   Applicable fees.
(1)   For-sale affordable dwelling units will be subject to an annual
monitoring fee of $50 per unit.
(2)   For-sale affordable dwelling units will be subject to a fee of $600 per
unit each and every time the real property title of the unit changes pursuant
to §
29-1.5.
(3)   For-rental affordable dwelling units will be subject to annual monitoring
by a private compliance monitoring service, the fees for which will be paid by
the owner of an affordable rental dwelling unit directly to the private
compliance monitoring service. For-rental affordable dwelling units will also
be subject to an annual monitoring fee of $50.00 per unit.
(4)   An applicant eligibility certification fee of $75 will be assessed for
each application reviewed by the city.
(5)   Applicable fees identified in this subsection may be imposed by the city
on other affordable housing projects to which this chapter does not apply;
provided that the fees will only apply to those affordable housing units needed
to fulfill a city requirement.
(6)   Resale of for-sale affordable dwelling units will be subject to a $600
fee per transaction.
(d)   The director may take action to refer delinquent payments of fees
pursuant to this section to a debt collector on behalf of the city.
(e)   All monies collected from fees pursuant to this section will be deposited
into a special account within the general fund, and may only be used for the
administration and implementation of this chapter.
(Added by Ord. 18-10; Am. Ord. 20-18)
§ 29-1.11 Rules.
(a)   The director shall adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 to implement,
administer, and enforce this chapter.
(b)   At a minimum, the director shall adopt rules to:
(1)   Regulate the resale of affordable dwelling units under §
29-1.5 to ensure the units remain within the same AMI range, as adjusted from
time-to-time; and
(2)   Establish an affordable housing compliance monitoring program, to be
administered by a third party, to manage and implement the for-rental and for-
sale affordable dwelling units created in compliance with this chapter, for
purposes of ensuring compliance with affordability requirements and periods. At
a minimum, the affordable housing compliance monitoring program must address
the performance of the following functions:
(A)   Maintenance of an affordable housing database;
(B)   Compliance investigations;
(C)   Responses to inquiries; and
(D)   Income verifications.
(Added by Ord. 18-10)
CHAPTER 30: WATER MANAGEMENT
Articles
   
1.   General Provisions
   
2.   Oahu Water Management Policies and Strategies
   
2A.   Waianae Watershed Management Plan
   
2B.   Koolau Loa Watershed Management Plan
   
2C.   Koolau Poko Watershed Management Plan
   
2D.   North Shore Watershed Management Plan
   
2E.   East Honolulu Watershed Management Plan
   
3.   Severability
   
4.   Water Conservation Measures
   
5.   Medication in Drinking Water
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections
   
30-1.1   Purpose
   
30-1.2   Definitions
   
30-1.3   Consistency requirements
   
30-1.4   Preparation and adoption of regional watershed management plans
   
30-1.5   Interim plan in areas not yet subject to a regional watershed
management plan
   
30-1.6   Revisions
§ 30-1.1 Purpose.
(a)   The State water code (HRS Chapter 174C) mandates the preparation and
adoption of a water use and development plan by each county as part of the
Hawaii water plan. In adopting the plan, the City and County of Honolulu
recognizes that water is a limited resource, the development and use of which
must be carefully planned.
(b)   The water use and development plan for the City and County of Honolulu,
which is called the Oahu water management plan (OWMP), is intended to fulfill
the requirements set forth by the State water code.
(c)   The OWMP consists of overall policies and strategies and regional
watershed management plans, which guide the activities of the City and County
of Honolulu and advises the State commission on water resource management in
the areas of planning, management, water development, and use and allocation of
Oahu’s limited water resources.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 1, § 30-1.1) (Added by Ord. 90-62; Am. Ord. 10-17)
§ 30-1.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Board. The board of water supply of the City and County of Honolulu.
Commission. The commission on water resource management.
Department. The department of planning and permitting of the City and County of
Honolulu.
Development Plans. The development plans of the City and County of Honolulu as
defined by Charter § 6-1509.
Domestic Use. Any use of water for individual personal needs and for household
purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, noncommercial gardening,
and sanitation.
General Plan. The general plan of the City and County of Honolulu as defined by
Charter § 6-1508.
Groundwater. Any water found beneath the surface of the earth, whether in
perched, dike-confined, or basal supply; in underground channels or streams; in
standing, percolating, or flowing condition; or under artesian pressure.
Hawaii Water Plan. The integrated program of the commission for the protection,
conservation, and management of the waters of the State, with such amendments,
supplements, and additions as may be necessary, mandated by the State water
code.
Municipal Use. The domestic, industrial, and commercial use of water through
public services available to persons of a county for the promotion and
protection of their health, comfort, and safety, for the protection of property
from fire, and for domestic use.
Oahu Water Management Plan (OWMP). The water use and development plan mandated
by the State water code and collectively reflected in islandwide water
management policies and strategies in
Article 2, and regional watershed management plans in
Article 2A and thereafter.
State Water Code. HRS Chapter 174C.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 1, § 30-1.2) (Added by Ord. 90-62; Am. Ords. 96-58,
10-17)
§ 30-1.3 Consistency requirements.
   The Oahu water management plan shall be consistent with:
(1)   The water resource protection and water quality plans of the Hawaii water
plan;
(2)   City land use plans and policies including the general plan, development
plans, and zoning; and
(3)   State land use classification and policies.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 1, § 30-1.3) (Added by Ord. 90-62; Am. Ord. 10-17)
§ 30-1.4 Preparation and adoption of regional watershed management plans.
   In conjunction with the board, the department shall be responsible for the
preparation of the regional watershed management plans for the Oahu water
management plan. The regional watershed management plans shall be adopted by
ordinance.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 1, § 30-1.4) (Added by Ord. 90-62; Am. Ord. 10-17)
§ 30-1.5 Interim plan in areas not yet subject to a regional watershed
management plan.
   In areas where a regional watershed plan has not been adopted,
Articles 1,
2, and
3 of this chapter and the Technical Reference Document for the Oahu Water
Management Plan, dated March 1990, shall serve as the water use and development
plan.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 1, § 30-1.5) (Added by Ord. 90-62; Am. Ord. 10-17)
§ 30-1.6 Revisions.
   The department, working in conjunction with the board, shall be responsible
for the preparation of updates to the regional watershed management plans. Each
regional watershed management plan shall be updated, at a minimum, in tandem
with the respective development plan/sustainable communities plan. Updates
shall be adopted by ordinance.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 1, § 30-1.6) (Added by Ord. 90-62; Am. Ords. 91-61,
10-17)
ARTICLE 2: OAHU WATER MANAGEMENT POLICIES AND STRATEGIES
Sections
   
30-2.1   Intent
   
30-2.2   Water management policies
   
30-2.3   Water management strategies
§ 30-2.1 Intent.
   The Oahu water management plan is intended to ensure:
(1)   The optimum utilization of the existing water supply to minimize the need
for the development of additional potable groundwater sources;
(2)   The preservation of the aquifers for the benefit of future generations,
in perpetuity, by proper management of Oahu’s groundwater sources;
(3)   The timely development of additional potable groundwater sources and
alternative sources to provide for additional consumer demand; and
(4)   That growth in consumer demand will be compatible with available water
supply.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 2, § 30-2.1) (Added by Ord. 90-62)
§ 30-2.2 Water management policies.
(a)   This section sets forth the policies for water use and development within
each development plan area. These are established in recognition of the vital
role of water in supporting land use activities on the island of Oahu. Potable
groundwater is the premium water resource on Oahu because over the long term,
it is the most economical to develop and requires no treatment, but this
resource is finite in nature and the limit of feasibly developed potable water
sources is rapidly being approached.
(b)   These policies shall apply to all city agencies in the performance of
their powers, duties, and functions as related to both public and private
development.
(c)   In addition, all city actions in regard to the use and commitment of
water resources to meet existing or projected demands on the public water
system on the island of Oahu shall be guided by the board of water supply’s
Oahu water plan.
(1)   Policy one. Facilities for the provision of water shall be based on the
general plan population projections and the land use policies contained in the
development plans and depicted on the development plan land use maps.
(2)   Policy two. System flexibility shall be maintained to facilitate the
provision of an adequate supply of water consistent with planned land uses. The
municipal water system shall be developed and operated substantially as an
integrated islandwide water system.
(3)   Policy three. Close coordination shall be maintained between federal,
State, and county agencies which are involved in the provision or management of
water to ensure optimal distribution of the available water supply.
(4)   Policy four. The quality and integrity of the water supply shall be
maintained by providing for the monitoring and protection of the water supply
in accordance with the requirements of the State water code.
(5)   Policy five. The development and use of nonpotable water sources shall be
maximized in a manner consistent with the protection of the groundwater
quality.
(6)   Policy six. Water conservation shall be strongly encouraged.
(7)   Policy seven. Alternative water sources shall be developed wherever
feasible to ensure an adequate supply of water for planned uses on Oahu.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 2, § 30-2.2) (Added by Ord. 90-62)
§ 30-2.3 Water management strategies.
(a)   Based on the findings and projections in the Oahu water management plan,
provisions for an adequate supply of water to meet islandwide needs for at
least 20 years shall be addressed. This shall be determined after evaluating
the anticipated demand for water use from municipal, agricultural, military,
and private users; the available remaining groundwater which can be safely
developed; the planned and proposed water source development projects; and
alternative water development projects underway.
(b)   Based on these findings, the plan or strategy for water management shall
be to continue to develop available groundwater sources but to preserve as much
of the groundwater supply as possible, through the more efficient use of the
existing water supply, an ongoing water conservation program, and by the
continued development of alternative sources of water.
(c)   The following strategies shall be applied in the development and use of
water resources on Oahu:
(1)   Strategy one. Develop water resources in consonance with the general plan
population projections and the land use policies contained in the development
plans and depicted on the development plan land use maps. Priority shall be
given to affordable housing projects shown on the development plan land use
maps or processed under HRS Chapter 201H;
(2)   Strategy two. Continue to safely develop the remaining available
groundwater in accordance with the requirements of the State water code.
(A)   Substrategy A. The commission may continue to refine the accuracy of the
sustainable yields in the water resources protection plan at the aquifer level
to better guide decisions regarding future exploration and development of water
sources.
(B)   Substrategy B. The commission, in consultation with the board, may
formulate a plan for the future exploration, monitoring, and development of
groundwater resources based on the identified sustainable yields.
(3)   Strategy three. Use surface water more effectively and efficiently.
(A)   Substrategy A. The commission may compile an inventory of surface water
use on Oahu for the purpose of determining existing use and projecting future
use, given the present lack of information.
(B)   Substrategy B. The commission may certify the unreported and undetermined
quantities of surface water use in windward Oahu as part of its water
registration program.
(4)   Strategy four. Continue to refine the near and long-term projections of
agriculture on the island to more accurately project the future net release of
water currently committed to agricultural use.
(A)   Substrategy A. The State department of agriculture may inventory and
project diversified agriculture including the irrigated acreage, method of
irrigation, source of water, and the quantity and quality of water use.
(B)   Substrategy B. The commission may seek to establish the necessary
commission procedures to more readily transfer water allocations from
agricultural to municipal use, especially where urban or other agricultural
uses replace sugarcane lands.
(5)   Strategy five. Maintain an ongoing water conservation program through the
board, using such approaches as pricing, public information, educational
programs, water-saving devices, and use restrictions and allocations;
(6)   Strategy six. Develop and use nonpotable water sources, wherever
feasible, for the irrigation of agricultural crops, parks and golf courses,
landscaping, and for certain industrial uses.
(A)   Substrategy A. Support the exchange of nonpotable water, wherever
feasible, for potable water, which is being used for irrigation to preserve
more of Oahu’s potable supply for domestic use.
(B)   Substrategy B. Pursue opportunities to blend brackish water with potable
water to produce a greater supply of potable water.
(C)   Substrategy C. Support and pursue the reuse of treated wastewater
effluent for irrigation or groundwater recharge wherever feasible.
(7)   Strategy seven. Continue efforts to develop economical methods of
demineralizing brackish water and desalting seawater.
(A)   Substrategy A. Support the demonstration and expansion of the State’s
desalinization pilot project.
(B)   Substrategy B. Continue research to develop more economical methods for
desalting seawater for municipal purposes (e.g., an open cycle method of ocean
thermal energy conversion or OTEC).
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 2, § 30-2.3) (Added by Ord. 90-62; Am. Ord. 10-17)
ARTICLE 2A: WAIANAE WATERSHED MANAGEMENT PLAN
Sections
   
30-2A.1   Applicability
   
30-2A.2   Adoption of the Waianae watershed management plan
   
30-2A.3   Conflicting provisions
§ 30-2A.1 Applicability.
   This article applies to the Waianae district, which is described in the
Waianae watershed management plan. This article supplements
Article 2 with respect to the Waianae district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 2A, § 30-2A.1) (Added by Ord. 10-17)
§ 30-2A.2 Adoption of the Waianae watershed management plan.
   Pursuant to HRS Chapter 174C, the plan entitled “Waianae Watershed
Management Plan,” dated August 2009, attached to Ordinance 10-17 as Exhibit A-
1, is adopted and by reference is incorporated herein as a regional watershed
management plan for Oahu. Exhibit A-1 need not be included in this code.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 2A, § 30-2A.2) (Added by Ord. 10-17)
§ 30-2A.3 Conflicting provisions.
   This article shall, with respect to the Waianae district, prevail should
there be any conflict with
Articles 1 or
2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 2A, § 30-2A.3) (Added by Ord. 10-17)
ARTICLE 2B: KOOLAU LOA WATERSHED MANAGEMENT PLAN
Sections
   
30-2B.1   Applicability
   
30-2B.2   Adoption of the Koolau Loa watershed management plan
   
30-2B.3   Conflicting provisions
§ 30-2B.1 Applicability.
   This article applies to the Koolau Loa district, which is described in the
Koolau Loa watershed management plan. This article supplements
Article 2 with respect to the Koolau Loa district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 2B, § 30-2B.1) (Added by Ord. 10-18)
§ 30-2B.2 Adoption of the Koolau Loa watershed management plan.
   Pursuant to HRS Chapter 174C, the plan entitled “Koolau Loa Watershed
Management Plan,” dated August 2009, attached to Ordinance 10-18 as Exhibit A-
1, is adopted and by reference is incorporated herein as a regional watershed
management plan for Oahu. Exhibit A-1 need not be included in this code.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 2B, § 30-2B.2) (Added by Ord. 10-18)
§ 30-2B.3 Conflicting provisions.
   This article shall, with respect to the Koolau Loa district, prevail should
there be any conflict with
Articles 1 or
2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 2B, § 30-2B.3) (Added by Ord. 10-18)
ARTICLE 2C: KOOLAU POKO WATERSHED MANAGEMENT PLAN
Sections
   
30-2C.1   Applicability
   
30-2C.2   Adoption of the Koolau Poko watershed management plan
   
30-2C.3   Conflicting provisions
§ 30-2C.1 Applicability.
   This article applies to the Koolau Poko district, which is described in the
Koolau Poko watershed management plan. This article supplements
Article 2 with respect to the Koolau Poko district.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 2C, § 30-2C.1) (Added by Ord. 12-30)
§ 30-2C.2 Adoption of the Koolau Poko watershed management plan.
   Pursuant to HRS Chapter 174C, the plan entitled “Koolau Poko Watershed
Management Plan,” dated February 2012, attached to Ordinance 12-30 as Exhibit
A, is adopted and by reference is incorporated herein as a regional watershed
management plan for Oahu. Exhibit A need not be included in this code.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 2C, § 30-2C.2) (Added by Ord. 12-30)
§ 30-2C.3 Conflicting provisions.
   This article shall, with respect to the Koolau Poko district, prevail should
there be any conflict with
Articles 1 or
2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 2C, § 30-2C.3) (Added by Ord. 12-30)
ARTICLE 2D: NORTH SHORE WATERSHED MANAGEMENT PLAN
Sections
   
30-2D.1   Applicability
   
30-2D.2   Adoption of the North Shore watershed management plan
   
30-2D.3   Conflicting provisions
§ 30-2D.1 Applicability.
   This article applies to the North Shore District, which is described in the
North Shore Watershed Management Plan. This article supplements
Article 2 with respect to the North Shore District.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 2D, § 30-2D.1) (Added by Ord. 16-31)
§ 30-2D.2 Adoption of the North Shore watershed management plan.
   Pursuant to HRS Chapter 174C, the plan entitled “North Shore Watershed
Management Plan,” dated June 2016, attached to Ordinance 16-31 as Exhibit A, is
adopted and by reference is incorporated herein as a regional watershed
management plan for Oahu. Exhibit A need not be included in this code.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 2D, § 30-2D.2) (Added by Ord. 16-31)
§ 30-2D.3 Conflicting provisions.
   This article shall, with respect to the North Shore District, prevail should
there be any conflict with
Articles 1 or
2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 2D, § 30-2D.3) (Added by Ord. 16-31)
ARTICLE 2E: EAST HONOLULU WATERSHED MANAGEMENT PLAN
Sections
   
30-2E.1   Applicability
   
30-2E.2   Adoption of the East Honolulu watershed management plan
   
30-2E.3   Conflicting provisions
§ 30-2E.1 Applicability.
   This article applies to the East Honolulu District, which is described in
the East Honolulu Watershed Management Plan. This article supplements
Article 2 with respect to the East Honolulu District.
(Added by Ord. 24-29)
§ 30-2E.2 Adoption of the East Honolulu watershed management plan.
   Pursuant to HRS Chapter 174C, the plan entitled “East Honolulu Watershed
Management Plan,” dated May 2024, attached to Ordinance 24-29 as Exhibit A, is
adopted and by reference is incorporated herein as a regional watershed
management plan for O‘ahu. Exhibit A need not be included in this code.
(Added by Ord. 24-29)
Editor’s note:
   *“Ordinance 24-29” is substituted for “this ordinance.”
§ 30-2E.3 Conflicting provisions.
   With respect to the East Honolulu District, the provisions of this article
and the East Honolulu Watershed Management Plan shall prevail should there be
any conflict with any other provisions of
Article 1 or
Article 2.
(Added by Ord. 24-29)
ARTICLE 3: SEVERABILITY
Section
   
30-3.1   Severability
§ 30-3.1 Severability.
   The invalidity of any word, section, clause, paragraph, sentence, part, or
provision of this chapter shall not affect the validity of any other part of
this chapter which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 3, § 30-3.1) (Added by Ord. 90-62)
ARTICLE 4: WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES
Sections
   
30-4.1   Definitions
   
30-4.2   Water closets and showerhead requirements
   
30-4.3   Exception
   
30-4.4   Enforcement
   
30-4.5   Rules
   
30-4.6   Exemption for low-consumption properties
§ 30-4.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Administrative Authority. Has the same meaning as defined in §
19-2.1.
Authorized Agent. A person who is authorized to act on behalf of the owner of
residential property.
Director. The director of budget and fiscal services.
Hotel. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Low-Flow Kitchen Faucet, Lavatory Faucet, and Showerhead. A kitchen faucet or
showerhead with flow control devices that limit the faucet’s or showerhead’s
maximum flow rate to 2.5 gallons per minute and a lavatory faucet with flow
control devices that limit the lavatory faucet’s maximum flow rate to 2.0
gallons per minute.
Low-Flush Urinal. A urinal with volume limiting devices or methods which limit
the discharge to 1.0 gallon per flush.
Nonresidential Property or Nonresidential Properties. Property improved with
hotels or with industrial or commercial buildings.
Residential Property or Residential Properties. Property other than
nonresidential property or nonresidential properties.
Ultra-Low Flush Toilet. A tank-type water closet or a flushometer valve toilet
with volume-limiting devices or methods that limit the discharge to 1.6 gallons
per flush.
Water-Saving Toilets. Ultra-low flush toilets and low-flush urinals.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 4, § 30-4.1) (Added by Ord. 92-01; Am. Ords. 92-109,
94-32, 00-05, 25-2)
§ 30-4.2 Water closets and showerhead requirements.
(a)   All nonresidential properties shall be equipped with low-flow kitchen
faucets, lavatory faucets, and showerheads within one year of January 16,
1992.*
(b)   Except as provided in §
30-4.3, and unless granted an extension of time by the building board of
appeals pursuant to subsection (d), all nonresidential properties shall be
equipped with ultra-low flush toilets by January 1, 1998, and low-flush urinals
within two years of January 16, 1992;* provided that if a nonresidential
property is equipped with wall-mounted flushometer toilets with blowout action,
such toilets need not be replaced with ultra-low flush toilets; and provided
further, that nonresidential properties shall be exempt from the requirement to
be equipped with ultra-low flush toilets if they qualify for an exemption under
§
30-4.6.
(c)   The administrative authority shall allow extensions of time for good
cause shown. A nonresidential property may be granted an extension of time to
install low-flow kitchen faucets, lavatory faucets, and showerheads of up to
six months after the deadline specified in subsection (a), and may be granted
an extension to install ultra-low flush toilets and low-flush urinals of up to
six months after the deadline specified in subsection (b).
(d)   The owner or operator of a nonresidential property may appeal a decision
of the administrative authority:
(1)   Denying any extension of time for the installation of low-flow kitchen
faucets, lavatory faucets, and showerheads or ultra-low flush toilets and low-
flush urinals; or
(2)   Granting an extension that is less than what the owner or operator had
requested.
Appeals by an owner or operator shall be to the building board of appeals. The
board may grant an extension of time if it finds that the time period appealed
from poses an undue hardship; provided that the total time of compliance shall
not exceed two years for low-flow kitchen faucets, lavatory faucets, and
showerheads and three years for low-flush urinals; and provided further, that
for ultra-low flush toilets, the total time for compliance shall not extend
beyond January 1, 1999.
(e)   Owners or operators of nonresidential properties which, before January
16, 1992,* have already installed low-flow kitchen faucets, lavatory faucets,
and showerheads and ultra-low flush toilets and low-flush urinals which meet
the water flow standards of this article, and dual-flush mechanisms for toilets
which accomplish the purpose and objective of this article, as determined by
the board of water supply, shall be exempt from the application of this
article. The board of water supply shall adopt rules governing such exemptions
in accordance with HRS Chapter 91.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 4, § 30-4.2) (Added by Ord. 92-01; Am. Ords. 92-109,
94-28)
Editor’s note:
   * “January 16, 1992” is substituted for “the effective date of this article”
and “the effective date of this section.” (Ord. 92-01)
§ 30-4.3 Exception.
(a)   A nonresidential property shall not be required to comply with the
requirements of §
30-4.2(b) if the administrative authority determines, upon application of the
property owner or operator, that the age, condition, or type of plumbing system
of such nonresidential property would prevent the proper functioning of water-
saving toilets. Should the administrative authority determine that the
applicant’s plumbing system does not prevent the proper functioning of water-
saving toilets, the applicant may appeal that decision in accordance with
subsection (c). In the event the owner or operator does not appeal the
decision, water-saving toilets shall be installed on such owner’s or operator’s
nonresidential property within the time period provided in §
30-4.2(b) or within six months of the administrative authority’s decision,
whichever is later.
(b)   If the administrative authority determines that the applicant’s plumbing
system does prevent the proper functioning of water-saving toilets, the
nonresidential property owner or operator shall prepare a water conservation
plan within six months of the date of that determination. That plan shall
provide for the conservation of water by the nonresidential property in an
amount not less than the amount of water that would be conserved, over an equal
period of time, through the installation of water-saving toilets on such
nonresidential property. The plan shall be submitted to the administrative
authority for approval. The administrative authority, in consultation with the
board of water supply, shall either approve or deny the water conservation
plan. If the administrative authority approves the plan, the plan shall be in
lieu of compliance with §
30-4.2(b) and the nonresidential property owner or operator shall implement the
plan within the time period provided in §
30-4.2(b), or within six months of the administrative authority’s decision,
whichever is later. If the administrative authority denies the water
conservation plan, the nonresidential property owner or operator may appeal the
decision in accordance with subsection (c). In the event the owner or operator
does not appeal the administrative authority’s decision, water-saving toilets
shall be installed on such owner’s or operator’s property within the time
period provided in §
30-4.2(b) or within six months of the administrative authority’s decision,
whichever is later.
(c)   Any appeal from the decision of the administrative authority shall be
made to the building board of appeals within 30 days of the date of the
administrative authority’s decision. The building board of appeals shall render
a decision within 120 days of the date of the appeal. If the building board of
appeals does not render a decision on an appeal made pursuant to subsection (a)
or (b) within 120 days, the nonresidential property owner or operator shall
prepare and implement a water conservation plan in lieu of installing water-
saving toilets, or, if a plan has already been prepared, the owner or operator
shall implement such plan. The nonresidential property owner or operator shall
prepare or implement, or both, the plan within six months after the end of such
120-day period, or, if the board decides in favor of such owner or operator,
within the time period specified in §
30-4.2(b) or within six months after the date of the board of appeal’s
decision, whichever is later.
If the building board of appeals denies the appeal, the owner or operator shall
install water-saving toilets on the owner’s or operator’s nonresidential
property within the time period specified in §
30-4.2(b) or within six months of the board’s decision, whichever is later.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 4, § 30-4.3) (Added by Ord. 92-01)
§ 30-4.4 Enforcement.
(a)   The administrative authority shall have the same right of entry as
provided in §
19-2.3 to enforce the requirements of this article.
(b)   All violations of this article shall constitute violations under
Chapter 19, Article 6, and shall be enforced in the same manner as provided
therein.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 4, § 30-4.4) (Added by Ord. 92-01)
§ 30-4.5 Rules.
   Subject to HRS Chapter 91, the administrative authority may adopt rules
having the force and effect of law for the implementation, administration, and
enforcement of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 4, § 30-4.5) (Added by Ord. 92-01)
§ 30-4.6 Exemption for low-consumption properties.
(a)   Nonresidential properties that consume an average of 15,000 gallons of
water per month or less in calendar year 1996 shall be exempted from the
requirement to be equipped with ultra-low flush toilets under §
30-4.2(b).
(b)   If a nonresidential property with an exemption under subsection (a)
consumes more than 15,000 gallons of water per month, on the average, during
any calendar year after 1996, that nonresidential property shall be equipped
with ultra-low flush toilets within the calendar year following the year in
which the property’s water consumption exceeded 15,000 gallons per month.
(c)   The building department shall annually determine if nonresidential
properties granted an exemption under subsection (a) still qualify for that
exemption.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 4, § 30-4.6) (Added by Ord. 94-28; Am. Ord. 94-67)
Editor’s note:
   Reference to the rebate program was removed because the program terminated
on July 1, 2008.
ARTICLE 5: MEDICATION IN DRINKING WATER
Sections
   
30-5.1   Prohibition
   
30-5.2   Product safety
§ 30-5.1 Prohibition.
   No person shall add any product, substance, or chemical to the public water
supply, except federally owned and operated water systems, such as military
facilities, for the purpose of treating or affecting the physical or mental
functions of the body of any person, rather than to make the water safe or
potable. This prohibition shall not apply to water treatment chemicals used to
make the water potable and safe to drink, such as chlorination and
anticorrosion chemical to reduce lead.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 5, § 30-5.1) (Added by Ord. 04-01)
§ 30-5.2 Product safety.
   Should any State law mandate using the drinking water system to dispense
medication for treating the physical or mental function of a person’s body, the
chemical additive used shall meet the following quality control and safety
requirements.
(a)   All chemical additives purchased shall be pharmaceutical grade or
equivalent; industrial grade chemical additives shall not be used.
(b)   The chemical additive shall not contain any contaminants which would
exceed the maximum contaminant level goals established by:
(1)   The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; or
(2)   The State department of health, whichever is lower.
(c)   The chemical additive shall not increase corrosion of the water piping
system material components or increase leaching of heavy metals such that
another chemical additive will be required to minimize corrosion.
(d)   The chemical additive shall have been tested and approved for safety and
effectiveness by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
(e)   The chemical additive shall have been tested using the following
additional safety tests if not already done by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration.
(1)   The chemical additive shall have been tested for safety using worst-case
conditions for any contaminants allowed by specifications with a safety factor
to cover all ranges of unrestricted consumption.
(2)   If the chemical additive, in combination with body minerals, becomes a
thermoluminescent phosphor material, which is known to become electrically
charged when exposed to radiation and X-rays, testing shall have been done to
determine any adverse effects. Thermoluminescent phosphor material examples are
calcium fluoride, lithium fluoride, lithium bromide, and calcium sulphate.
(1990 Code, Ch. 30, Art. 5, § 30-5.2) (Added by Ord. 04-01)
CHAPTER 31: COMMUNITY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Articles
   
1.   Enterprise Zone
   
2.   Enterprise Zone—Real Property Tax Rebate
   
3.   Enterprise Zones—Exemptions from Development Requirements
ARTICLE 1: ENTERPRISE ZONE
Sections
   
31-1.1   Definitions
   
31-1.2   Designation of enterprise zones
   
31-1.3   Amendment or termination of zones
   
31-1.4   Provision of city incentives
   
31-1.5   Penalties
§ 31-1.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Enterprise Zone. An area within the City and County of Honolulu which has been
declared an enterprise zone in accordance with HRS § 209E-4(a) and this
chapter.
Qualified Business. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS Chapter 209E.
(1990 Code, Ch. 31, Art. 1, § 31-1.1) (Added by Ord. 94-38; Am. Ord. 97-65)
§ 31-1.2 Designation of enterprise zones.
   The mayor, with the concurrence of the council, or the council, with the
concurrence of the mayor, may initiate an application to have an area declared
by the State to be an enterprise zone; provided that such application may only
be submitted to the State upon its approval by the council by resolution. The
resolution shall expressly set forth the area to be included in the enterprise
zone and those incentives which the city proposes to offer in the enterprise
zone as delineated by the city. The application shall comply with the
requirements of Hawaii Administrative Rules § 15-6-4.
(1990 Code, Ch. 31, Art. 1, § 31-1.2) (Added by Ord. 94-38; Am. Ord. 97-65)
§ 31-1.3 Amendment or termination of zones.
(a)   The mayor, with the concurrence of the council, or the council, with the
concurrence of the mayor, may initiate a request to the State to amend an
application for an enterprise zone.
(b)   (1)   The mayor, with the concurrence of the council, or the council,
with the concurrence of the mayor, may initiate a request to the State to
terminate an enterprise zone when there is evidence of lack of reasonable
progress toward implementation of the zone. Lack of reasonable progress shall
be determined by the council after review of the status report and
recommendation submitted in accordance with subdivision (2).
(2)   By June 30 of each year, the director of community services shall submit
to the council a status report on the designated enterprise zones. For each
designated enterprise zone, the status report shall include the name and type
of each business receiving enterprise zone benefits, the name and type of new
businesses attracted to the enterprise zone after enterprise zone designation,
and the number and type of jobs created in the zone by each business receiving
enterprise zone benefits. The status report shall also assess the progress made
toward implementation of each designated enterprise zone, and shall make a
recommendation regarding continuance or termination of each zone.
(c)   A request to amend or terminate an enterprise zone may only be submitted
to the State upon its approval by the council by resolution.
(1990 Code, Ch. 31, Art. 1, § 31-1.3) (Added by Ord. 94-38; Am. Ords. 95-63,
97-65)
§ 31-1.4 Provision of city incentives.
(a)   The city may provide incentives and allow regulatory flexibility as
permitted by HRS § 209E-12 only in those enterprise zones delineated by the
council pursuant to HRS § 209E-4(a).
(b)   Local incentives may include, but need not be limited to:
(1)   Reduction of permit fees;
(2)   Reduction of user fees; and
(3)   Reduction of real property taxes.
(c)   Regulatory flexibility may include but need not be limited to:
(1)   Special zoning districts; plan review use approvals; zoning district
variances, conditional use permits, and special use permits;
(2)   Permit process reform;
(3)   Exemptions from local ordinances; and
(4)   Other public incentives.
(d)   City incentives for an enterprise zone may apply retroactively; provided
that the council authorizes retroactive application of the benefits by
resolution.
(e)   City incentives proposed in an application to the State for an enterprise
zone may only be provided upon approval of the application by the governor and
provided in accordance with this chapter. Upon approval of a zone and provision
of city incentives, such incentives shall continue in effect for any qualified
business, subsequent city action to amend or terminate that zone
notwithstanding.
(1990 Code, Ch. 31, Art. 1, § 31-1.4) (Added by Ord. 94-38; Am. Ord. 97-65)
§ 31-1.5 Penalties.
   Any person who files a fraudulent claim or attests to any false statement
with intent to defraud the city or to evade the payment of taxes or any part
thereof, or who in any manner intentionally deceives or attempts to deceive the
city, shall be fined not more than $2,000, imprisoned for not more than one
year, or both.
(1990 Code, Ch. 31, Art. 1, § 31-1.5) (Added by Ord. 94-38)
ARTICLE 2: ENTERPRISE ZONE—REAL PROPERTY TAX REBATE
Sections
   
31-2.1   Definitions
   
31-2.2   Rebate established
   
31-2.3   Administration
   
31-2.4   Appeal
   
31-2.5   Rules
§ 31-2.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Director. The director of budget and fiscal services.
Property Owner. Has the same meaning as defined in §
8-6.3, as modified as follows:
(1)   Property owner includes a lessee holding real property, as defined in §
8-1.2, for a stated term of seven years or more, provided the lease:
(A)   Has been duly entered into and recorded in the bureau of conveyances or
filed in the office of the assistant registrar of the land court; and
(B)   Provides that the lessee shall pay all taxes levied on the property
during the term of the lease.
(2)   Property owner excludes a lessee under a government lease whose stated
term is less than seven years.
Tax Year. Has the same meaning as defined in §
8-6.2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 31, Art. 2, § 31-2.1) (Added by Ord. 94-38)
§ 31-2.2 Rebate established.
   Where a property tax rebate has been authorized by council resolution
pursuant to §
31-1.2 or
31-1.3, upon proper application, any owner of a qualified business located
within the enterprise zone delineated in the council resolution who owned the
property used by that business on the date of the business’s first
certification by the State pursuant to HRS Chapter 209E shall be entitled to a
rebate from the city as set forth in the resolution.
   A claim for a real property tax rebate may be filed for excess taxes paid
during a tax year at any time during the succeeding tax year only, except where
the council has approved retroactive application of incentives as provided for
in §
31-1.4(d). The first claim for a rebate shall be made during the tax year when
the rebate is first available to the qualified business; the claim for
retroactive application of an incentive shall be made during the first tax year
after council authorization of the retroactive application.
   The rebate shall apply to real property which is held by the qualified
business within the enterprise zone, as delineated in the council resolution,
and which is used for the activities of the qualified business.
(1990 Code, Ch. 31, Art. 2, § 31-2.2) (Added by Ord. 94-38; Am. Ord. 97-65)
§ 31-2.3 Administration.
(a)   The director shall prescribe the appropriate form or forms for rebate
claims. For each tax year in which a claim is filed, the director shall require
proof of the applicant’s certification by the State department of business,
economic development, and tourism that the qualified business is exempt from
the payment of the general excise tax in that tax year, and shall require proof
of the applicant’s status as a property owner as of the date of the
certification. The director shall request such proof as the director shall deem
necessary to verify the applicant’s qualification for the rebate, including but
not limited to proof that the real property for which the claim for rebate of
taxes is made is used for the activities of the qualified business, and that
the applicant paid the taxes for which the claim for rebate is made.
(b)   The applicant may refuse to provide any such proof requested by the
director; provided that the director may deny the claim for rebate upon such
refusal. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, there shall be no
appeal from the director’s denial of the claim due to such refusal of the
applicant.
(c)   Where the applicant is qualified for rebate of only a portion of the
taxes paid for a tax map key parcel, the sum rebated shall be the lesser of
either:
(1)   The excess taxes actually paid by the applicant; or
(2)   An allocation made by the director of the excess taxes attributable to:
(A)   The floor space of a building held and used by the applicant, including
an allocation of the taxes for the land thereunder and the appurtenant
premises, where only a portion of a building is held and used by the applicant;
(B)   The portion of the land held and used by the applicant, where only
unimproved land is held and used by the applicant; or
(C)   The entire structure and the land thereunder that is held and used by the
applicant, where the entire structure is held and used by the applicant, but
only a portion of the land is held and used by the applicant.
(d)   Upon review and verification of each claim, the director shall determine
eligibility for rebate within 45 days of the director’s receipt of a duly
submitted claim. If an applicant is found ineligible, the director shall notify
the applicant and the council within 45 days after the applicant has been found
ineligible by the director. If an applicant’s claim is approved, the rebate
shall be made by warrant in the name of the applicant and shall be issued
within 45 days after the applicant has been found eligible by the director. All
warrants issued shall be subject to audit.
(1990 Code, Ch. 31, Art. 2, § 31-2.3) (Added by Ord. 94-38)
§ 31-2.4 Appeal.
(a)   An applicant may appeal the director’s denial of a claim to the council.
The appeal shall be filed with the council within 30 days of the applicant’s
receipt of the notification of ineligibility from the director. The council
shall establish the procedure for an appeal.
(b)   This section shall not be construed as superior to §
31-2.3(b). A claim denied under that subsection shall not be appealable under
this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 31, Art. 2, § 31-2.4) (Added by Ord. 94-38)
§ 31-2.5 Rules.
   In accordance with HRS Chapter 91, the director may adopt rules having the
force and effect of law as deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes of this
article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 31, Art. 2, § 31-2.5) (Added by Ord. 94-38)
ARTICLE 3: ENTERPRISE ZONES—EXEMPTIONS FROM DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Sections
   
31-3.1   Definitions
   
31-3.2   Exemption established
   
31-3.3   Administration
   
31-3.4   Appeal
   
31-3.5   Rules
§ 31-3.1 Definitions.
   As used in this article, “director” means the director of planning and
permitting.
(1990 Code, Ch. 31, Art. 3, § 31-3.1) (Added by Ord. 94-38)
§ 31-3.2 Exemption established.
   Where an exemption has been authorized by council resolution pursuant to §
31-1.2 or
31-1.3, a qualified business located within the enterprise zone delineated in
the council resolution which is seeking to construct a new facility or to
expand, renovate, or re-equip an existing facility in the enterprise zone may
apply to the director for an exemption from city ordinances, resolutions, or
rules relating to planning, zoning, subdivision, or construction standards or
for one or more approvals under city ordinances, resolutions, or rules relating
to planning, zoning, subdivision, or construction standards as authorized in
the resolution; notwithstanding the proposed new facility or expansion,
renovation, or re-equipment of an existing facility would not comply in all
respects with all of such standards.
(1990 Code, Ch. 31, Art. 3, § 31-3.2) (Added by Ord. 94-38; Am. Ord. 97-65)
§ 31-3.3 Administration.
   The director shall review applications for exemption based on the following
criteria:
(1)   The proposed expansion, renovation, or re-equipment or new facility is
consistent with the purpose and intent of the establishment of the enterprise
zone to stimulate business and industrial growth and foster neighborhood
revitalization;
(2)   The proposed expansion, renovation, or re-equipment or new facility is
consistent with the policies and objectives of HRS Chapter 205A and the general
plan of the City and County of Honolulu; and
(3)   The proposed exemption for the expansion, renovation, or re-equipment or
new facility meets minimum requirements of health and safety, upon consultation
by the director with the appropriate public agencies.
   The director may recommend approval of the application only upon finding
that all of the above criteria are met.
   If the director recommends approval of the application, the director shall
submit the application together with the director’s findings and recommendation
within 45 days of the director’s receipt of a duly submitted application to the
council for consideration of approval by resolution. The exemption shall take
effect only if approved by the council by resolution.
(1990 Code, Ch. 31, Art. 3, § 31-3.3) (Added by Ord. 94-38)
§ 31-3.4 Appeal.
   The function performed by the director under this article shall not be
considered action in the administration of the zoning and subdivision
ordinances, or rules adopted pursuant thereto, for the purposes of Charter § 6-
1516.
(1990 Code, Ch. 31, Art. 3, § 31-3.4) (Added by Ord. 94-38)
§ 31-3.5 Rules.
   In accordance with HRS Chapter 91, the director may adopt rules, with the
concurrence of the council, having the force and effect of law as deemed
necessary to accomplish the purposes of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 31, Art. 3, § 31-3.5) (Added by Ord. 94-38)
CHAPTER 32: AFFORDABLE RENTAL HOUSING
Article
   
1.   General Provisions
   
2.   Permitted Uses, Development Standards, and Other Requirements
   
3.   Building Construction Standards
   
4.   Post-Construction Grants
   
5.   Pre-Construction Subsidies
Editor’s note:
   In accordance with Ordinance 19-8, as amended by Ordinance 23-12: Chapter 32
will be repealed on June 1, 2030; and, upon the repeal of Chapter 32,
affordable rental housing projects developed thereunder will be deemed a non-
conforming multi-family dwelling use and must comply with the applicable non-
conforming provisions of §
21-4.110.
   In accordance with Ordinance 19-8, as amended by Ordinance 23-12: the
Director of Planning and Permitting shall submit to the City Council, no later
than May 21, 2022, a report on the number of affordable rental housing units
developed under this chapter, and a recommendation regarding the repeal,
modification, or extension of this chapter.
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
32-1.1   Definitions
   
32-1.2   Regulation of affordable rental housing projects
   
32-1.3   Prohibitions
   
32-1.4   Declaration of restrictive covenants
   
32-1.5   Building permit processing
   
32-1.6   Violation—Penalty
§ 32-1.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Affordable Rental Housing Project. A multifamily dwelling containing only
dwelling units that meet all of the following criteria:
(1)   (A)   At least 80 percent of the total units are rented to households
earning 100 percent and below of the AMI; and
(B)   For a period of at least 15 years after a certificate of occupancy is
issued for the affordable rental housing project, the affordable units are
rented at or below the rental rate limits established by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development for households earning 100 percent
of the AMI for the applicable household size;
(2)   No more than 20 percent of the total units in the affordable rental
housing project are occupied by the property owners or individuals who are
related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the property owners;
(3)   Households occupying affordable rental housing units must have a lease
for the unit with a minimum six month term, and a prohibition against
subleasing;
(4)   All leases for dwelling units must allow the lessee to terminate the
lease early if the lessee or any member of the lessee's family residing with
the lessee is rendered unable to access the unit by reason of an accident or
medical condition;
(5)   The fee owners of the land on which an affordable rental housing project
is situated shall execute a declaration of restrictive covenants, and shall
file a copy thereof with the department of planning and permitting prior to the
issuance of a building permit for the affordable rental housing project; and
(6)   A certification must be filed annually with the director of budget and
fiscal services using a form provided by the director of budget and fiscal
services, affirming that at least 80 percent of the total units in the
affordable rental housing are affordable rental housing units and no more than
20 percent of the total units in the affordable rental housing are occupied by
the property owners or individuals who are related by blood, marriage, or
adoption to the property owners.
Affordable Rental Housing Unit. A unit in an affordable rental housing project
that:
(1)   Is rented to a household earning 100 percent and below of the AMI; and
(2)   For a period of at least 15 years after a certificate of occupancy is
issued for the affordable rental housing project, the affordable units are
rented at or below the rental rate limits established by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development for households earning 100 percent
of the AMI for the applicable household size.
Area Median Income or AMI. The current AMI determined by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development annually for the Honolulu
Metropolitan Statistical area, as adjusted for household size.
Bathroom. A room, or combination of adjoining rooms that provide access to one
another, that is equipped for taking a bath or shower, and that includes either
a sink or toilet, or both. A 0.5 bathroom means any room, or combination of
adjoining rooms that provide access to one another, that is equipped with a
sink or toilet, or both, but is not equipped with a bath or shower.
Bed and Breakfast Home. Has the same meaning as defined in
Chapter 21, Article 10.
Building Code. The building code of the City and County of Honolulu, as
amended.
Building Official. Has the same meaning as defined in §
18-2.1.
Declaration of Restrictive Covenants. The declaration of covenants, conditions,
and restrictions in a form approved by the director of budget and fiscal
services and executed by the fee owners of the land on which an affordable
rental housing project is situated, which at a minimum provides that:
(1)   The land and all improvements thereon are subject to the affordable
rental housing requirements of this chapter;
(2)   The land or a portion thereof may qualify for a real property tax
exemption during the exemption period;
(A)   If rented to households earning 80 percent or below of the AMI; and
(B)   For a period of at least 15 years after a certificate of occupancy is
issued for the affordable rental housing project, the affordable units are
rented at or below the rental rate limits established by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development for households earning 80 percent
of the AMI for the applicable household size;
(3)   Excluding any portion of the ground floor of the affordable rental
housing project that is designated for commercial use if commercial use is
otherwise permitted by the underlying zoning, mixed use projects are
prohibited;
(4)   The property on which an affordable rental housing project is situated
may only be submitted to a condominium property regime pursuant to HRS Chapter
514B or any successor statute if it contains a ground floor commercial use that
is permitted by the underlying zoning of the property; provided further that
the only condominium units created are one condominium unit for the ground
floor commercial portion of the project and one condominium unit for the
residential portion of the project, and the one condominium unit for the
residential portion of the project must not be further divided into separate
condominium units; and
(5)   Violation of the declaration of restrictive covenants is subject to the
enforcement provisions of
Chapters 8 and
21.
Floor Area Ratio or FAR. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Dwelling Unit. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Heavy Timber Construction. Has the same meaning as defined by the National Fire
Protection Association.
Multifamily Dwelling. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Transient Vacation Unit. Has the same meaning as defined in
Chapter 21, Article 10.
(1990 Code, Ch. 42, Art. 1, § 42-1.1) (Added by Ord. 19-8; Am. Ord. 20-13)
§ 32-1.2 Regulation of affordable rental housing projects.
   This chapter regulates affordable rental housing projects.
(1990 Code, Ch. 42, Art. 1, § 42-1.2) (Added by Ord. 19-8)
§ 32-1.3 Prohibitions.
(a)   Excluding the ground floor if commercial use is otherwise permitted by
the underlying zoning, mixed use affordable rental housing projects are
prohibited.
(b)   The property on which an affordable rental housing project is situated
may only be submitted to a condominium property regime pursuant to HRS Chapter
514B or any successor statute if it contains a ground floor commercial use that
is permitted by the underlying zoning of the property; provided further that
the only condominium units created are one condominium unit for the ground
floor commercial portion of the project and one condominium unit for the
residential portion of the project, and the one condominium unit for the
residential portion of the project must not be further divided into separate
condominium units.
(c)   Units in an affordable rental housing project must not be used as a bed
and breakfast home or transient vacation unit.
(1990 Code, Ch. 42, Art. 1, § 42-1.3) (Added by Ord. 19-8)
§ 32-1.4 Declaration of restrictive covenants.
(a)   The owner of the zoning lot on which an affordable rental housing project
is situated shall execute a declaration of restrictive covenants, as required
under this chapter.
(b)   Upon the sale, transfer, or demise of title to the property, or any
portion thereof, on which an affordable rental housing project is situated, the
owner shall disclose the declaration of restrictive covenants to the
prospective transferee, and upon the transfer of title, the new owner shall
execute a declaration of restrictive covenants in substantially the same form
as the declaration of restrictive covenant executed by the prior owner, and
file a copy of the executed declaration of restrictive covenants with the
department of planning and permitting.
(1990 Code, Ch. 42, Art. 1, § 42-1.4) (Added by Ord. 19-8)
§ 32-1.5 Building permit processing.
(a)   The declaration of restrictive covenants that has been executed by the
owner of the zoning lot on which an affordable rental housing project is
situated, must be filed with any building permit application for the affordable
rental housing project, along with any additional documents determined by the
director to be necessary to supplement the application.
(b)   Upon acceptance of a complete application for a building permit to
construct an affordable rental housing project, the building official shall
approve or disapprove the application within 90 calendar days. If the building
official fails approve or disapprove a building permit application for an
affordable rental housing project within 90 days after acceptance of a complete
application, the building permit application will be deemed approved.
(1990 Code, Ch. 42, Art. 1, § 42-1.5) (Added by Ord. 19-8)
§ 32-1.6 Violation—Penalty.
(a)   If the director of planning and permitting determines that the use of the
affordable rental housing project is abandoned; or that an owner, or the heir,
successor, or assign of the owner is violating Article 2, the violator will be
subject to the administrative enforcement provisions of §
21-2.150-2; provided that in addition to the civil fines specified in §§
21-2.150-2(e)(2)(C) and
21-2.150-2(e)(2)(D), the violator will be subject to penalties equal to the
following amounts:
(1)   The differences in the amount of taxes that were paid and those that
would have been due but for the exemption for affordable rental housing units
pursuant to §
8-10.33(b)(4);
(2)   The differences in the amount of taxes that were paid and those that
would have been due but for the exemption for qualifying construction work
pursuant to §
8-10.34(a)(2);
(3)   The amount of wastewater system facility charges waived for affordable
rental housing units pursuant to §
43-10.8(a)(4);
(4)   The amount of plan review and building permit fees waived for the
affordable rental housing units pursuant to §
18-6.5(i); and
(5)   The value of the park dedication requirements waived for the affordable
rental housing units pursuant to §
22-7.3(j)(4);
together with a penalty in the form of interest at 10 percent per annum on the
amounts imposed under subdivisions (1), (2), (3), (4), and (5), from the dates
that the respective payments would have been due, but for the exemption or
waiver.
(b)   If the building official determines that the affordable rental housing
project violates the building code or any provision of
Article 3, the violator will be subject to the violations and penalty
provisions of
Chapter 16, Article 10.
(c)   From time to time, or upon receipt of a complaint, the director of budget
and fiscal services, or the director of planning and permitting, or both, may
conduct an audit of an affordable rental housing project to determine
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 42, Art. 1, § 42-1.6) (Added by Ord. 19-8; Am. Ord. 20-13)
ARTICLE 2. PERMITTED USES, DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS, AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
32-2.1   Administration
   
32-2.2   Permitted uses
   
32-2.3   Development standards
   
32-2.4   Parking
   
32-2.5   Bicycle parking
   
32-2.6   Examples of maximum building area and yards
   
32-2.7   Examples of maximum building height
   
32-2.8   Maximum number of units
   
32-2.9   Maximum size of units
   
32-2.10   Compliance with applicable laws
§ 32-2.1 Administration.
   The director of planning and permitting, or the director's duly appointed
representative, shall administer this article. Unless specifically modified in
this article, the permitted uses, development standards, and other requirements
of
Chapters 21,
21A,
22,
25, and
26 apply to affordable rental housing projects; provided that the special
district requirements pursuant to §§
21-9.20 through
21-9.90-6 and related exhibits do not apply to affordable rental housing
projects if the assessed value of the existing buildings on the proposed
affordable rental housing project site does not exceed 30 percent of the
assessed value of the land. In the event of a conflict between applicable
provisions, this article will prevail.
(1990 Code, Ch. 42, Art. 2, § 42-2.1) (Added by Ord. 19-8; Am. Ord. 20-13)
§ 32-2.2 Permitted uses.
   Affordable rental housing projects are a permitted use in the apartment,
apartment mixed use, and business mixed use zoning districts, and in the
apartment precinct, including the apartment mixed use subprecinct, of the
Waikiki special district, pursuant to
Chapter 21.
(1990 Code, Ch. 42, Art. 2, § 42-2.2) (Added by Ord. 19-8; Am. Ord. 20-13)
§ 32-2.3 Development standards.
   Affordable rental housing projects are subject to the following development
standards and off-street parking and loading requirements, as illustrated in
Figures 32-2.6 and 32-2.7:
Development Standard Requirement
Development Standard        Requirement
Maximum lot area            20,000 square feet
Minimum front yard          10 feet, or the minimum front yard required by the
                            underlying zoning, whichever is less
Minimum side and rear yards 5 feet, or the minimum side and rear yards required
                            by the underlying zoning, whichever is less
Maximum building area       80% of the zoning lot
Maximum building height     60 feet
Maximum density             4.0 FAR
Height setbacks             None
Off-street parking          None
Bicycle parking             None
Off-street loading          None, provided that loading and garbage storage
                            must be accommodated on site.
                            Parking, including bicycle parking, is allowed in
                            the side and rear yards.
                            One loading space may encroach a maximum of 5 feet
Yard encroachments          into the front yard.
                            Required fire exit stairwells and fire corridors
                            may encroach into the front yard by a maximum of 5
                            feet.
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 42, Art. 2, § 42-2.3) (Added by Ord. 19-8)
§ 32-2.4 Parking.
   Parking, including bicycle parking, may extend into side and rear yards,
provided that a solid wall, with a minimum height of 4 feet and a maximum
height of 6 feet, is built along the applicable side or rear property boundary.
(1990 Code, Ch. 42, Art. 2, § 42-2.4) (Added by Ord. 19-8)
§ 32-2.5 Bicycle parking.
   The bicycle parking requirements of §
21-6.150 do not apply to affordable rental housing projects; however, if the
affordable rental housing project provides short- or long-term bicycle parking
onsite, the bicycle parking may encroach into required yards.
(1990 Code, Ch. 42, Art. 2, § 42-2.5) (Added by Ord. 19-8)
§ 32-2.6 Examples of maximum building area and yards.
   The following figures illustrate possible configurations of maximum building
area and required yards; however, they do not necessarily reflect acceptable
parking configurations or compliance with all other development standards:
Figure 32-2.6
5,000 SQUARE FOOT LOT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8669.png]
Figure 32-2.6
10,000 SQUARE FOOT LOT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8667.png]
Figure 32-2.6
15,000 SQUARE FOOT LOT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8665.png]
Figure 32-2.6
20,000 SQUARE FOOT LOT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8663.png]
(1990 Code, Ch. 42, Art. 2, § 42-2.6) (Added by Ord. 19-8)
§ 32-2.7 Examples of maximum building height.
   The following figures illustrate possible configurations of building height;
however, they do not necessarily reflect acceptable parking configurations or
compliance with all other development standards:
Figure 32-2.7
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8661.png]
(1990 Code, Ch. 42, Art. 2, § 42-2.7) (Added by Ord. 19-8)
§ 32-2.8 Maximum number of units.
   The maximum number of affordable rental housing units for each zoning lot is
determined by dividing the square footage equivalent of the maximum allowable
FAR for that zoning lot, excluding any public open space bonus FAR, by a factor
of 800, and rounding down to the nearest whole number.
(1990 Code, Ch. 42, Art. 2, § 42-2.8) (Added by Ord. 19-8)
§ 32-2.9 Maximum size of units.
   The maximum size of an affordable rental housing unit in an affordable
rental housing project is as follows:
Number of Bedrooms and Bathrooms Maximum Floor Area (square feet)
Number of Bedrooms and Bathrooms  Maximum Floor Area (square feet)
Studio with 1 bathroom            500
One bedroom with 1 bathroom       650
One bedroom with 1.5 bathrooms    700
One bedroom with 2 bathrooms      750
Two bedrooms with 1 bathroom      800
Two bedrooms with 1.5 bathrooms   900
Two bedrooms with 2 bathrooms     1,000
Three bedrooms with 1.5 bathrooms 1,100
Three bedrooms with 2 bathrooms   1,200
Three bedrooms with 2.5 bathrooms 1,250
Four bedrooms with 2 bathrooms    1,300
Four bedrooms with 2.5 bathrooms  1,350
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 42, Art. 2, § 42-2.9) (Added by Ord. 19-8)
§ 32-2.10 Compliance with applicable laws.
   Affordable rental housing projects must comply with all applicable laws,
including but not limited to the federal Fair Housing Act, the Americans with
Disabilities Act, and § 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
(1990 Code, Ch. 42, Art. 2, § 42-2.10) (Added by Ord. 19-8)
ARTICLE 3. BUILDING CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
Section
   
32-3.1   Administration
   
32-3.2   Standards
§ 32-3.1 Administration.
   The building official, or the building official's duly appointed
representative, shall administer this article. Unless specifically modified
herein, the building and housing code requirements of
Chapters 16 and
16A, respectively, apply to affordable rental housing projects. In the event of
a conflict between applicable provisions, this article will prevail.
(1990 Code, Ch. 42, Art. 3, § 42-3.1) (Added by Ord. 19-8)
§ 32-3.2 Standards.
(a)   Building heights and areas. The building height permitted by
Table 32-A will be increased in accordance with Section 504 of the building
code. The building area of a one-story building must not exceed the limitations
set forth in
Table 32-A, except as provided in Section 506 of the building code.
TABLE 32-A
                     ALLOWABLE HEIGHT AND BUILDING AREAS FOR MID-RISE MULTI-
                     FAMILY RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS.
                     Height Limitations shown as stories and feet above grade
                     plane.
TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION Area limitations as determined by the definition of Area,
                     building, per story
                     IB IIA IIIA HT VA
                     MAXIMUM HEIGHT (feet)
                     60 60  60   60 50
TABLE 32-A
             ALLOWABLE HEIGHT AND BUILDING AREAS FOR MID-RISE MULTI-FAMILY
             RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS.
             Height Limitations shown as stories and feet above grade plane.
TYPE OF      Area limitations as determined by the definition of Area,
CONSTRUCTION building, per story
             IB          IIA         IIIA        HT          VA
             MAXIMUM HEIGHT (feet)
             60          60          60          60          50
Height/Area  Maximum Height (stories) and Maximum Area (sq. ft.)
H            7           7           7           7           5
A            80% of land 80% of land 80% of land 80% of land 80% of land area
             area        area        area        area
 
(b)   Type of construction. The minimum type of construction must comply with
Chapter 6 of the building code and
Table 32-A.
(c)   Fire-resistance rated construction and requirements. The following
requirements apply to affordable rental housing projects:
(1)   Where an exterior wall is less than 10 feet from the property line, one-
hour fire-rated exterior walls with no greater than 25 percent openings per
wall surface; provided that windows in the openings may be unrated;
(2)   One-hour fire-rated corridor walls for double loaded corridors and
demising walls between units;
(3)   Twenty-minute fire-rated entry doors to units with automatic closure
mechanisms;
(4)   Unrated interior walls within each unit;
(5)   One-hour fire-rated floors and roof, or heavy timber floors and roof;
(6)   Two-hour fire-rated walls between units and building stairs or passenger
elevators;
(7)   Two-hour fire-rated walls and 90-minute fire-rated door in the booster
pump room described in subsection (d)(5); and
(8)   All domestic water and fire sprinkler piping must be made of
noncombustible material.
(d)   Fire protection system. The installation of automatic sprinkler systems
for protection against fire hazards must be designed and installed in
compliance with section 903 of the building code; or, for residential
occupancies of seven or fewer stories in buildings not exceeding 60 feet in
height above grade, an automatic sprinkler system must be provided as follows:
(1)   A common sprinkler/domestic main must be installed throughout the
building;
(2)   Vertical risers must be provided with a secured shutoff valve locked in
the open position. All required outages must be provided with a fire watch;
(3)   All sprinkler heads must be installed prior to the last plumbing fixture
served within the unit. All sprinkler piping serving a sprinkler head must be
kept to a minimum and no greater than 16 inches in length;
(4)   The discharge density must be 0.05 gallons per minute per square-foot
with a maximum of four sprinkler heads within each compartment;
(5)   A booster pump must be provided to accommodate the domestic water and
greatest hydraulic demanding sprinklers within a unit. The booster pump must
provide a minimum of 40 pounds per square inch at the top of the riser;
(6)   A manual wet stand pipe must be precharged from a domestic water supply
tap. The stand pipe must be located in an exterior open stairwell with two-hour
rated walls;
(7)   For exterior walls that are between 5 and 10 feet from the property line
with a wall opening greater than a 10 percent, there must be a sprinkler head
at all wall openings to provide a water curtain when the sprinkler head is
activated;
(8)   For buildings over 40 feet in height with type VA construction, a
National Fire Protection Association 13 sprinkler system is required; and
(9)   A mechanical engineer licensed in the State of Hawaii shall prepare the
plans for the automatic sprinkler system required by this section.
(e)   Means of egress. Exterior corridors and balconies that are open with
guards of a minimum one-hour fire-rated construction, or composed of other
noncombustible fascia surfaces may be constructed up to 5 feet from the
property line.
(f)   Fire escape stairs.
(1)   All fire stair exits may be open; provided that the walls adjoining any
unit are two-hour fire-rated walls.
(2)   Except as provided in subdivision (3), at least one fire exit stairwell
must be a minimum width of 36 inches, and if no elevator is provided, a second
fire exit stairwell with a minimum width of 36 inches must be provided.
(3)   Buildings with 35 or fewer units may have a single fire exit stairwell
that is a minimum width of 48 inches and constructed of non-combustible
material or heavy timber construction; provided that the total length of the
building must not exceed 100 feet. The stairwell must exit to the ground floor.
(4)   The fire chief may, at the fire chief's discretion, approve of
alternative fire exits in lieu of a second fire exit stairwell, including a
drop ladder system or a narrower second fire exit stairwell.
(g)   Exterior glass. Exterior glass in an affordable rental housing project
will be exempt from the requirements of
Chapter 16B (the Building Energy Conservation Code).
(h)   Accessibility. Design of building and facilities must comply with the
federal Fair Housing Act, 42 USC §§ 3601 et seq. Elevators are not required
unless mandated by Section 1007.2.1 of the building code, or required by
applicable federal accessibility laws. Elevators may be provided in affordable
rental housing projects, even though not required.
(i)   Fire and smoke alarm systems. Smoke detectors with audio alarms that are
electronically powered must be installed in all bedrooms. An alarm pull box
that is electronically connected to set off an audio alarm must be installed on
each floor.
(1990 Code, Ch. 42, Art. 3, § 42-3.2) (Added by Ord. 19-8)
ARTICLE 4: POST-CONSTRUCTION GRANTS
Section
   
32-4.1   Administration
   
32-4.2   Post-construction grant
   
32-4.3   Reporting
   
32-4.4   Penalty
Editor's note:
   *In accordance with Ord. 24-23, upon the repeal of ROH Chapter 32, the
penalty provisions set forth in § 32-4.4 will remain in effect for as long as
any affordable rental housing project is subject to the requirements of Chapter
32 as it read on the day prior to the date on which Chapter 32 is repealed.
§ 32-4.1 Administration.
   The director of budget and fiscal services, or the director's duly appointed
representative, shall administer this article.
(Added by Ord. 21-12)
§ 32-4.2 Post-construction grant.
(a)   Post-construction grant establishment. A post-construction grant is
established for the purpose of incentivizing the completion of construction of
affordable rental housing units provided for in this chapter.
(b)   Source of funds.
(1)   The aggregate of post-construction grant payments made under this article
may not exceed $10,000,000 in general funds; provided that there is no limit on
payments made under this article from funds outside of the general fund.
(2)   The maximum amount of funds available per fiscal year is limited to the
amount appropriated for post-construction grants pursuant to this article in
each fiscal year’s executive operating budget and program.
(3)   No more than 5 percent of the moneys designated for post-construction
grants in any given fiscal year may be used for administrative expenses.
(c)   Post-construction grant. The owner of the zoning lot on which an
affordable rental housing project is situated may apply for a post-construction
grant under this subsection after a certificate of occupancy has been issued
for the affordable rental housing project in accordance with the following
provisions:
(1)   Post-construction grant amount.
(A)   For affordable rental housing units that are less than 300 square feet in
size, the owner is eligible to receive $40 per square foot of dwelling unit
floor area; and
(B)   For affordable rental housing units that are 300 square feet or more in
size, the owner is eligible to receive $12,000 per affordable rental housing
unit.
(2)   To apply for a post-construction grant, no earlier than the date of
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the affordable rental housing
project, and no later than 12 months after the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, the owner shall submit to the department of planning and permitting
a post-construction grant application for the project in a form prescribed by
the director of planning and permitting. At a minimum, the post- construction
grant application must include:
(A)   The building permit number or professional self-certification number
issued for the affordable rental housing project; and
(B)   The certificate of occupancy number issued for the affordable rental
housing project.
(3)   Upon receipt of the post-construction grant application for an affordable
rental housing project, the department of planning and permitting shall certify
project eligibility for the post-construction grant, review and process the
grant application, and calculate the post-construction grant amount the project
is eligible for.
(4)   For all affordable rental housing projects eligible for a post-
construction grant, the director of planning and permitting shall send the
following to the director of budget and fiscal services:
(A)   Certification that the affordable rental housing project is eligible for
the post-construction grant, together with a copy of the project’s post-
construction grant application;
(B)   The building permit number or professional self-certification number
issued for the affordable rental housing project;
(C)   The certificate of occupancy number issued for the affordable rental
housing project; and
(D)   The total post-construction grant amount payable, and the calculation
thereof.
(5)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall pay or cause to be paid
the post-construction grant amount to the owner no later than 30 days after
receipt of the information set forth in subdivision (4) from the director of
planning and permitting.
(Added by Ord. 21-12; Am. Ord. 24-23)
§ 32-4.3 Reporting.
   Commencing on August 28, 2024, the director of budget and fiscal services
and the director of planning and permitting shall provide reports to the
council every three years by September 30 of each third year, which at a
minimum must include:
(1)   The number of post-construction grant applications received in each prior
fiscal year and for all fiscal years to date;
(2)   The number of post-construction grants awarded for each prior fiscal year
and for all fiscal years to date;
(3)   For each affordable rental housing project that received a post-
construction grant:
(A)   The total number of dwelling units in the project rented out at each AMI
level;
(B)   The fiscal year in which the project received a post-construction grant;
and
(C)   The total post-construction grant amount;
(4)   The cumulative post-construction grant amount awarded for all fiscal
years to date;
(5)   For each project that received a post-construction grant that was subject
to forfeiture pursuant to § 32-4.4:
(A)   The date on which the project received a post-construction grant;
(B)   The date on which the project forfeited the post-construction grant;
(C)   The nature of the violation that resulted in forfeiture;
(D)   The post-construction grant amount forfeited, and the interest amount
paid; and
(E)   Any other actions taken against the violator; and
(6)   The cumulative post-construction grant amount forfeited for all fiscal
years to date and the cumulative interest paid on the forfeited amount for all
fiscal years to date.
(Added by Ord. 21-12; Am. Ord. 24-23)
Editor's note:
   *“August 28, 2024” is substituted for “the effective date of this
ordinance.”
§ 32-4.4 Penalty.
(a)   An owner of the zoning lot on which an affordable rental housing project
is situated that received a post-construction grant under this article will be
subject to the penalty provisions set forth in this section.
(b)   If the director of planning and permitting determines at any time that:
(1)   The affordable rental housing project fails to satisfy any of the
requirements of this chapter; or
(2)   The use of the affordable rental housing project is abandoned prior to
the expiration of the required affordability period;
the owner of the affordable rental housing project will be subject to the
administrative enforcement provisions in §
21-2.150-2; provided that in addition to the civil fines specified in §
21-2.150-2(e)(2)(C) and §
21-2.150-2(e)(2)(D), and the penalty amounts specified in §
32-1.6(a), the owner will be subject to a penalty equal to the total post-
construction grant amount the owner received from the city, together with a
penalty in the form of interest at 10 percent per annum, from the date the
post-construction grant moneys were paid to the owner. Any post-construction
grant amounts not yet paid will be forfeited.
(Added by Ord. 24-23)
ARTICLE 5: PRE-CONSTRUCTION SUBSIDIES
Section
   
32-5.1   Administration—Rulemaking
   
32-5.2   Pre-construction subsidy
   
32-5.3   Reporting
   
32-5.4   Penalty
§ 32-5.1 Administration—Rulemaking.
(a)   The director of budget and fiscal services, or the director’s duly
appointed representative, shall administer this article.
(b)   The director of budget and fiscal services and the director of planning
and permitting may adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 for the
implementation, administration, and enforcement of this article, including
procedural provisions to ensure pre-construction subsidy eligibility,
qualification, compliance with all requirements of this article, and the
collection of any forfeiture of pre-construction subsidy moneys awarded.
(Added by Ord. 25-19)
§ 32-5.2 Pre-construction subsidy.
(a)   Pre-construction subsidy establishment. A pre-construction subsidy is
established for the purpose of funding a portion of the development of
affordable rental housing units provided for in this chapter.
(b)   Source of funds.
(1)   The aggregate of pre-construction subsidy payments made under this
article and post-construction grants made under Article 4 may not exceed
$10,000,000 in general funds; provided that there is no limit on payments made
under this article from funds outside of the general fund.
(2)   The maximum amount of funds available per fiscal year is limited to the
amount appropriated for pre-construction subsidies pursuant to this article and
post-construction grants pursuant to Article 4 in each fiscal year’s executive
operating budget and program.
(3)   No more than 5 percent of the moneys designated for pre-construction
subsidies in any given fiscal year may be used for administrative expenses.
(c)   Pre-construction subsidy. The owner may apply for a pre-construction
subsidy under this subsection after a building permit or professional self-
certification has been issued for the affordable rental housing project in
accordance with the following provisions:
(1)   An owner who has been awarded a pre-construction subsidy is not eligible
for a post-construction grant pursuant to
Article 4 for the same affordable rental housing project.
(2)   Pre-construction subsidy amount. An owner may be eligible to receive a
total of $50,000 for each unit.
(3)   A pre-construction subsidy may only be used for purposes of paying
prevailing wages to every laborer and mechanic performing work on the job site
for the construction of the affordable rental housing project, in compliance
with HRS Chapter 104.
(4)   To apply for a pre-construction subsidy, no earlier than the date of
issuance of a building permit or professional self-certification for the
affordable rental housing project, and no later than 12 months after the
issuance of a building permit or professional self-certification, the owner
shall submit to the department of planning and permitting a pre-construction
subsidy application for the project in a form prescribed by the director of
planning and permitting. At a minimum, the pre-construction subsidy application
must include:
(A)   A current title report for the property, a description of the affordable
rental housing project, including but not limited to location, zoning lot tax
map key number, underlying zoning district, height, density, the number of
affordable units at each AMI level, and whether there is a commercial component
to the project;
(B)   The building permit number or professional self-certification number
issued for the affordable rental housing project; and
(C)   The total estimated cost of the affordable rental housing project and all
sources of funding for the project.
(5)   Upon receipt of the pre-construction subsidy application for an
affordable rental housing project, the department of planning and permitting
shall certify project eligibility for the funding, review and process the
subsidy application, and calculate the subsidy amount for which the project is
eligible.
(6)   All pre-construction subsidy awards are subject to the execution of a
written pre-construction subsidy agreement between the city and the owner. At a
minimum, the pre-construction subsidy agreement must include provisions:
(A)   Restricting the use of the pre-construction subsidy moneys in accordance
with subdivision (3);
(B)   Requiring that annual payroll records be submitted to the director of
planning and permitting, due by September 30 of each year, consisting of a
certified copy of all payrolls and a certified copy of a fringe benefit report
in compliance with HRS § 104-3;
(C)   Requiring the owner to obtain a certificate of occupancy for the
affordable rental housing project within 24 months after the issuance of a
building permit or professional self-certification for the project; provided
that the director of planning and permitting, at the director’s discretion, may
extend this 24-month period if the owner demonstrates good cause;
(D)   Requiring that the owner develop and manage the affordable rental housing
project in compliance with all applicable laws, rules, regulations, and other
governmental requirements;
(E)   Providing that if the owner breaches or otherwise violates any terms of
the pre-construction subsidy agreement, the owner shall forfeit and return all
the pre-construction subsidy moneys received in accordance with the penalty
provisions set forth in §
32-5.4(c); and
(F)   Providing that the director of budget and fiscal services may, from time
to time at the director’s discretion, conduct an audit of the use of the pre-
construction subsidy moneys to determine compliance with the requirements of
this article and the applicable pre-construction subsidy agreement, and require
the owner to cooperate with the audit and provide any information requested by
the director.
(7)   For all affordable rental housing projects eligible for pre-construction
subsidies, upon the execution of a pre-construction subsidy agreement pursuant
to subdivision (6), the director of planning and permitting shall transmit the
following to the director of budget and fiscal services:
(A)   Certification that the affordable rental housing project is eligible for
the pre-construction subsidy, together with a copy of the project’s pre-
construction subsidy application;
(B)   The building permit number or professional self-certification number
issued for the affordable rental housing project;
(C)   A copy of the fully executed pre-construction subsidy agreement for the
affordable rental housing project; and
(D)   The total pre-construction subsidy amount payable, and the calculation
thereof.
(8)   All pre-construction subsidy awards are subject to the execution of a
written pre-construction escrow agreement by the city (as grantor), the owner
(as grantee), and an escrow agent. At a minimum, the pre-construction escrow
agreement must include a provision for periodic disbursements of the pre-
construction subsidy pro rata in proportion to the prevailing wages paid to
date, as evidenced by the submission of certified payroll records.
(Added by Ord. 25-19)
§ 32-5.3 Reporting.
   Commencing on May 28, 2025, the director of budget and fiscal services and
the director of planning and permitting shall provide reports to the council
every three years by September 30 of each third year, which at a minimum must
include:
(1)   The number of pre-construction subsidy applications received in each
prior fiscal year and for all fiscal years to date;
(2)   The number of pre-construction subsidy awards for each prior fiscal year
and for all fiscal years to date;
(3)   For each affordable rental housing project that received a pre-
construction subsidy:
(A)   The total number of dwelling units in the project at each AMI level;
(B)   The fiscal year in which the project received a pre-construction subsidy;
and
(C)   The total pre-construction subsidy amount;
(4)   The cumulative pre-construction subsidy amount awarded for all fiscal
years to date;
(5)   For each project that received a pre-construction subsidy award that was
subject to forfeiture:
(A)   The date on which the project received a pre-construction subsidy;
(B)   The date on which the project forfeited the pre-construction subsidy;
(C)   The nature of the violation that resulted in forfeiture;
(D)   The pre-construction subsidy amount forfeited, and the interest amount
paid; and
(E)   Any other actions taken against the violator; and
(6)   The cumulative pre-construction subsidy amount forfeited for all fiscal
years to date and the cumulative interest paid on the forfeited amount for all
fiscal years to date.
(Added by Ord. 25-19)
Editor’s note:
   “May 28, 2025” is substituted for “the effective date of this ordinance.” In
accordance with Ord. 25-19, upon the repeal of Chapter 32, the penalty
provisions set forth in § 32-5.4 will remain in effect for as long as any
affordable rental housing project is subject to the requirements of Chapter 32
as it read on the day prior to the date on which Chapter 32 is repealed.
§ 32-5.4 Penalty.
(a)   An owner who received a pre-construction subsidy under this article will
be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in this section.
(b)   If the director of planning and permitting determines at any time that:
(1)   The affordable rental housing project fails to satisfy any of the
requirements of this chapter; or
(2)   The use of the affordable rental housing project is abandoned prior to
the expiration of the required affordability period;
the owner will be subject to the administrative enforcement provisions in §
21-2.150-2; provided that in addition to the civil fines specified in §§
21-2.150-2(e)(2)(C) and
21-2.150-2(e)(2)(D), and the penalty amounts specified in §
32-1.6(a), the owner will be subject to a penalty equal to the total pre-
construction subsidy amount the owner received from the city, together with a
penalty in the form of interest at 10 percent per year, from the date the pre-
construction subsidy moneys were paid to the owner. Any pre-construction
subsidy amounts not yet paid will be forfeited.
(c)   If the director of planning and permitting determines at any time that
the owner breached any of the terms of the pre-construction subsidy agreement,
including but not limited to that the pre-construction subsidy moneys received
were used or expended for improper purposes, the owner will be subject to a
penalty equal to the total pre-construction subsidy amount the owner received
from the city, together with a penalty in the form of interest at 10 percent
per year, from the date the pre-construction subsidy moneys were paid to the
owner. Any pre-construction subsidy amounts not yet paid will be forfeited.
(Added by Ord. 25-19)
CHAPTER 33: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
Article
   
1.   General Provisions
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections
   
33-1.1   Definitions—Execution
   
33-1.2   General authorization
   
33-1.3   Negotiation, approval, and execution of development agreements
   
33-1.4   Periodic review—Termination of agreement
   
33-1.5   Development agreement—Provisions
   
33-1.5A   Development agreement—Fees
   
33-1.6   Enforceability—Applicability
   
33-1.7   Administrative procedure
   
33-1.8   Effective date—Laws and rules applicable—Effect on zoning and permit
requirements
   
33-1.9   Amendment or cancellation
   
33-1.10   Filing and recordation
§ 33-1.1 Definitions—Execution.
(a)   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Designated Agency. The department of planning and permitting.
Development. Includes but is not limited to the subdivision of land or change
in the intensity of the use of the land or the construction of permanent
structures thereon.
Developer. A person who has a legal or equitable right to effect the
development of the subject real property.
Discretionary Permit. Includes any permit issuable by the council, including
special management area use permits; any permit issuable by the designated
agency, including conditional use permits and site plan review permits; any
permit issuable as a matter of discretion by any federal, State, or county
agency. Discretionary permit does not include grading permits, construction
permits, or any permits issuable under the city building, plumbing, fire, or
electrical codes.
Lessee with Standing. Any person having current lease rights in the property
and from, or through which, directly or indirectly, the developer has leased
the property or has obtained development rights in the property.
Person. An individual, group, partnership, firm, association, corporation,
trust, governmental agency, governmental official, administrative body, or
tribunal or any other legal form of business or legal entity.
State. The State of Hawaii.
(b)   For the purposes of this chapter, a development agreement shall be deemed
to have been “executed” when it has been signed by all parties thereto.
(1990 Code, Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.1) (Added by Ord. 96-09)
§ 33-1.2 General authorization.
(a)   Pursuant to HRS Chapter 46, Part VII, the city may enter into a
development agreement with a developer. The agreement may be requested by
either the city or by a developer, pursuant to §
33-1.7.
(b)   Pursuant to HRS § 46-131, each development agreement shall be deemed an
administrative act of the government body made party to the agreement.
(c)   The designated agency is authorized to negotiate, prepare, and administer
a development agreement, in accordance with this chapter, with any developer.
(d)   If after March 29, 1996,* a statute is enacted by the State that provides
that development agreements shall be subject to the exercise of county
initiative power, either direct or indirect, or to county referendum, any
development agreement entered into after such enactment shall be subject
thereto.
(1990 Code, Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.2) (Added by Ord. 96-09)
Editor’s note:
   * “March 29, 1996” is substituted for “the effective date of this
ordinance.”
§ 33-1.3 Negotiation, approval, and execution of development agreements.
(a)   A proposed development agreement may be negotiated upon request by a
developer, by the city, or, for State developments, by the State, by submitting
an application in accordance with §
33-1.7. Negotiations by and among all parties may be pursued, provided that the
development agreement shall not be executed by the mayor until the developer
has obtained the approval of the council and all development plan land use map
and zoning district designations necessary for the proposed development have
been enacted and become effective. The mayor shall not execute the development
agreement until all nongovernmental parties thereto have executed the
development agreement. The council may, as a condition to its approval of a
development agreement, require the prior execution thereof by all
nongovernmental parties thereto. If a development agreement approved in
connection with a rezoning ordinance is not executed by all parties within 30
days after the effective date of the ordinance, the director of planning and
permitting shall immediately initiate action to rezone the affected property to
the zoning that existed before the effective date of the rezoning ordinance.
(b)   The designated agency shall submit any proposed development agreement to
the council for its approval, modification and approval as modified, or
rejection, by resolution adopted by a majority of the council.
(1990 Code, Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.3) (Added by Ord. 96-09)
§ 33-1.4 Periodic review—Termination of agreement.
(a)   In accordance with this section, the designated agency shall conduct
periodic reviews of all development agreements to determine compliance with the
terms and conditions thereof by the parties thereto.
(b)   Each development agreement shall specify requirements for periodic review
thereof by the designated agency for compliance with the agreement; provided
that such reviews shall be conducted at least once a year. The designated
agency may conduct reviews at more frequent intervals, as specified in the
development agreement, or if the designated agency has reason to believe the
agreement is being or has been violated.
(c)   If the designated agency finds that any party has committed a material
breach of the terms or conditions of a development agreement, the following
procedure shall be followed.
(1)   The designated agency shall, within 15 days of its making such finding,
notify the party in writing, setting forth the specific breach found and the
evidence supporting the finding, and provide the party a reasonable time within
which to cure the breach.
(2)   The designated agency shall give the party the opportunity to request a
hearing before the director of planning and permitting or the director’s
designee to rebut the findings of the designated agency, or if the designated
agency finds that an amendment to the agreement would meet its concerns, an
opportunity to consent to the amendment.
(3)   If the party fails successfully to rebut the findings at the hearing or
to cure the breach within the time provided, or if the designated agency, after
obtaining the consent of the party found to be in breach, wishes to propose an
amendment to the development agreement to meet the designated agency’s
concerns, it shall notify the council.
(4)   The council thereafter may, but need not, take one of the following
actions:
(A)   Unilaterally terminate the agreement and impose any other penalties which
are stated in the agreement; or
(B)   Amend the agreement pursuant to §
33-1.9, so that the party is no longer in material breach thereof.
(d)   The designated agency shall establish rules of procedure for any party
found to be in material breach to rebut the finding. The hearing procedures
shall conform to the requirements of HRS Chapter 91, relating to contested case
hearings.
(e)   Nothing in this article shall preclude the council, following termination
of a development agreement, from taking action with respect to the subject
land, including rezoning thereof, independent of the agreement.
(1990 Code, Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.4) (Added by Ord. 96-09)
§ 33-1.5 Development agreement—Provisions.
(a)   A development agreement shall contain the following, when applicable:
(1)   A description of the land that is the subject of the development
agreement;
(2)   Specifications of the permitted uses of the property, the density or
intensity of use, and the design and the maximum height and size of proposed
buildings permitted as of the date the development agreement is effective;
(3)   If required by the council, a master plan of the property subject to the
development agreement, designating the permitted locations of uses or
categories of uses and designating areas of the property that will be subject
to the various specifications on density, intensity, building design, building
height, and building size referred to in subdivision (2);
(4)   A description of which city laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules,
regulations, and policies governing the use of the land that is the subject of
the development agreement shall apply to the development in accordance with §
33-1.6;
(5)   Provisions, where appropriate, for reservation or dedication of land for
public purposes as may be required or permitted pursuant to laws, ordinances,
resolutions, rules, or policies in effect on the date the development agreement
is effective; and
(6)   A termination date, not to exceed 10 years from the effective date of the
agreement; provided that the parties to the agreement shall not be precluded
from extending the termination date by mutual agreement pursuant to §
33-1.9 for a period or periods not to exceed two years per extension, or from
entering into subsequent development agreements.
(b)   A development agreement shall provide commencement dates and completion
dates for any proposed development, including dates for commencement and
completion of phases, if any, of the development; provided that such dates as
may be set forth in the development agreement may be extended at the discretion
of the city at the request of the developer upon good cause shown, subject to
subsection (a)(6).
(c)   A development agreement may include any other terms consistent with this
chapter not prohibited by law. Such additional terms may, as appropriate,
include maps, site plans, narrative, and any other documents or materials.
(d)   In addition to the city and the developers, any federal, State, or local
governmental agency or body may be included as a party to a development
agreement. If more than one governmental body is made a party to a development
agreement, the agreement shall specify that the designated agency shall be
responsible for the overall administration of the agreement.
(e)   Consent to the development agreement by the fee owner or owners and all
lessees with standing shall be a part of each agreement.
(f)   A development agreement shall include conditions imposed by the city on
the proposed development; provided that further conditions may be imposed
pursuant to any discretionary permit that is required for the proposed
development as of the effective day of the agreement.
(g)   No development agreement can preempt the need for a future discretionary
permit, issued by the city, where such discretionary permit is required by law
in effect as of the effective date of the agreement.
(h)   The city may require a developer to obtain a bond, establish a letter of
credit, provide collateral, or use any other adequate means to ensure
compliance with a development agreement.
(1990 Code, Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.5) (Added by Ord. 96-09; Am. Ord. 96-58)
§ 33-1.5A Development agreement—Fees.
   Applications for development agreements shall be accompanied by a fee of
$10,000, plus $1,000 per acre involved or any major fraction thereof, up to a
maximum fee of $30,000. Fees shall not be refundable.
(1990 Code, Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.5A) (Added by Ord. 14-4)
§ 33-1.6 Enforceability—Applicability.
(a)   Unless terminated pursuant to §
33-1.5(a)(6) or unless canceled pursuant to §
33-1.4(c), a development agreement, amended development agreement, or modified
development agreement, once entered into, shall be enforceable by any party
thereto, or their heirs, successors in interest, or permitted assigns.
(b)   All city laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, and policies
governing uses of the land that is the subject of a development agreement,
including but not limited to those governing permitted uses, density, design,
height, parking requirements, setbacks, size, and building specification of
proposed buildings, construction standards and specifications, and water
utilization requirements applicable to the development of the property subject
to the development agreement, shall be those city laws, ordinances,
resolutions, rules, regulations, and policies applicable to the development and
in force at the time of the execution of the development agreement,
notwithstanding any subsequent change adopted by the city that alters or amends
the laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, or policies specified in
this section. Such subsequent change shall be void as applied to property
subject to the development agreement to the extent that it changes any city
law, ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation, or policy that the development
agreement provides shall be maintained in force as written at the time of the
development agreement’s execution; provided that a development agreement shall
not prevent the city from requiring any party or any party’s heirs, successors,
and permitted assigns to comply with city laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules,
regulations, and policies of general applicability enacted after the execution
date of the development agreement if the city finds it necessary to impose such
requirement because a failure to do so would place the residents of the
development or of the immediate community, or both, in a condition perilous to
the residents’ health or safety, or both.
(c)   (1)   If the State is a party to a development agreement, the development
agreement may contain provisions relating to:
(A)   The applicability of State statutes, resolutions, rules, regulations, and
policies governing uses of the land that is the subject of the development
agreement and amendments thereto; and
(B)   Obligations of the developer to the State or of the State to the
developer;
      provided that the inclusion of such provisions is permitted by law.
(2)   Except as may be provided in a development agreement pursuant to
subdivision (1), State statutes, resolutions, rules, regulations, and policies,
and any amendments thereto, shall apply to the development.
(d)   The development agreement shall not affect the applicability of federal
statutes, resolutions, rules, regulations, and policies, and any amendments
thereto, to the development.
(e)   For the purposes of this section, improvement district, maintenance
district, tax increment financing district and community facilities district
laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, and policies are laws,
ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, and policies governing the
financing of infrastructure construction and maintenance and not governing the
uses of land.
(1990 Code, Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.6) (Added by Ord. 96-09; Am. Ord. 96-58)
§ 33-1.7 Administrative procedure.
(a)   A request for a development agreement may be initiated by a developer, by
the city or, for State developments, by the State, by submitting an application
and a preliminary proposal of the substance of the agreement to the designated
agency. Within 30 days after receipt of the application, the designated agency
shall publish notice of the substance of the proposed development agreement at
least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and forward copies
of the application to all affected agencies and neighborhood boards. As used in
this section, “affected neighborhood board” means a neighborhood board whose
geographic area contains all or any portion of the proposed development. Any
affected agency, affected neighborhood board, or interested person shall make
any comments on the application to the designated agency within 45 days of the
date of the public notice.
(b)   The designated agency shall review all comments and hold a public hearing
within 30 days of the expiration of the public comment period provided for in
subsection (a). At the public hearing, the designated agency shall afford all
interested persons an opportunity to testify on the proposed development
agreement and shall recommend appropriate action to the council within 10 days
of the completion of the public hearing. The public hearing may be held at the
same time as public hearings held for related purposes. The designated agency
may conduct more than one public hearing, if the agency deems it warranted. If
more than one public hearing is deemed warranted by the designated agency, the
30-day limit may be extended by the designated agency for up to 30 days for
each additional hearing conducted. The designated agency may adopt rules
relating to its procedures for the processing of development agreement
applications.
(c)   The council shall review the proposed development agreement and the
recommendations thereon from the designated agency, hold a public hearing, and,
by resolution, accept, modify and accept as modified, or reject the development
agreement. The council’s public hearing may be held at the same time as other
public hearings of the council. In addition to other notice requirements
prescribed by law for the public hearing, notice of such public hearing shall
be given to any affected neighborhood board, and may, but need not, be given to
any other affected community organization.
(d)   When appropriate, a development agreement may be processed in conjunction
with a proposal for the rezoning of or the issuance of a discretionary permit
for all or a portion of the land that is the subject of the development
agreement. The processing of the development agreement shall not preclude the
imposition of conditions in connection with the rezoning pursuant to §
21-2.80.
(1990 Code, Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.7) (Added by Ord. 96-09)
§ 33-1.8 Effective date—Laws and rules applicable—Effect on zoning and permit
requirements.
(a)   Upon completion of the negotiations and administrative process as
provided in §§
33-1.3 and
33-1.7, the council may adopt a resolution authorizing the city to enter into a
development agreement and the agreement shall be effective immediately upon its
execution by the mayor on behalf of the city and by all other parties to the
agreement.
(b)   No development agreement shall be approved by the council, unless the
council finds that the provisions of the proposed development agreement are
consistent with:
(1)   The city’s general plan;
(2)   Any applicable development plans; and
(3)   The applicable zoning district designation or designations;
effective as of the date of execution of the development agreement. This
subsection shall not preclude the council from finding that the provisions of a
proposed development agreement are consistent with the applicable zoning
district designation or designations if the council has passed on third reading
a zoning district amendment ordinance with which the provisions of the
development agreement would be consistent and the time period for the override
of a mayoral veto has not lapsed as of the time of the finding.
(c)   The authorization or execution of a development agreement shall not be
construed as a granting of any necessary discretionary permit.
(1990 Code, Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.8) (Added by Ord. 96-09)
§ 33-1.9 Amendment or cancellation.
   A request for amendment or cancellation of a development agreement may be
initiated by any party to the agreement. A development agreement may be amended
or canceled, in whole or in part, by mutual consent of all the parties to the
agreement; provided that the amendment or cancellation shall be approved by
resolution of the council; provided further, that a public hearing shall be
held by the council before any amendment that the council determines would
substantially alter the development agreement or any cancellation of a
development agreement.
(1990 Code, Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.9) (Added by Ord. 96-09)
§ 33-1.10 Filing and recordation.
   The city shall be responsible for filing or recording the development
agreement or any amendment to the development agreement in the office of the
assistant registrar of the land court or in the bureau of conveyances of the
State, whichever is appropriate, or both if both are appropriate, within 20
days after the city enters into a development agreement or an amendment to the
development agreement. The burdens of the development agreement shall be
binding upon, and the benefits of the development agreement shall inure to all
successors in interest or permitted assigns of the parties to the development
agreement.
(1990 Code, Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.10) (Added by Ord. 96-09)
CHAPTER 33A: IMPACT FEES FOR TRAFFIC AND ROADWAY IMPROVEMENTS IN EWA
Article
   
1.   General Provisions
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections
   
33A-1.1   Purpose
   
33A-1.2   Definitions
   
33A-1.3   Impact fees
   
33A-1.4   Conformity with the Ewa development plan and the Ewa highway master
plan
   
33A-1.5   Ewa highway impact fee program
   
33A-1.6   Ewa highway master plan impact fees
   
33A-1.7   Ewa highway improvement trust fund or account
   
33A-1.8   Hearing and appeal procedures
   
33A-1.9   Refund of fees
   
33A-1.10   Exemptions and credits
§ 33A-1.1 Purpose.
   This chapter sets forth a regulatory scheme for the assessment and
collection of impact fees to be borne on a pro rata share basis by landowners,
developers, home builders, and others who directly contribute to expanding the
population and increasing economic activity in the Ewa region through new land
development activities. This chapter is intended to recover only a portion of
the governmental expenditures related to growth and implements the Ewa
development plan and the Ewa highway master plan.
(1990 Code, Ch. 33A, Art. 1, § 33A-1.1) (Added by Ord. 02-52)
§ 33A-1.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Applicant. An individual, partnership, corporation, trust, or agent having the
requisite authority, who has applied to the City and County of Honolulu for a
building permit.
Building or Structure. Has the same meaning as defined in the International
Building Code as adopted and amended in
Chapter 16.
Building Permit. An official document or certificate issued by the city
authorizing the construction of any building or structure.
Ewa Region. The geographical area defined in the Ewa development plan, plus the
entire Royal Kunia and Village Park areas. The Village Park area is described
by the following tax map key plats: 9-4-104, -106, -107, -113, -114, -120, -
124, -131, -132, -133, -134, and -135; and by the following tax map key Nos: 9-
4-002: 014 and 028.  The Royal Kunia area is described by the following tax map
key plats: 9-4-136, -137, -146, -148, -149, -152, -153, -154, -155, -156, -157,
-163, -164, -165; and by the following tax map key Nos.: 9-4-002: 049, 050,
064, 066, 068, 001, 052, 070, and 071.
Ewa Highway Impact Fee Program. Refers collectively to:
(1)   The July 3, 2002 report entitled “Ewa Highway Impact Fee Program,”
prepared by Kaku Associates, Inc., for the State department of transportation
(“DOT”), which includes the Ewa highway master plan and which was submitted as
miscellaneous communication No. 1965 (2002) to the council;
(2)   The letter from Kaku Associates, Inc., to the chair of the council’s
zoning committee, submitted as miscellaneous communication No. 2440 (2002) to
the council; and
(3)   The “Proportionate Share Study of the Ewa Highway Impact Fee Program” by
SMS Research, dated October 2, 2002, and submitted as miscellaneous
communication No. 2590 (2002) to the council.
Ewa Highway Master Plan. Refers collectively to the August 28, 2001 report from
Kaku Associates, Inc., to the director of the DOT on the Ewa highway master
plan/Year 2010 highway plan, as modified by the May 31, 2002 report from Kaku
Associates, Inc., to the director of the DOT on the Ewa highway master plan,
both of the reports being included as part of miscellaneous communication No.
1965 (2002) to the council. The Year 2010 highway improvement plan contained in
the Ewa highway master plan sets forth the six regional roadway projects
improvements that form the basis for this impact fee ordinance.
Ewa Highway Master Plan Impact Fees. The charges imposed on new land
development that are designed to fund a pro rata share of the cost of traffic
and roadway improvements set out and contained in the Ewa highway master plan.
Hotel or Transient Vacation Unit. Buildings or structures that are designed or
intended for temporary human habitation. The types of hotel or transient
vacation unit identified in this chapter have the same meanings as in §
21-10.1.
New Land Development. The carrying out of any building activity or the making
of any material change in the use or appearance of any structure or land that
attracts or produces vehicular trips over and above that produced or attracted
by the existing use of the land.
Square Feet. Are computed by determining the total floor area of a
nonresidential structure or building under roof, with all of the same
exclusions as set forth in the definition of “floor area” contained in §
21-10.1.
Trip or Vehicular Trip. A one-way movement of vehicular travel from an origin
point (one trip end) to a destination point (the other trip end). For the
purposes of this chapter, “trip” shall have the meaning that it has in commonly
accepted traffic engineering practice and that is substantially the same as
that definition in the previous sentence.
Trip Generation. The attraction or production of trips caused by a given new
land development.
(1990 Code, Ch. 33A, Art. 1, § 33A-1.2) (Added by Ord. 02-52)
§ 33A-1.3 Impact fees.
(a)   Ewa highway master plan impact fees shall be charged and assessed for all
new land development activities that require a building permit in the Ewa
region, except as otherwise provided in §
33A-1.10(a). Ewa highway master plan impact fees shall be assessed in
accordance with §
33A-1.6, and shall be paid to the city before the issuance of any building
permit.
(b)   No building permit shall be issued if an Ewa highway master plan impact
fee is due and the Ewa highway master plan impact fee has not been paid.
(c)   Applications for refunds or waivers under the Ewa highway impact fee
program shall be accompanied by a fee of $50 which is not refundable.
(1990 Code, Ch. 33A, Art. 1, § 33A-1.3) (Added by Ord. 02-52; Am. Ord. 14-4)
§ 33A-1.4 Conformity with the Ewa development plan and the Ewa highway master
plan.
   Section 4.1 of the Ewa development plan, adopted by Ordinance 97-49, as
amended, lists the highway improvements needed to be built to accommodate the
planned growth in Ewa. The roadways identified in the Ewa highway master plan
are consistent with and implement § 4.1 of the Ewa development plan. The Ewa
highway master plan is approved and adopted by the City and County of Honolulu.
This plan contains the Year 2010 highway improvement plan, which lists a set of
roadway improvements that are necessary to accommodate the anticipated
development of the Ewa region with adequate roadway improvements while
protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
   The Ewa highway master plan impact fees set forth in §
33A-1.6 are in conformity with the Ewa highway master plan and are an essential
component of implementing this plan.
(1990 Code, Ch. 33A, Art. 1, § 33A-1.4) (Added by Ord. 02-52)
§ 33A-1.5 Ewa highway impact fee program.
   The Ewa highway impact fee program is approved as the “needs assessment
study” required for enactment of this chapter and for purposes of HRS §§ 46-141
through 46-148. The Ewa highway impact fee program is comprised of the
following parts:
(1)   Ewa region development forecasts.  The land use development forecasts for
the Ewa region through 2010 are shown in
Table 33A-1.1.
Table 33A-1.1: Ewa Region Development Forecasts through 2010
 Units (square feet for Nonresidential)
Table 33A-1.1: Ewa Region Development Forecasts through 2010
                                Units (square feet for Nonresidential)
Residential                      
   SF residential dwelling un7,640
   MF residential dwelling un7,640
Nonresidential
   Retail                    938,100
   Office                    852,200
   Industrial/other          3,475,200
   Hotel                     1,100
   Timeshare                 1,000
 
(2)   Roadway master plan for Ewa. The estimated cost of Ewa highway master
plan improvements for the Ewa region is shown in
Table 33A-1.2.
Table 33A-1.2: Ewa Region Highway Improvement Program
Estimated Cost of Improvements
Facility Segment Improvement Cost Estimate
Table 33A-1.2: Ewa Region Highway Improvement Program
Estimated Cost of Improvements
Facility           Segment                  Improvement           Cost Estimate
H-1                Kapolei Interchange      New ramps, bridges    $25,910,000
H-1                Makakilo Interchange     Extend ramp, new ramp $10,170,000
                                            Subtotal              $36,080,000
Fort Barrette Road Farrington to Franklin   Widen to 4 lanes      $10,500,000
                   D. Roosevelt Ave.
Fort Weaver Road   Farrington Hwy. to North Widen to 6 lanes      $33,500,000
                   Road
                   Ko Olina to Kalaeloa     New 4-lane roadway    $14,400,000
                   Blvd.
                   Kamokila Blvd. to Fort   New 4-lane roadway    $10,400,000
                   Barrette Rd.
                   Kapolei Pkwy. Bridge to  New 4-lane roadway    $3,400,000
                   North-South Rd.
Kapolei Parkway    North-South Road to      New 4-lane roadway    $14,000,000
                   Puamaeole
                   Puuloa Road to Keoneula  New 2-lane roadway    $3,600,000
                   Blvd.
                   Keonuela Blvd. to        New 2-lane roadway    $2,424,000
                   Kaileolea Dr.
                   Kaimalie St. to Papipi   New 2-lane roadway    $860,400
                   Rd.
                                            Subtotal              $49,084,400
North-South Road   H-1 to Kapolei Parkway   New 4-lane roadway    $64,800,000
                                            New Interchange
                                            GRAND TOTAL           $193,964,400
 
Based upon the Ewa highway master plan, the Ewa highway impact fee program, the
Oahu regional transportation (Top 2025) plan, the Ewa development plan, and
other policy considerations, the portion of the estimated cost of Ewa highway
master plan improvements attributable to new development and to be collected by
this impact fee ordinance is $38,792,880.
(3)   Vehicular trip forecasts. The forecasted new vehicular trips, per hour,
for the Ewa region are shown in
Table 33A-1.3.
Table 33A-1.3: Ewa Region Trip Generation Estimate for New Development
Land Use (1,000                      Trip Generation Rate Trip Generation
square feet for
Nonresidential;     Units (Increment
units for           2002 to 2010)    a.m. Peak p.m. Peak  a.m. Peak p.m. Peak
Residential, Hotel,
and Timeshare)
Table 33A-1.3: Ewa Region Trip Generation Estimate for New Development
Land Use (1,000 square feet   Units      Trip
for Nonresidential; units for (Increment Generation     Trip Generation
Residential, Hotel, and       2002 to    Rate
Timeshare)                    2010)      a.m. p.m. Peak a.m. Peak p.m. Peak
                                         Peak
Residential
   SF residential dwelling 7,640      0.78 0.52      5,959     3,973
unit
   MF residential dwelling 7,640      0.52 0.362     3,973     2,766
unit
Nonresidential
   Retail                  938        0.62 2.25      582       2,111
   Office                  852        1.23 1.18      1,048     1,006
   Industrial/other        3,475      0.7  0.73      2,433     2,537
   Hotel                   1,100      0.34 0.37      374       407
   Timeshare               1,000      0.17 0.185     170       185
Total                                                   14,539    12,985
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 33A, Art. 1, § 33A-1.5) (Added by Ord. 02-52)
§ 33A-1.6 Ewa highway master plan impact fees.
   Ewa highway master plan impact fees shall be based on the following factors.
(a)   Impact of new development. The measure of impact is the number of
predicted vehicular trips generated by the new land development activity. The
authority for the trip generation rates to be used in the calculation of
vehicle trips is
Table 33A-1.3 of §
33A-1.5 .
(b)   Assessment of cost. A schedule for determining Ewa highway master plan
impact fees is established. The fee rates by land use type are shown in
Table 33A-1.4.
Table 33A-1.4: Impact Fees by Land Use
Category Land Use Impact Fee
                  Amount Unit
Table 33A-1.4: Impact Fees by Land Use
Category       Land Use         Impact Fee
                                Amount Unit
Residential    Single-family    $1,836 Per dwelling unit
               Multi-family     $1,245 Per dwelling unit
               Hotel            $1,003 Per unit
               Timeshare        $501   Per unit
Nonresidential Retail           $4,053 Per 1,000 square feet
               Office           $3,403 Per 1,000 square feet
               Industrial/other $2,019 Per 1,000 square feet
 
The department of planning and permitting shall compute and collect Ewa highway
master plan impact fees from applicants before issuance of building permits.
The director of planning and permitting shall establish by rule such procedures
as may be necessary to carry out the department’s responsibilities under this
section.
(c)   Interpretation of fee schedule. If the type of land use that is the
subject of an application is in doubt, the applicant may request an
interpretation from the department of planning and permitting as to the
appropriate type of land development being undertaken and the applicable Ewa
highway master plan impact fees that would be due. This interpretation may be
appealed by following the procedures set out in §
33A-1.8.
(d)   Expansion of a building or structure. In the event of an expansion of a
building or structure, Ewa highway master plan impact fees due would be the net
positive difference between the Ewa highway master plan impact fees that would
be due for the expanded building or structure and that which would have been
due for the original building if constructed currently.
(e)   Change of use. In the event of a change of use of a building or
structure, Ewa highway master plan impact fees due would be the net positive
difference between the Ewa highway master plan impact fees that would be due
for the new use of the building or structure and that which would have been due
for the original use if constructed currently.
(f)   Mixed use. When a single building or structure will contain more than one
type of land use, the Ewa highway master plan impact fees due will be based on
the amount of space devoted to each type.
(g)   Retail, office, and industrial/other impact fees. Impact fees for land
uses that are listed in units of 1,000 square feet in
Table 33A-1.4 shall be computed by dividing the per-1,000-square-foot amount of
the land use impact fee by 1,000 and then multiplying this amount by the actual
square footage of the land use.
(h)   Revisions to the Ewa highway master plan. The director of transportation
services, in consultation with the director of planning and permitting and the
State director of transportation, shall review the Ewa highway master plan once
every five years in terms of land uses, densities, highway improvements, and
changes in costs and make appropriate changes thereto. This review and revision
shall include consultation and input from the Ewa region developers. The cost
of this review may be funded out of the impact fees collected under this
chapter. Based upon this review of the Ewa highway master plan, the directors
may recommend to the council that the impact fee program contained in this
chapter be modified by amending this chapter. As a matter of policy, the share
of the costs attributable to new development for highway projects in the Ewa
region and payable by impact fees shall remain in roughly the same proportion
as the proportion set forth in this chapter.
(i)   Compliance with unilateral agreement conditions. The enactment of this
chapter constitutes compliance with the various unilateral agreement
conditional zoning conditions attached to project zoning conditions requiring
participation in the implementation, funding, and construction of the six
regional transportation projects contained in the Ewa highway master plan, or
similar requirements to address regional transportation impacts in the Ewa
area. Upon issuance of a building permit, the requirements for participation in
the implementation, funding, and construction of the six regional
transportation projects contained the Ewa highway master plan, or similar
requirements to address regional transportation impacts in the Ewa area, shall
be satisfied with respect to the development covered by that building permit.
Any on-site or project-specific improvements, apart from those set forth in the
Ewa highway master plan, remain subject to the requirements of the specific
unilateral agreement conditions.
(1990 Code, Ch. 33A, Art. 1, § 33A-1.6) (Added by Ord. 02-52)
§ 33A-1.7 Ewa highway improvement trust fund or account.
(a)   The department of budget and fiscal services shall create a special trust
fund, or interest-bearing account in the general trust fund or other
appropriate fund, which shall serve as the exclusive depository of all funds
collected as Ewa highway master plan impact fees pursuant to this chapter.
(b)   All funds collected as Ewa highway master plan impact fees shall promptly
be deposited into and held in the special trust fund or account until expended
or encumbered pursuant to this chapter. All interest earnings on the balances
in the special trust fund or account shall be retained and used for the same
purposes as Ewa highway master plan impact fees.
(c)   All funds deposited into the special trust fund or account are to be used
exclusively for traffic and roadway improvements set out and contained in the
Year 2010 highway improvement plan contained in the Ewa highway master plan, as
that plan may be amended, and not for any other purpose, except that the city
shall receive 2 percent of all funds deposited, deducted upon deposit, as
reimbursement for the cost of administering this chapter.
(d)   Funds collected as Ewa highway master plan impact fees shall be made
available to either the State for State highway or traffic improvements, or the
city for city highway or traffic improvements, provided that the improvements
are contained in the Year 2010 highway improvement plan contained in the Ewa
highway master plan.
(1990 Code, Ch. 33A, Art. 1, § 33A-1.7) (Added by Ord. 02-52)
§ 33A-1.8 Hearing and appeal procedures.
   The applicant may contest the amount of the impact fee assessed by
petitioning the director of planning and permitting for a declaratory ruling
pursuant to the practices and procedures of the department. The petition must
be submitted by the developer within 15 days of notification of the fee amount.
Payment of the fee amount will not be a waiver of the applicant’s right to
request a declaratory ruling from the director. The declaratory ruling shall be
considered a final decision and order by the department.
(1990 Code, Ch. 33A, Art. 1, § 33A-1.8) (Added by Ord. 02-52)
§ 33A-1.9 Refund of fees.
(a)   The fees collected pursuant to this chapter, less the administrative
costs set forth in §
33A-1.7(c), shall be refunded to the applicants in the following situations,
provided that the procedures set forth in subsection (b) shall be complied
with:
(1)   If they have not been spent or encumbered within six years from the date
collected; or
(2)   If the building permit is revoked or withdrawn and no work was initiated
thereunder.
(b)   (1)   The applicant shall petition the department of planning and
permitting for the refund within the following time periods:
(A)   For situations described in subsection (a)(1), within one year following
the end of the sixth year from the date on which the fee was collected; or
(B)   For situations described in subsection (a)(2), within 30 days of the
revocation or withdrawal of the building permit.
(2)   The form of the petition shall be prescribed by the department of
planning and permitting. The petition shall contain such information as the
department deems necessary to establish that the petitioner is eligible for a
refund.
(3)   Within one month from the date of receipt of a petition for refund, the
department of planning and permitting shall advise the petitioner of the status
of the request for refund. For the purposes of this section, fees collected
must be spent or encumbered on the basis of the first fee in must be the first
fee out. In other words, the first money placed in the special account must be
the first money taken out of that account when withdrawals have been made.
(1990 Code, Ch. 33A, Art. 1, § 33A-1.9) (Added by Ord. 02-52)
§ 33A-1.10 Exemptions and credits.
(a)   The following shall be exempted from payment of the Ewa highway master
plan impact fee:
(1)   Alterations or expansion of an existing residential dwelling unit where
no additional dwelling or lodging units are created and the use is not changed;
(2)   The construction of accessory buildings or structures, as defined in §
21-10.1, that will not increase the number of external vehicular trips beyond
those produced or attracted by the primary buildings or structures;
(3)   The replacement of an existing building or structure with a new building
or structure of the same size and use that will not increase the number of
external vehicular trips beyond those produced or attracted by the original
buildings or structures;
(4)   Facilities that are part of water, sewer, electrical, telecommunication,
or roadway system infrastructure and that do not attract or produce vehicular
trips. This includes but is not limited to small, medium, and large utilities,
as defined in §
21-10.1, that do not have regular onsite employees; and
(5)   Mass transit centers or stops that promote a reduction in commuting by
private vehicles.
(b)   The following credits shall be applied to payment of the Ewa highway
master plan impact fee:
(1)   In lieu of paying the Ewa highway master plan impact fee, a landowner or
developer may elect to construct all or a portion of one of the Ewa highway
master plan Year 2010 highway improvements set forth in §
33A-1.5(2). If a landowner or developer does elect to construct all or a
portion of one of the Ewa highway master plan Year 2010 highway improvements,
then the landowner or developer shall receive a credit against Ewa highway
master plan impact fees equal to the estimated cost set forth in §
33A-1.5(2) or a pro rata share thereof depending upon the portion of the
improvement constructed. If a developer elects to oversize all or a portion of
one of the Ewa highway master plan Year 2010 highway improvements, the
developer shall receive a credit against Ewa highway master plan impact fees
equal to the developer’s actual cost of constructing the improvement if the
oversized improvement subsequently is identified as a needed improvement in an
Ewa highway master plan revision undertaken pursuant to §
33A-1.6(h). The credits received by a landowner or developer pursuant to this
section may be transferred by the holder to other landowners or developers; and
(2)   Credit for construction costs given to the landowner or developers may be
repaid by the city from future new land development activities.
(1990 Code, Ch. 33A, Art. 1, § 33A-1.10) (Added by Ord. 02-52) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
TITLE VII: BUSINESS
   Chapters
      
34.   REGULATION OF BUSINESSES
      
35.   RESERVED
      
36.   COMMON CARRIERS
CHAPTER 34: REGULATION OF BUSINESSES
Articles
   
1.   Auctions
   
2.   Hotels
   
3.   Shooting Galleries
   
4.   Operation of Certain Amusement Facilities
   
5.   Regulations Governing Public Shows
   
6.   Secondhand Dealers
   
7.   Scrap Dealers
   
8.   Panoram Business Regulation
   
9.   Lap Dancing Establishments
   
10.   Nightclubs
   
11.   Sale of Toilets and Urinals
   
12.   Sale of Showerheads and Faucets
   
13.   Polystyrene Foam and Disposable Food Service Ware
   
14.   Regulation of Bags Provided to Customers
   
15.   Residential Real Property Disclosure
   
16.   Naloxone
   
17.   Single-Use Plastic Bottles
   
18.   Electronic Amusement Devices
ARTICLE 1: AUCTIONS*
Sections
   
34-1.1   Definitions
   
34-1.2   Legislative intent
   
34-1.3   Exceptions
   
34-1.4   Applicability
   
34-1.5   License required
   
34-1.6   Fee
   
34-1.7   Authority to conduct auctions
   
34-1.8   Adverse interest in auctioneer prohibited
   
34-1.9   Restriction on property to be sold
   
34-1.10   Inventory and affidavit of ownership required
   
34-1.11   Receipts to purchasers required
   
34-1.12   Violation—Penalty
Editor’s note:
   * The title of Article 1 was amended from “Auction Rooms” to “Auctions” by
Ord. 95-04.
§ 34-1.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Auction. A sale, offering for sale, or exposing for sale to the highest bidder
of any goods, wares, merchandise, or other property in an auction room.
Auctioneer. Any person who is licensed by the director pursuant to HRS Chapter
445 and this article, as amended, to sell goods, wares, merchandise, or other
property at auction.
Director. The director of budget and fiscal services or the director’s duly
authorized subordinates.
Public Auction Room. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 445-22.
(Sec. 13-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.1) (Am.
Ord. 95-04)
§ 34-1.2 Legislative intent.
   It is declared to be the legislative intent of the council to limit the use
of public auctions to the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, or other property
which cannot be disposed of through the usual channels of trade, and to
prohibit the use of public auctions for disposal of other goods, wares,
merchandise, or property to the public as an established merchandising
practice.
(Sec. 13-1.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.2) (Am.
Ord. 95-04)
§ 34-1.3 Exceptions.
   Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to apply to any type of
auction excepted from the requirements of HRS § 445-22.
(Sec. 13-1.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.3) (Ree.
Ord. 95-04)
§ 34-1.4 Applicability.
   Any auctioneer who is otherwise licensed shall comply with HRS Chapter 445
and this article as a condition of the auctioneer’s license.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.4) (Added by Ord. 95-04)
§ 34-1.5 License required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, or expose for
sale at public auction, any personal property without obtaining a license
issued by the director in accordance with the terms, conditions, and penalties
enumerated in HRS Chapter 445 and this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.5) (Added by Ord. 95-04)
§ 34-1.6 Fee.
   The annual fee for a license to sell, offer for sale, or expose for sale any
property at auction, shall be $100, payable to the director.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.6) (Added by Ord. 95-04)
§ 34-1.7 Authority to conduct auctions.
   It is unlawful for any person, other than the auctioneer who has obtained a
license, to conduct an auction; provided that the auctioneer may appoint an
agent or assistant who may conduct the auction in the auctioneer’s presence.
Where the licensee is a corporation, it shall appoint and designate a natural
person to be its “auctioneer,” within the meaning of this article.
(Sec. 13-1.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.7) (Am.
Ord. 95-04)
§ 34-1.8 Adverse interest in auctioneer prohibited.
   Every auctioneer conducting an auction shall, in accepting a bid from any
person, become the agent of such bidder and remain so until a higher bid is
accepted, or until the transaction involving the bid is completed. It is
unlawful for the auctioneer to auction, or offer for auction, any goods, wares,
or other property in which the auctioneer has a proprietary interest adverse to
that of the bidder.
(Sec. 13-1.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.8) (Am.
Ord. 95-04)
§ 34-1.9 Restriction on property to be sold.
   It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, or expose for sale in
a public auction, any goods, wares, merchandise, or other property, which were
acquired for the purpose of resale by the owner thereof, unless the owner:
(1)   Has been continuously engaged in the business of selling such property
through the channels of trade within the city, other than by auction for a
period of not less than one year immediately preceding the commencement of the
auction; and
(2)   Has had the property in the owner’s possession for a period of not less
than six months.
(Sec. 13-1.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.9) (Am.
Ord. 95-04)
§ 34-1.10 Inventory and affidavit of ownership required.
(a)   Every auctioneer conducting an auction shall, before such sale, mark or
tag each article to be offered at such sale with a distinctive number, and
shall file with the chief of police an inventory, listing each article and its
number. The property of each owner shall be listed separately. The inventory
shall contain a sworn statement specifying the ownership of the property to be
sold, and an affidavit signed and sworn to by the auctioneer that the
auctioneer has no proprietary interest of any nature or degree in the articles
listed for sale. A copy of such inventory and statement shall be kept on the
premises of the auction room, available for inspection by any person. It is
unlawful for any auctioneer to falsify or fail to file such inventory and
statement.
(b)   It is unlawful to sell, offer for sale, or expose for sale at public
auction, any property which has not been listed in the inventory required under
subsection (a), or any article or property which does not bear a number
sufficient to identify it as a part of such inventory.
(Sec. 13-1.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.10) (Am.
Ord. 95-04)
§ 34-1.11 Receipts to purchasers required.
   The auctioneer shall give each purchaser at an auction a receipt with each
purchase setting forth:
(1)   The name and permanent address of the auctioneer;
(2)   The date;
(3)   The price paid for the article;
(4)   The amount of tax paid; and
(5)   A description of the article, and if a watch, the make and number of
jewels.
(Sec. 13-1.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.11) (Am.
Ord. 95-04)
§ 34-1.12 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a
fine not exceeding $500, and such person’s license to conduct a public auction
shall be subject to suspension or forfeiture.
(Sec. 13-1.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.12) (Am.
Ord. 95-04)
ARTICLE 2: HOTELS
Section
   
34-2.1   Register requirements
§ 34-2.1 Register requirements.
(a)   Every owner, keeper, or proprietor of any hotel shall keep a register in
accordance with HRS Chapter 486K.
(b)   The owner, keeper, or proprietor shall at all times make the register
available for inspection by the chief of police upon the chief’s request.
(c)   A violation of subsection (a) shall be subject to punishment in
accordance with State law. A violation of subsection (b) shall be subject to a
fine of $200, imprisonment for up to 30 days, or both.
(Sec. 13-11.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 4, § 41-4.1) (Am.
Ord. 01-09)
ARTICLE 3: SHOOTING GALLERIES
Sections
   
34-3.1   Definitions
   
34-3.2   Permit required—Fee
   
34-3.3   Application for permit
   
34-3.4   Qualifications of applicant
   
34-3.5   Conditions of permit
   
34-3.6   Display of permit
   
34-3.7   Permits—General provisions
   
34-3.8   Violation—Penalty
§ 34-3.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Crime of Violence. Any of the following crimes: murder, manslaughter, rape,
kidnapping, robbery, burglary, and those certain crimes set forth in HRS
Chapters 707 and 711, as amended.
Shooting Gallery. Any place or premises where facilities or devices for target
shooting for practice or amusement with any firearm (as defined in HRS § 134-1)
are provided for the use of any person for a fee, pay, or compensation of any
kind to be paid, directly or indirectly, by such person.
(Sec. 13-15.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 6, § 41-6.1)
§ 34-3.2 Permit required—Fee.
(a)   It is unlawful for any person to establish, keep, conduct, or operate any
shooting gallery without a permit, or to assist in the operation of such a
shooting gallery.
(b)   The fee for each permit shall be $5.
(Sec. 13-15.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 6, § 41-6.2)
§ 34-3.3 Application for permit.
(a)   Application for a permit shall be made in writing to the chief of police
and shall be signed and verified under oath by the applicant, and accompanied
by the permit fee of $5.
(b)   The application shall set forth:
(1)   The full name, age, and address of the applicant and of any persons,
other than the applicant, who are to be in charge of and responsible for the
operation of the shooting gallery, or who are to be employed in connection with
such operation;
(2)   The occupation of the applicant;
(3)   A full and complete description of the place and location of the shooting
gallery for which a permit is desired;
(4)   The full name and address of the owner of the premises or of the person
in control of the premises;
(5)   The term for which the applicant desires a permit, that is, whether for
one day, several days, a month, or a year; provided that in no case, shall the
permit be valid for more than one year;
(6)   A statement that neither the applicant, nor any agent or employee
connected with the shooting gallery has been convicted in this State or
elsewhere of having committed or attempted to commit any crime of violence; and
(7)   The number of firearms and shooting lanes proposed to be used.
(Sec. 13-15.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 6, § 41-6.3)
§ 34-3.4 Qualifications of applicant.
(a)   An applicant shall be 20 years of age or over, shall have been a resident
of the city continuously for at least one year immediately preceding the date
of application, and shall not have been convicted in this State or elsewhere of
having committed or attempted to commit any crime of violence.
(b)   Every corporation, firm, association, or club applying for a permit shall
first appoint an agent who shall be given full authority and control of the
premises and of all matters relating to the shooting gallery. Such
authorization shall be evidenced in writing, duly executed. Such agent shall
meet the qualifications set forth in subsection (a), and shall be personally
responsible for compliance with all the terms and provisions of this article.
(c)   No permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted more than
twice of violating this article.
(Sec. 13-15.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 6, § 41-6.4)
§ 34-3.5 Conditions of permit.
   All permits to operate a shooting gallery shall be subject to all applicable
laws and ordinances and to the following conditions which shall be written and
placed upon the permit.
(a)   The shooting gallery and its immediate vicinity shall be brightly lighted
at all times when it is open for business.
(b)   No shooting gallery shall be operated on any week day between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., nor on Sundays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
12:00 noon.
(c)   No person who is known to have been convicted in this State or elsewhere,
of having committed or attempted to commit any crime of violence, shall be
permitted to handle any firearm.
(d)   No person under the age of 20 years shall be permitted to handle any
firearm at the shooting gallery, except under the supervision of a responsible
adult.
(e)   No person under the influence of intoxicating liquor shall be permitted
to handle any firearm or to be or remain upon the premises of any shooting
gallery, and no intoxicating liquor shall be consumed in or around the premises
of any shooting gallery.
(f)   It is unlawful to employ in connection with the operation of any shooting
gallery any person who is under the age of 20 years or any person who has been
convicted in this State or elsewhere of having committed or attempted to commit
any crime of violence.
(g)   All firearms used for, in, or at the shooting gallery shall be securely
chained or otherwise attached to the firing line counter, in such a manner as
to prevent their removal by unauthorized persons or being pointed or aimed in
any direction other than the direction of the target area.
(h)   No firearm shall be used, kept, or discharged within the premises of the
shooting gallery, which is larger than a .22 caliber rifle, and no ammunition
larger than .22 caliber long rifle rim fire cartridge shall be used.
(i)   The permit holder, or the permit holder’s agent who is duly registered
with the chief of police, shall be present within the premises of the shooting
gallery at all times that it is open for business.
(j)   No person other than the permit holder, or the permit holder’s agent, who
is duly registered with the chief of police, shall be permitted entry into the
range area or the area situated between the firing line and targets, when any
firing is in progress.
(k)   The room, place, or enclosure wherein firing is to take place shall not
be used for any other purpose when any firing is in progress.
(l)   Reasonable precautions, as required or approved by the chief of police,
shall be taken to prevent any injury to the public.
(m)   The chief of police and any of the health, fire, and law enforcement
officers or authorities of the city, the State, or of the United States, may at
any time enter the premises of a shooting gallery for the purpose of inspecting
the same and the conditions therein.
(Sec. 13-15.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 6, § 41-6.5)
§ 34-3.6 Display of permit.
   Any permit issued under this section shall be displayed in a conspicuous
place upon the premises for which the permit had been issued.
(Sec. 13-15.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 6, § 41-6.6)
§ 34-3.7 Permits—General provisions.
(a)   If a permit holder discontinues the operation of a shooting gallery,
notice of such discontinuance shall be given in writing to the chief of police
and the permit surrendered to the chief of police.
(b)   No permit shall be transferable.
(c)   Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to lessen or
abrogate any requirements prescribed by any other ordinance or statute.
(Sec. 13-15.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 6, § 41-6.7)
§ 34-3.8 Violation—Penalty.
(a)   Any person who falsely swears to any application for a permit under this
article, or who knowingly violates or assists in the violation of any of the
conditions prescribed in the permit, or who violates this article, shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding one year, or by both.
(b)   In addition thereto, upon the conviction under this section of any owner
or operator of any shooting gallery or of any agent or employee thereof, the
court may suspend or cancel the permit for the shooting gallery and may
prescribe any period not more than one year during which the holder of such
permit shall be prohibited from applying for a new permit under this section.
The penalties herein prescribed shall not be construed in any way to prevent
the closing of any shooting gallery as a public nuisance.
(Sec. 13-15.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 6, § 41-6.8)
ARTICLE 4: OPERATION OF CERTAIN AMUSEMENT FACILITIES
Section
   
34-4.1   Skating rink—Certain hours of operation prohibited—Penalty
§ 34-4.1 Skating rink—Certain hours of operation prohibited—Penalty.
(a)   No skating rink shall do business or operate on any day between the hours
of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m.
(b)   Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by
a fine not exceeding $1,000.
(Sec. 13-18.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 7, § 41-7.1)
ARTICLE 5: REGULATIONS GOVERNING PUBLIC SHOWS
Sections
   
34-5.1   Definitions
   
34-5.2   License required—Applications
   
34-5.3   Conditions of licenses
   
34-5.4   Rejection of application—Suspension or revocation of license
   
34-5.5   Adoption of rules
   
34-5.6   Notice—Appeal—Hearings board
   
34-5.7   Violation—Penalty
   
34-5.8   Injunction upon violation of laws and ordinances
§ 34-5.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Owner or Licensee. (The latter term will apply when a license is issued.) An
individual, partnership, corporation, association, or any other business or
commercial entity whether established for profit, who or which owns, leases, or
rents any permanent or temporary structure as defined hereinabove, which is
used to accommodate more than one person to observe, view, watch, or witness
public shows; or any exhibitor, promoter, or producer of a public show;
provided that an exhibitor, promoter, or producer shall not be deemed an owner
if the owner, lessee, or tenant of the permanent or temporary structure for
public shows has a license therefor.
Public Show. Any exhibition, show, or performance produced, presented, staged,
shown, displayed, exhibited, or performed to which an admission fee is charged
or for which a fee is collected in any permanent or temporary structure
designed to accommodate more than one person to observe, view, watch, or
witness such public shows and which is subject to licensing under HRS §§ 445-
161 to 445-164. A permanent structure shall include but is not limited to
auditoriums, theaters, concert halls, arenas, convention halls, meeting rooms,
and restaurants with stages, while a temporary structure shall include but is
not limited to tents consisting of canvas or plastic materials. Exempted under
this section are “public shows,” which are subject to the control and
supervision of any board, commission, department, or agency of the State or the
city and any of the aforementioned permanent or temporary structures owned and
controlled by the State or city.
(Sec. 13-38.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 15, § 41-15.1)
§ 34-5.2 License required—Applications.
(a)   License required. No owner of a permanent or temporary structure designed
to accommodate more than one person to observe, view, watch, or witness a
public show shall use same for public shows without first obtaining a license
therefor as provided in HRS §§ 445-161 to 445-165.
(b)   Application for license. Any owner seeking an original license or a
renewal shall file a written application with the director of budget and fiscal
services which shall contain such information and shall be in such form as the
director of budget and fiscal services may prescribe.
(c)   Verification. All applicants shall certify on the application that the
statements, information, and data contained in the application in support of
the application are true and correct.
(d)   Term and fee for license. The term and fee for such license shall be as
prescribed in HRS §§ 445-161 and 445-162, respectively.
(Sec. 13-38.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 15, § 41-15.2)
§ 34-5.3 Conditions of licenses.
   Every license issued under this section is subject to the following
conditions.
(1)   License nontransferable—close out of business. No license issued under
this section shall be transferable or assignable. If a licensee voluntarily or
involuntarily terminates the business for whatever reason or reasons during the
term for which the license was issued, the licensee shall, within five days
from the date of such termination, give the director of budget and fiscal
services written notice thereof and surrender the licensee’s license for
cancellation;
(2)   Posting. Any license issued under this section shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises where any person may examine same;
(3)   Obscene, indecent, or immoral public show prohibited—applicable standard.
No licensee shall present or permit the presentation of an obscene, indecent,
or immoral public show on or within the licensed premises. To determine whether
a public show is obscene, indecent, or immoral, the following standard which
was established by the United States Supreme Court in Miller v. California (41
U.S. 15 (1973)), shall be applied:
(A)   Whether the average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find that the work, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest;
(B)   Whether the work depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way,
sexual conduct such as:
(i)   Representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, normal or
perverted, actual or simulated; or
(ii)   Representations or descriptions of masturbation, excretory functions,
and lewd exhibitions of the genitals.
(C)   Whether the work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, or scientific value.
(Sec. 13-38.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 15, § 41-15.3)
§ 34-5.4 Rejection of application—Suspension or revocation of license.
(a)   Authorization. The director of budget and fiscal services is authorized
to reject any application for an original license or renewal or suspend or
revoke any license based on the grounds set forth herein.
(b)   Grounds for rejection of application for an original license or renewal.
(1)   The applicant has failed to fill out an application as prescribed.
(2)   There was deliberate falsification or misrepresentation in the
application for license or renewal.
(c)   Grounds for suspension or revocation of license.
(1)   The licensee has presented or permitted the presentation of an obscene,
indecent, or immoral public show on the licensed premises based on the
standards prescribed hereinbefore.
(2)   During the term of the existing license, the licensee or the licensee’s
employees has been convicted of promoting pornography on the licensed premises
in violation of HRS §§ 712-1214 and 712-1215; or
(3)   The licensee has violated this article, HRS §§ 445-161 to 445-165, or any
rules adopted by the director of budget and fiscal services as authorized
herein.
(d)   Period of revocation. No owner whose license is revoked shall be eligible
to apply for a new license until the expiration of a 12-month period commencing
from the effective date of revocation.
(Sec. 13-38.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 15, § 41-15.4)
§ 34-5.5 Adoption of rules.
   The director of budget and fiscal services is authorized to adopt such
additional rules as prescribed in HRS Chapter 91 as the director of budget and
fiscal services may deem necessary to implement or administer this article and
HRS §§ 445-161 to 445-165.
(Sec. 13-38.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 15, § 41-15.5)
§ 34-5.6 Notice—Appeal—Hearings board.
(a)   Notice and hearing. In every case where it is proposed to refuse to issue
a license or to suspend or revoke a license, the director of budget and fiscal
services shall give the party concerned notice and hearing in conformity with
HRS Chapter 91.
(1)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall notify in writing the
applicant or licensee of any adverse decision based on this article, together
with the reasons therefor. The notice shall also include a statement that the
applicant or licensee may appeal the decision of the director of budget and
fiscal services and provide space on the notice so that the applicant or
licensee may indicate that such person desires to exercise the appeal and
request a hearing. Such notice may be personally served upon the applicant or
licensee or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested.
(2)   The written notice of the director of budget and fiscal services shall
contain specific reasons for its adverse decision; provided such notice shall
not act as a stay upon the continued showing of the particular show until the
appeal panel has made its decision, pursuant to subsection (b). It shall also
contain a statement that the applicant or licensee has the right to appeal an
adverse decision of the director of budget and fiscal services within 10
working days as stated herein.
(3)   Upon receipt of such notice of appeal and request for hearing, the
director of budget and fiscal services shall request the mayor to appoint a
hearings panel so that the appeal can be heard.
(b)   Hearings panel.
(1)   The mayor is authorized to appoint three officers of the executive
branch, excluding the prosecutor and corporation counsel and their
subordinates, who shall be members of the hearings panel so an appeal can be
heard.
(2)   The hearings panel shall conduct such hearing as prescribed in HRS
Chapter 91.
(3)   The hearings panel is authorized to establish procedures for its hearings
and adopt rules therefor, as prescribed in HRS Chapter 91.
(4)   Whenever its decisions are adverse to the applicant or licensee, the
panel shall issue written findings of fact, conclusions of law, decision, and
order.
(5)   If the decision of the panel is to suspend or revoke any license, it
shall orally order the licensee to cease and desist any public show for which
the license herein had been issued, unless otherwise ordered by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(c)   Judicial review. Any owner or licensee aggrieved by the decision and
order of the hearings panel may seek judicial review of such decision and order
in any court of competent jurisdiction as provided in HRS § 91-14.
(Sec. 13-38.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 15, § 41-15.6)
§ 34-5.7 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person, owner or licensee violating this article shall be subject to the
penalties prescribed in HRS § 445-165, and upon such conviction, the court is
authorized to declare that any license issued by the director of budget and
fiscal services is either suspended or revoked.
(Sec. 13-38.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 15, § 41-15.7)
§ 34-5.8 Injunction upon violation of laws and ordinances.
   Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the prosecuting attorney, in
addition to or while in the course of, or having instituted prosecution against
a person, owner, or licensee under this section, may seek injunctive relief,
pursuant to HRS § 603-23, to enjoin or prohibit any act or practice in
violation of this article, HRS §§ 445-161 to 445-165 or any rules adopted by
the director of budget and fiscal services as authorized herein.
(Sec. 13-38.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 15, § 41-15.8)
ARTICLE 6: SECONDHAND DEALERS
Sections
   
34-6.1   Definitions
   
34-6.2   License required—Denial, suspension, and revocation
   
34-6.3   Fee
§ 34-6.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Director. The director of budget and fiscal services or the director’s duly
authorized subordinates.
Secondhand Dealer. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 486M-1.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 35, § 41-35.1) (Added by Ord. 95-03)
§ 34-6.2 License required—Denial, suspension, and revocation.
(a)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in business as a secondhand
dealer without obtaining a license issued by the director in accordance with
the terms, conditions, and penalties enumerated in HRS Chapter 445 and HRS
Chapter 486M.
(b)   The director may deny, suspend, or revoke such license for violation of
this article or HRS Chapter 445 and HRS Chapter 486M.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 35, § 41-35.2) (Added by Ord. 95-03)
§ 34-6.3 Fee.
   The annual fee for a secondhand dealer license shall be $100, payable to the
director.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 35, § 41-35.3) (Added by Ord. 95-03)
ARTICLE 7: SCRAP DEALERS
Sections
   
34-7.1   Definitions
   
34-7.2   License required—Denial, suspension, and revocation
   
34-7.3   Fee
§ 34-7.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Director. The director of budget and fiscal services or the director’s duly
authorized subordinates.
Scrap Dealer. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 445-231.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 36, § 41-36.1) (Added by Ord. 95-05)
§ 34-7.2 License required—Denial, suspension, and revocation.
(a)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in business as a scrap dealer
without obtaining a license issued by the director in accordance with the
terms, conditions, and penalties enumerated in HRS Chapter 445.
(b)   The director may deny, suspend, or revoke such license for violation of
this article or HRS Chapter 445.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 36, § 41-36.2) (Added by Ord. 95-05)
§ 34-7.3 Fee.
   The annual fee for a scrap dealer license shall be $100, payable to the
director.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 36, § 41-36.3) (Added by Ord. 95-05)
ARTICLE 8: PANORAM BUSINESS REGULATION
Sections
   
34-8.1   Definitions
   
34-8.2   Panoram license required for conduct of panoram business
   
34-8.3   License application and issuance
   
34-8.4   License validity and renewal
   
34-8.5   Right to license nontransferable
   
34-8.6   License suspension or revocation
   
34-8.7   Appeal of director of budget and fiscal services’ decision
   
34-8.8   Specifications of licensed location
   
34-8.9   Inspection of licensed location
   
34-8.10   Prohibited acts
   
34-8.11   Penalties
   
34-8.12   Rules
§ 34-8.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Licensed Location. The location at which a panoram business may be conducted
under a panoram license.
Licensee’s Employee. A person employed, contracted, or otherwise retained by a
panoram licensee to assist in the panoram business at a licensed location.
Under this article, a person shall be deemed an “employee” even if contracted
or retained by a licensee under other than an employment relationship.
Panoram. A device, installed or placed in a booth, which shows to a person
inside the booth a film or videotape depicting sexual conduct, sexual
excitement, sadomasochistic abuse, or sexual anatomical display. For the
purpose of this definition, “sexual conduct,” “sexual excitement,” and
“sadomasochistic abuse” mean the same as defined under HRS § 712-1210. “Sexual
anatomical display” means the display, with less than completely opaque
covering, of the human genitals, pubic area, or buttock or the female breast
from below the top of the areola.
Panoram Booth. A booth containing a panoram and intended for occupancy by the
person viewing the panoram.
Panoram Business. A business under which at least one panoram in a booth is
made available for viewing by a patron in return for a fee or other
consideration charged for activating the panoram, entering the booth, or
accessing or remaining on the premises containing the booth.
Panoram License or License. A license to conduct a panoram business at a
specific location.
Panoram Licensee or Licensee. The holder of a valid panoram license.
Viewing Area. An area in a panoram booth where a patron or customer would
ordinarily be positioned while watching a film or video viewing device.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.1) (Added by Ord. 97-11)
§ 34-8.2 Panoram license required for conduct of panoram business.
(a)   A person may conduct a panoram business at a specific location only if
holding a valid panoram license issued under this article.
A panoram licensee may make available at a licensed location no more than the
maximum number of panoram booths authorized under the license.
Each location at which a panoram business is conducted shall have a separate
license. The license shall at all times be conspicuously posted and maintained
at the location.
(b)   A person shall not be deemed as conducting a panoram business if making
available for viewing a panoram in a booth, but charging no fee or other
consideration for activating the panoram, entering the booth, or accessing or
remaining on the premises containing the booth. A person engaging in that
activity, but not a panoram business, at a particular location shall not be
subject to the licensure requirement or other provisions of this article. This
subsection, however, shall not be construed as exempting the person from all
other laws and ordinances applicable to the activity.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.2) (Added by Ord. 97-11)
§ 34-8.3 License application and issuance.
(a)   A person seeking a panoram license shall file an application with the
director of budget and fiscal services. The application shall set forth the
following information:
(1)   The proposed location of the panoram business. The location shall be
identified by tax map key number, street address, and, if applicable, building
unit number;
(2)   The maximum number of panoram booths proposed to be available at the
location;
(3)   A proposed floor plan showing each panoram booth and the continuous main
aisle required under §
34-8.8; and
(4)   Any other information required by the director.
(b)   To review an application, the director of budget and fiscal services may
request the assistance of the police, fire, building, or other relevant
department. Whenever the director requests assistance from a department, its
executive head shall comply within the constraints of available resources.
Upon the request of an authorized city officer or employee to inspect a
proposed panoram business location, the license applicant shall allow the
inspection.
(c)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall approve the license
application if finding that:
(1)   The panoram business will be conducted in a building and at a location
complying with this article and applicable zoning, building, and fire
prevention ordinances;
(2)   The panoram business will not be conducted at a location within 300 feet
of any boundary of an elementary or secondary school;
(3)   The floor plan showing each panoram booth and the continuous main aisle
will comply with §
34-8.8;
(4)   The applicant has not knowingly made any false statement in the license
application; and
(5)   The applicant has not had a panoram license revoked within the two-year
period before the filing of the application.
If finding otherwise, the director shall deny the application.
(d)   The director of budget and fiscal services’s decision regarding a license
application shall be rendered within 30 days of the filing of the application.
If a decision is not rendered within the 30-day period, the application shall
be deemed denied.
(e)   A panoram license approval by the director shall be deemed an approval of
the information listed in the application pursuant to subsection (a). The
approved information shall be regarded as terms and conditions of the license,
the compliance with which is required by the licensee.
(f)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall issue the panoram
license upon payment by the applicant of a license fee. The license fee amount
shall be set by the director.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.3) (Added by Ord. 97-11)
§ 34-8.4 License validity and renewal.
(a)   A panoram license shall be valid for one year, unless sooner canceled,
suspended, or revoked.
The one-year period shall be measured from the date the license was issued or
last renewed, as the case may be. When a license is suspended, time shall
continue to toll for measuring the period of that license’s validity.
(b)   Not more than 60, but not less than 30, days before the expiration of a
license, the licensee may apply for renewal. The director of budget and fiscal
services shall review the renewal application in the same manner as a new
license application.
   The director shall approve the renewal application if finding that:
(1)   The panoram business will continue to comply with the conditions of §
34-8.3(c)(1), (c)(2), and (c)(3);
(2)   The applicant has complied with the conditions of §
34-8.3(c)(4) and (c)(5) with respect to the renewal application; and
(3)   The license sought to be renewed has not been suspended for a period
encompassing its expiration date.
An approved renewal shall be effective on the day after the license’s
expiration date.
If the director finds noncompliance with subdivision (1), (2), or (3), the
renewal application shall be denied.
(c)   The director’s decision regarding a renewal application shall be rendered
within 30 days of the filing of the application. If a decision is not rendered
within the 30-day period, the renewal shall be deemed denied.
(d)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall charge a renewal fee for
each license renewal. The renewal fee amount shall be set by the director.
The licensee whose license is renewed shall pay the fee before the effective
date of the renewal. If not paid by that date, the director shall suspend the
renewal until the licensee pays the fee.
(e)   A license which is not renewed by its expiration date shall be invalid
from the day after that date. If desiring to conduct a panoram business at the
location specified in an invalidated license, a person shall be required to
apply for and receive a new license.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.4) (Added by Ord. 97-11)
§ 34-8.5 Right to license nontransferable.
(a)   The right to a panoram license shall not be transferred by the licensee
to another person.
(b)   A prohibited “transfer of the right to a license” shall be deemed to have
occurred if, before expiration of the license:
(1)   The license is sold or otherwise conveyed by the licensee to another
person;
(2)   The panoram business authorized by the license is sold or otherwise
conveyed by the licensee to another person;
(3)   The location at which the panoram business may be conducted under the
license:
(A)   Is sold, leased, subleased, assigned, or rented by the licensee to
another person; and
(B)   Becomes unavailable to the licensee for the conduct of the panoram
business.
(4)   The licensee changes at least a majority interest in its ownership by
other than will or intestate succession.
(c)   A licensee who intends to engage in an act described under subsection (b)
shall notify the director of budget and fiscal services before executing the
act. After receipt of the notification, the director shall cancel the license.
The cancellation shall be effective on the date of execution of the act, unless
the licensee requests an earlier date.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.5) (Added by Ord. 97-11)
§ 34-8.6 License suspension or revocation.
(a)   The director of budget and fiscal services may suspend or revoke a
panoram license if finding that at least one of the following conditions
exists:
(1)   The license was procured by false representation in the license issuance
or renewal application;
(2)   The building or parcel where the panoram business is conducted does not
comply with this article or applicable zoning, building, and fire prevention
ordinances;
(3)   The right to the license has been transferred in violation of §
34-8.5;
(4)   The licensee or licensee’s employee has knowingly committed a violation
of this article; or
(5)   The licensee or licensee’s employee has knowingly conducted the panoram
business in a manner contrary to a term or condition of the license.
Except as otherwise provided under subsection (b), a license shall be suspended
or revoked after at least 20 days’ notice to the licensee.
(b)   The director of budget and fiscal services may immediately suspend or
revoke a panoram license if finding that a condition under subsection (a)
constitutes an immediate threat of serious personal injury or property damage.
The notice of immediate suspension or revocation shall identify the basis for
and facts supporting the director’s decision.
(c)   The director of budget and fiscal services may reinstate a suspended
license when the condition for the suspension has been corrected. No fee shall
be charged the licensee for a reinstatement.
The director of budget and fiscal services shall not reinstate a revoked
license, but the person who held the revoked license may apply for a new
license after two years from the revocation, except as provided for in
subsection (d).
(d)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall permanently revoke the
panoram license of a panoram licensee who has been convicted of violating this
article three times.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.6) (Added by Ord. 97-11)
§ 34-8.7 Appeal of director of budget and fiscal services’ decision.
(a)   Any person aggrieved by the director of budget and fiscal services’
decision to deny, suspend, or revoke a license may appeal. The person shall
appeal by filing a notice with the director within 10 days of receiving the
notice of the decision.
For the purpose of this subsection, a decision to “deny a license” includes the
denial of an application for a new or renewed license.
(b)   The appeal shall be subject to the contested case procedures of HRS
Chapter 91 and heard by a hearing officer appointed by the director of budget
and fiscal services. The director shall appoint as the hearing officer a city
executive branch officer or employee who did not participate in the appealed
decision.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.7) (Added by Ord. 97-11)
§ 34-8.8 Specifications of licensed location.
(a)   Except as provided under subsection (c), the interior of a licensed
location shall be arranged so that each panoram booth is entered from a
continuous main aisle at least 6 feet wide.
A panoram booth shall have no entrance other than the one from the main aisle.
(b)   The viewing area in each panoram booth must be visible from a continuous
main aisle and must not be obscured by any curtain, door, wall, or other
enclosure at the entrance to the panoram booth. The obstruction of the viewing
area by a chair or seat complying with subsection (d) shall not be a violation
of this subsection.
(c)   This subsection shall apply to the minimum aisle width of a licensed
location which was used in the panoram business on April 30, 1997* and became
subject to a license issued under this article on January 1, 1998.
As required under subsection (a), the interior of the licensed location shall
be arranged so that each panoram booth is entered from a continuous main aisle.
If the aisle was at least 6 feet wide on April 30, 1997,* the aisle shall
remain at least 6 feet wide in accordance with subsection (a).
If the aisle was less than 6 feet wide on April 30, 1997,* the aisle may remain
at that width as long as:
(1)   The licensee maintains a valid license for the location; and
(2)   The aisle is in compliance with applicable building and fire prevention
ordinances.
(d)   A chair or other seat in a panoram booth shall not provide a seating
surface of more than 18 inches on any side. A leg of or support for the chair
or seat shall not have a diameter of more than 3 inches.
A panoram booth shall not contain more than one chair or seat.
(e)   The entire floor of a panoram booth shall be level with the continuous
main aisle.
(f)   Illumination within a panoram booth shall be sufficient to enable the
determination of the number of persons occupying a booth by a person looking
inside from the booth’s entrance.
(g)   A sign stating the following shall be conspicuously posted and
permanently maintained on the interior and exterior of each panoram booth:
Occupancy of this booth is limited to only one person at any time. Violators
are subject to criminal prosecution, civil fine, or both under
Chapter 34, Article 8, Revised Ordinances of Honolulu 1990, as amended.
The sign’s letters and numerals shall be on a contrasting background and no
smaller than 0.75 inches in height.
(h)   A licensed location shall not be equipped with a system or device capable
of warning a person occupying a panoram booth that a police officer or other
city officer or employee is approaching or has entered the licensed location.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.8) (Added by Ord. 97-11)
Editor’s note:
   * “April 30, 1997” is substituted for “the effective date of this
ordinance.”
§ 34-8.9 Inspection of licensed location.
   A licensee or licensee’s employee shall allow a police officer or other
authorized city officer or employee to inspect the licensed location during its
business hours.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.9) (Added by Ord. 97-11)
§ 34-8.10 Prohibited acts.
(a)   A person shall not conduct a panoram business without a valid license.
(b)   A licensee or licensee’s employee shall not conduct a panoram business in
violation of this article, any other ordinance, or a term or condition of the
licensee’s license.
A licensee or licensee’s employee shall not authorize or order another person
to conduct a panoram business in violation of this article, any other
ordinance, or a term or condition of the licensee’s license.
(c)   A licensee shall not transfer the right to a license in violation of §
34-8.5.
(d)   A licensee or licensee’s employee shall not:
(1)   Warn a person occupying a panoram booth that a police officer or other
city officer or employee is approaching or has entered the licensed location;
(2)   Show in a panoram booth any film or videotape which promotes pornography
or pornography for minors contrary to HRS Chapter 712, Part II;
(3)   Lock any door to a public area at the licensed location during business
hours; or
(4)   Allow a person to violate subsection (e), (f), or (g).
(e)   A person under 18 years of age shall not enter or remain in a licensed
location.
(f)   More than one person shall not occupy a panoram booth at the same time.
(g)   A person shall not stand or kneel on any seating surface in a panoram
booth.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.10) (Added by Ord. 97-11)
§ 34-8.11 Penalties.
   A person who violates this article or term or condition of a panoram license
shall be:
(1)   Guilty of a misdemeanor;
(2)   Punishable by a maximum $1,000 civil fine imposed in accordance with
applicable State law; or
(3)   Subject to both the criminal penalty of subdivision (1) and civil fine of
subdivision (2).
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.11) (Added by Ord. 97-11)
§ 34-8.12 Rules.
   The director of budget and fiscal services may adopt rules in accordance
with HRS Chapter 91 to implement this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.12) (Added by Ord. 97-11)
ARTICLE 9: LAP DANCING ESTABLISHMENTS
Sections
   
34-9.1   Definitions
   
34-9.2   Admission restrictions
   
34-9.3   Prohibition of access to and common wall with a liquor selling
establishment
   
34-9.4   Prohibited activities
   
34-9.5   Owner or responsible managing agent required on premises
   
34-9.6   Penalty—Absolute liability
   
34-9.7   Enforcement
§ 34-9.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Dancer. A person who lap dances in a lap dancing establishment for compensation
or remuneration from either the establishment or a customer, including tips or
gratuities, whether the person is an employee of the establishment.
Intimate Part. The male or female genitalia, pubic area, anus, or buttock and,
in the case of a female, the breast below the top of the areola.
Lap Dance and Lap Dancing. A form of live adult entertainment in which a dancer
entertains a customer while the dancer is positioned directly above or
straddling the customer.
Lap Dancing Establishment. An establishment at which lap dancing is provided
for customers and which is not subject to licensure under HRS Chapter 281.
Owner of a Lap Dancing Establishment. Any person or entity, including but not
limited to any individual, partnership, or corporation, with a controlling
ownership interest in the business operating the lap dancing establishment. A
person shall not be deemed an “owner” merely because of an ownership interest
in the land upon or structure in which a lap dancing establishment is operated.
Responsible Managing Agent. An individual who is authorized by the owner of a
lap dancing establishment to oversee the operations of the establishment.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 40, § 41-40.1) (Added by Ord. 98-18)
§ 34-9.2 Admission restrictions.
(a)   A lap dancing establishment shall not admit into the establishment any
person under 21 years of age during business hours; provided that:
(1)   The admission of a person under 21 years of age shall not be deemed a
violation of this subsection if, in admitting the person, the personnel of the
lap dancing establishment were misled by the appearance of the person and by
the person’s personal identification meeting the standards of subsection (c)
into believing in good faith that the person was at least 21 years of age; and
(2)   The admission of an employee of the establishment who is under 21, but at
least 18, years of age shall be allowed.
The owner and any responsible managing agent of the lap dancing establishment
shall be deemed the violator when a person is admitted in violation of this
subsection.
(b)   A person under 21 years of age shall not enter a lap dancing
establishment, unless the person is an employee of the establishment and at
least 18 years of age.
(c)   A lap dancing establishment shall, for the purpose of identifying and
verifying the ages of customers, use an official state driver’s license, a
military identification card, or other form of official government
identification containing a photograph identifying the individual. Such
documents shall be unaltered, undamaged, and laminated. All documents shall be
examined carefully. School identification cards, expired documents of any kind,
cards with such phrases as “information provided by applicant” or the like,
identification cards issued for the purposes of check cashing or other
identification cards not issued by a government agency, shall be unacceptable.
(d)   The owner or responsible managing agent of a lap dancing establishment
shall post a notice, at each entrance to the establishment available to the
public during business hours, that:
(1)   States no customer under 21 years of age will be admitted to the
establishment;
(2)   Refers to this article and states the maximum penalty for a customer who
enters in violation of the age restriction; and
(3)   Is clearly visible and legible to prospective customers before their
entry into the establishment.
Every day during which the required sign is not posted or not otherwise in
compliance with this subsection shall be deemed a separate violation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 40, § 41-40.2) (Added by Ord. 98-18)
§ 34-9.3 Prohibition of access to and common wall with a liquor selling
establishment.
(a)   For the purpose of this section, a “liquor selling establishment” means
an establishment licensed by the liquor commission to sell liquor.
(b)   Except as otherwise provided under this subsection, a lap dancing
establishment shall not have an entrance or exit leading directly to or from a
liquor selling establishment. The entrance or exit of a lap dancing
establishment shall be deemed “leading directly to or from a liquor selling
establishment” if no common area exists between the entrance or exit of the lap
dancing establishment and the entrance or exit of the liquor selling
establishment. “Common area” means an area outside either establishment and
usable by a member of the general public or invitee to the structure containing
the establishments.
A lap dancing establishment in operation on May 21, 1998,* but in noncompliance
with this subsection on that date, may continue in noncompliance for 180 days
from that date. After the 180th day, the lap dancing establishment shall be in
violation of this subsection if still having an entrance or exit leading
directly to or from a liquor selling establishment.
(c)   Except as otherwise provided under subdivision (1) or (2), a lap dancing
establishment shall not have a common wall with a liquor selling establishment.
A “common wall” means a wall immediately between a lap dancing establishment
and a liquor selling establishment.
(1)   A lap dancing establishment in operation on May 21, 1998,* but in
noncompliance with this subsection on that date, may continue in noncompliance
for two years from that date. After the two-year period, the lap dancing
establishment shall be in violation of this subsection if still having a common
wall with a liquor selling establishment, unless the exception under
subdivision (2)(B) applies. While operating in noncompliance during the two-
year period, the lap dancing establishment shall not expand its lap dancing
operation beyond the premises of the establishment as existing on May 21,
1998.*
(2)   (A)   A lap dancing establishment in compliance with this subsection on
May 21, 1998* shall not become in violation of this subsection if, after that
date, a liquor selling establishment under different ownership locates or
expands next to the lap dancing establishment causing the sharing of a common
wall;
(B)   A lap dancing establishment in noncompliance with this subsection on May
21, 1998,* but coming in compliance within two years from that date, shall not
become in violation of this subsection if, after compliance, a liquor selling
establishment under different ownership locates or expands next to the lap
dancing establishment causing the sharing of a common wall; and
(C)   A lap dancing establishment which commences operation after May 21, 1998*
in compliance with this subsection shall not become in violation of this
subsection if, after commencement, a liquor selling establishment under
different ownership locates or expands next to the lap dancing establishment
causing the sharing of a common wall.
   A liquor selling establishment locating or expanding next to a lap dancing
establishment shall be deemed under “different ownership” if none of the
ownership interest in the liquor selling establishment is held, directly or
indirectly, by a person holding any ownership interest in the lap dancing
establishment.
   The exceptions of this subdivision shall not apply in the following
situations: when a lap dancing establishment expands its premises to cause the
sharing of a common wall with a liquor selling establishment, whether or not
under different ownership; when a liquor selling establishment, any ownership
interest in which is held by a person holding an ownership interest in a lap
dancing establishment, locates or expands next to the lap dancing establishment
to cause the sharing of a common wall; and when a liquor selling establishment
under different ownership locates or expands next to a lap dancing
establishment to cause the sharing of a common wall and, subsequently, a person
holding an ownership interest in either establishment acquires an ownership
interest in the other establishment.
   A lap dancing establishment excepted by this subdivision may continue in
noncompliance with this subsection until abandoned, destroyed, stopping all
business activity, or ceasing for 30 consecutive days to provide lap dancing.
While operating in noncompliance, an establishment shall not expand its lap
dancing operation beyond the premises of the establishment as existing on May
21, 1998,* the date of compliance, or the date of operation commencement, as
applicable. After a lap dancing establishment is abandoned or destroyed, stops
all business activity, or ceases for 30 consecutive days to provide lap
dancing, it may commence lap dancing operation again only if complying with
this subsection and other provisions of this article.
(d)   The owner of a lap dancing establishment in violation of this section
shall be deemed the violator. Every day during which the establishment is in
violation shall be deemed a separate violation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 40, § 41-40.3) (Added by Ord. 98-18)
Editor’s note:
   * “May 21, 1998” is substituted for “the effective date of this ordinance.”
§ 34-9.4 Prohibited activities.
(a)   The following prohibitions shall apply in a lap dancing establishment:
(1)   A dancer shall not touch, with any clothed or unclothed intimate part of
the dancer, any clothed or unclothed body part, including intimate part, of a
customer;
(2)   A dancer shall not touch, with any other clothed or unclothed body part
of the dancer, any clothed or unclothed intimate part of a customer;
(3)   A customer shall not touch, with any clothed or unclothed intimate part
of the customer, any clothed or unclothed body part, including intimate part,
of a dancer; and
(4)   A customer shall not touch, with any other clothed or unclothed body part
of the customer, any clothed or unclothed intimate part of a dancer.
The prohibitions shall apply at any time in the lap dancing establishment, even
when the dancer is not lap dancing for the customer.
(b)   A person under 21 years of age shall not lap dance in any lap dancing
establishment.
(c)   A person shall not lap dance in a room within a lap dancing establishment
unless the room complies with the following:
(1)   The room entrance does not have a door, partition, screen, curtain, or
other opaque, transparent, meshed, or perforated covering; and
(2)   The entire interior of the room is visible at all times from the room
entrance.
(d)   The owner or responsible managing agent of a lap dancing establishment
shall not direct or allow a person to commit a violation of this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 40, § 41-40.4) (Added by Ord. 98-18)
§ 34-9.5 Owner or responsible managing agent required on premises.
   A lap dancing establishment shall have an owner or responsible managing
agent on the premises of the establishment at all times during which it is open
for business.
   The owner of a lap dancing establishment in violation of this section shall
be deemed the violator. Every business day during which the establishment is in
violation shall be deemed a separate violation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 40, § 41-40.5) (Added by Ord. 98-18)
§ 34-9.6 Penalty—Absolute liability.
(a)   A person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation as
defined under and punishable by the State Penal Code.
(b)   The council intends that a person bear absolute liability for any
violation of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 40, § 41-40.6) (Added by Ord. 98-18)
§ 34-9.7 Enforcement.
(a)   There shall be provided for use by a police officer a form of summons or
citation for citing, not physically arresting, an alleged violator of this
article. The form and content of the summons or citation shall be as adopted or
prescribed by the administrative judge of the district court, designed to
include all information necessary under the laws and rules of the State of
Hawaii and City and County of Honolulu, and commensurate with the form of other
summons or citations used in modern methods of arrest.
Every summons or citation shall be consecutively numbered and each carbon copy
shall bear the number of its respective original.
(b)   A police officer may arrest, without warrant, an alleged violator of this
article by issuing the summons or citation in accordance with this section.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as barring a police officer from
initiating prosecution by penal summons, complaint, warrant, or other judicial
process as is permitted by statute or rule of court.
A police officer making an arrest for an alleged violation may take the name
and address of the alleged violator and shall issue to the alleged violator the
summons or citation. The summons or citation shall direct the alleged violator
to answer at a place and time provided in the summons or citation.
When a summons or citation is issued, the original shall be given to the
alleged violator; provided that the administrative judge of the district court
may prescribe the giving of a carbon copy to the alleged violator and other
disposition of the original.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 40, § 41-40.7) (Added by Ord. 98-18)
ARTICLE 10: NIGHTCLUBS
Sections
   
34-10.1   Definitions
   
34-10.2   Nonalcoholic nightclubs—Collocation with liquor establishment
   
34-10.3   Restriction on operation of teenage nightclubs during certain hours
   
34-10.4   Regulations applicable to nude dancing nightclubs
   
34-10.5   Responsible managing agent
   
34-10.6   Security guards on premises
   
34-10.7   Financial records
   
34-10.8   Teenage nightclub that is also a nude dancing nightclub or lap
dancing establishment
   
34-10.9   Criminal penalties—Enforcement
   
34-10.10   Severability
§ 34-10.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Adult. A person who is 18 years of age or older.
Building. Has the same meaning as defined in
Chapter 21.
Commercial Business Establishment. Does not include:
(1)   Any nonprofit corporation or other nonprofit organization; or
(2)   Any university, high school, intermediate or middle school, or elementary
school, which sponsors or provides facilities on an irregular basis for dances
or socials.
Common Ownership Between Two Establishments or Properties. That one or more of
the direct or indirect owners of one of the establishments or properties is a
direct or indirect owner of the other establishment or property.
Common Wall. A wall between two establishments or a ceiling or roof of one
establishment that serves as a floor of the other establishment.
Exotic Dancer. A person who performs or entertains in the nude at a nude
dancing nightclub. The term includes any such person, whether compensated or
uncompensated, and includes patrons participating in a contest or receiving
instruction in the art of nude dancing.
Intoxicating Liquor. Alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, gin, okolehao, sake, beer,
ale, porter, and wine; and also includes, in addition to the foregoing, any
spiritous, vinous, malt, or fermented liquor, liquids, and compounds,  whether
medicated, proprietary, patented, or not, in whatever form and of whatever
constituency and by whatever name called, containing one-half of 1 percent or
more of alcohol by volume, which are fit for use or may be used or readily
converted for use for beverage purposes.
Liquor. Intoxicating liquor.
Liquor Establishment. An establishment licensed by the Honolulu liquor
commission to sell liquor.
Minor. Any person who has not attained the age of 18 years.
Nude. Unclothed or in such attire as to expose to view any portion of the pubic
hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, genitals, or any portion of the female
breast below the top of the areola.
Nude Dancing Nightclub. Any commercial business establishment at which one or
more exotic dancers perform for or provide entertainment to patrons. The term
shall not include any establishment for which a liquor license has been issued,
any “lap dancing establishment” as defined in §
34-9.1 or any theater.
Owner of a Teenage Nightclub, Owner of a Nude Dancing Nightclub or Owner. Any
person or entity, including but not limited to any individual, partnership, or
corporation, with a controlling ownership interest in the business operating
the teenage nightclub, the nude dancing nightclub, or either a teenage
nightclub or nude dancing nightclub, as the context dictates. A person shall
not be deemed an “owner” merely because of an ownership interest in the land
upon or structure in which a nightclub is operated.
Premises. Includes the interior of the nude dancing nightclub or teenage
nightclub, any parking lot or yard appurtenant to either, or any other business
premises under common ownership, including common lease ownership, with the
nude dancing nightclub or teenage nightclub and located in the same building as
the nude dancing nightclub or teenage nightclub. The term does not, however,
include any establishment to which a license has been issued by the Honolulu
liquor commission.
Restaurant. A place which is regularly and in a bona fide manner used and kept
open for the serving of meals to patrons for compensation and which has
suitable kitchen facilities connected therewith, containing the necessary
equipment and supplies for cooking an assortment of foods which may be required
for ordinary meals. Additionally, at least 30 percent of the establishment’s
gross revenue must be derived from the sale of foods. For the purposes of this
definition, the term “foods” does not include beverages. This definition is
derived from the definition of “restaurant” in the rules of the Honolulu liquor
commission and shall be interpreted consistently with the interpretation given
to the term by the Honolulu liquor commission.
Teenage Nightclub. A commercial business establishment regularly engaged in the
business of a nightclub:
(1)   At which live or recorded music is regularly played;
(2)   At which a dance floor is provided for patrons; and
(3)   Which is advertised or promoted by the establishment, the owner, a
responsible managing agent, or an employee of the establishment, or by any
other person pursuant to the direction or request of any of the foregoing, in
such a manner as to attract or otherwise solicit minors, high school students,
teenagers or similar groups composed principally of minors. The term shall not
include any establishment for which a liquor license has been issued, any
restaurant, or any dance school.
   A minor shall be deemed “unaccompanied” when the minor is not accompanied by
a parent or guardian of the minor or by an adult person authorized by such
parent or guardian to accompany the minor.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 41, § 41-41.1) (Added by Ord. 99-46)
§ 34-10.2 Nonalcoholic nightclubs—Collocation with liquor establishment.
(a)   During the hours of operation of any teenage nightclub or any nude
dancing nightclub, no person may possess or consume any intoxicating liquor on
the premises of the establishment.
(b)   During the hours of operation of any teenage nightclub or any nude
dancing nightclub, no security guard, responsible managing agent, or employee
of the establishment shall knowingly permit a patron to enter the establishment
or its premises in possession of intoxicating liquor or to consume intoxicating
liquor in the establishment or on the premises of the establishment.
(c)   During the hours of operation of any teenage nightclub or any nude
dancing nightclub, no security guard, responsible managing agent, or employee
of the establishment shall knowingly permit any person in an obvious state of
intoxication to enter the establishment or its premises.
(d)   No person shall provide, or contract or otherwise arrange, on behalf of a
teenage nightclub or nude dancing nightclub, for the provision of, intoxicating
liquor on the premises of the establishment to patrons or anticipated patrons
of the teenage nightclub or nude dancing nightclub.
(e)   Except as otherwise provided under this subsection, a teenage nightclub
or a nude dancing nightclub shall not have an entrance or exit leading directly
to or from a liquor establishment. The entrance or exit of a teenage nightclub
or nude dancing nightclub shall be deemed “leading directly to or from a liquor
establishment” if no common area exists between the entrance or exit of the
teenage nightclub or nude dancing nightclub and the entrance or exit of the
liquor establishment. “Common area” means an area outside either establishment
and usable by a member of the general public or invitee to the structure
containing the establishments.
A teenage nightclub or nude dancing nightclub in operation on August 2, 1999,*
but in noncompliance with this subsection on that date, may continue in
noncompliance for 180 days from that date. After the 180th day, the teenage
nightclub or nude dancing nightclub shall be in violation of this subsection if
still having an entrance or exit leading directly to or from a liquor
establishment.
(f)   Except as otherwise provided for below, a teenage nightclub or nude
dancing nightclub shall not have a common wall with, or be located in the same
building as, a liquor establishment.
A teenage nightclub or nude dancing nightclub in operation on August 2, 1999,*
but in noncompliance with this subsection on that date, may continue in
noncompliance for two years from that date. After the two-year period, the
teenage nightclub or nude dancing nightclub shall be in violation of this
subsection if still having a common wall with a liquor establishment, or being
located in the same building. While operating in noncompliance during the two-
year period, the teenage nightclub or nude dancing nightclub shall not expand
the teenage nightclub or nude dancing nightclub operation beyond the
establishment as existing on August 2, 1999.*
The exception provided for above shall not apply in the following situations:
when a teenage nightclub or nude dancing nightclub expands its premises to
cause the sharing of a common wall with a liquor establishment, whether or not
under different ownership; when a liquor establishment, any ownership interest
in which is held by a person holding an ownership interest in a teenage
nightclub or nude dancing nightclub, locates or expands next to the teenage
nightclub or nude dancing nightclub to cause the sharing of a common wall; and
when a liquor establishment under different ownership locates or expands next
to a teenage nightclub or nude dancing nightclub to cause the sharing of a
common wall and, subsequently, a person holding an ownership interest in either
establishment acquires an ownership interest in the other establishment.
A teenage nightclub or nude dancing nightclub excepted by this subdivision may
continue in noncompliance with this subsection until abandoned, destroyed,
stopping all business activity, or ceasing for 30 consecutive days to operate
as a teenage nightclub or a nude dancing nightclub, as the case may be. While
operating in noncompliance, an establishment shall not expand its teenage
nightclub or nude dancing nightclub operation beyond the premises of the
establishment as existing on August 2, 1999,* the date of compliance, or the
date of operation commencement, as applicable. After a teenage nightclub or a
nude dancing nightclub is abandoned or destroyed, stops all business activity,
or ceases for 30 consecutive days to operate as a teenage nightclub or a nude
dancing nightclub, as the case may be, it may commence operation as a teenage
nightclub or nude dancing nightclub again only if complying with this
subsection and the other provisions of this article.
(g)   (1)   The owner of a teenage nightclub or nude dancing nightclub that is
in violation of subsection (e) or (f) shall be deemed the violator. Every day
during which the establishment is in violation of subsection (e) or (f) shall
be deemed a separate violation.
(2)   Any person violating subsection (a), (b), (c), or (d) shall be fined not
less than $100 and not more than $500 for each violation. Any owner violating
subsection (e) or (f) shall be fined not less than $250 and not more than
$1,000 for each violation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 41, § 41-41.2) (Added by Ord. 99-46)
Editor’s note:
   * “August 2, 1999” is substituted for “the effective date of this
ordinance.”
§ 34-10.3 Restriction on operation of teenage nightclubs during certain hours.
(a)   (1)   No person shall operate a teenage nightclub between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(2)   The prohibition of subdivision (1) shall not preclude the premises from
being used for other permitted purposes between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
provided the responsible managing agent of the nightclub removes or causes the
removal of all minors from the nightclub at 10:00 p.m. and thereafter does not
admit or allow the admission of any minor into the nightclub.
(3)   The admission of a minor shall not be deemed a violation of this
subsection if, in admitting the minor, the personnel of the establishment are
misled by the appearance of the minor and the minor’s personal identification
meeting the standards of §
34-10.4(d) into believing in good faith that the minor was an adult.
(b)   Any owner, responsible managing agent, or other person operating a
teenage nightclub in violation of subsection (a) shall be fined not less than
$250 and not more than $1,000 for each violation. Each day during which a
teenage nightclub is operated in violation of subsection (a) shall be deemed a
separate violation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 41, § 41-41.3) (Added by Ord. 99-46)
§ 34-10.4 Regulations applicable to nude dancing nightclubs.
(a)   The regulations provided in this section shall apply to any nude dancing
nightclub, as that term is defined in §
34-10.1, regardless of the hours of operation of the establishment.
(b)   A nude dancing nightclub shall not admit into the establishment any
person under 21 years of age during business hours; provided that:
(1)   The admission of a person under 21 years of age shall not be deemed a
violation of this subsection if, in admitting the person, the personnel of the
nude dancing nightclub were misled by the appearance of the person and by the
person’s personal identification meeting the standards of subsection (d) into
believing in good faith that the person was at least 21 years of age; and
(2)   The admission of an employee of the establishment who is under 21, but at
least 18 years of age shall be allowed.
Any responsible managing agent of the nude dancing nightclub and any employee
of the nightclub screening a person for entry into the nightclub shall be
deemed the violator when a person is admitted in violation of this subsection.
(c)   A person under 21 years of age shall not enter a nude dancing nightclub
during its business hours unless the person is an employee of the establishment
and at least 18 years of age.
(d)   A nude dancing nightclub shall, for the purpose of identifying and
verifying the ages of patrons, use an official State driver’s license, a
military identification card, or other form of official government
identification containing a photograph identifying the individual. Such
documents shall be unaltered, undamaged, and laminated. All documents shall be
examined carefully. School identification cards, expired documents of any kind,
cards with such phrases as “information provided by applicant” or the like,
identification cards issued for the purposes of check cashing or other
identification cards not issued by a government agency, shall be unacceptable.
(e)   Any owner or responsible managing agent of a nude dancing nightclub shall
be responsible for posting a notice, at each entrance to the establishment
available to the public during its business hours, that:
(1)   States that no patron under 21 years of age will be admitted to the
establishment;
(2)   Refers to this article and states the maximum penalty for a patron who
enters in violation of the age restriction; and
(3)   Is clearly visible and legible to prospective patrons before their entry
into the establishment.
Every day during which the required sign is not posted or not otherwise in
compliance with this subsection shall be deemed a separate violation.
(f)   Any owner or managing agent of a nude dancing nightclub shall be
responsible for conducting a training program, similar to the server-training
approved by the liquor commission, which provides at least five and a half
hours of instruction for managers, doorpersons, and beverage servers in the
following areas:
(1)   Proper checking of personal identification and the recognition of
unacceptable forms of identification;
(2)   Identifying and dealing with intoxicated persons;
(3)   Reviewing liquor laws and rules; and
(4)   Dangers of driving while intoxicated.
Managers, doorpersons and beverage servers must successfully complete the
training program every four years.
(g)   The following prohibitions shall apply in a nude dancing nightclub:
(1)   An exotic dancer shall not touch, with any clothed or unclothed intimate
part of the dancer, any clothed or unclothed body part, including intimate
part, of a patron;
(2)   An exotic dancer shall not touch, with any clothed or unclothed body part
of the dancer, any clothed or unclothed intimate part of a patron;
(3)   A patron shall not touch, with any clothed or unclothed intimate part of
the patron, any clothed or unclothed body part, including intimate part, of an
exotic dancer; and
(4)   A patron shall not touch, with any other clothed or unclothed body part
of the patron, any clothed or unclothed intimate part of an exotic dancer.
The prohibitions shall apply at any time in the nude dancing nightclub, even
when the dancer is not entertaining or performing for the patron.
(h)   A person under 21 years of age shall not dance as, or be hired,
recruited, or asked by any person to dance as, an exotic dancer in any nude
dancing nightclub.
(i)   A person shall not perform as an exotic dancer in a room within a nude
dancing nightclub, unless the room complies with the following:
(1)   The room entrance does not have a door, partition, screen, curtain, or
other opaque, transparent, meshed, or perforated covering; and
(2)   The entire interior of the room is visible at all times from the room
entrance.
(j)   Any responsible managing agent of a nude dancing nightclub shall not
permit any exotic dancer to perform, and no exotic dancer shall perform in the
nude, in a nude dancing nightclub, except upon a permanently affixed stage at
least 18 inches above the immediate floor area. Tables, seats, chairs, or
couches shall not constitute a stage for purposes of this article.
(k)   Any owner or responsible managing agent of a nude dancing nightclub shall
erect barriers or provide screening sufficient to prevent persons outside the
establishment from viewing exotic dancers while performing in the nude.
(l)   Except in any restroom, or in any changing room set aside for exotic
dancers or other employees, or both, to change their clothes, no person, other
than an exotic dancer during a performance, shall remain on, or be allowed by
any responsible managing agent to remain on, the premises of the nude dancing
establishment in the nude. The exception applicable to persons in a restroom or
changing room shall only apply if only persons of the same gender are permitted
in any such restroom or changing room at the same time, and the interior of the
restroom or changing room may not be viewed by persons outside such restroom or
changing room.
(m)   Any violation of this section by an owner or responsible managing agent
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $200 and not more than $1,000. Any
violation of this section by an exotic dancer, a patron, or any other person
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $500.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 41, § 41-41.4) (Added by Ord. 99-46)
§ 34-10.5 Responsible managing agent.
(a)   At all times during the operation of a teenage nightclub or a nude
dancing nightclub, the owner thereof shall designate a natural person or
persons to act as the responsible managing agent or agents for the
establishment. The owner shall maintain a record of the designated responsible
managing agent or agents for all times the establishment is in operation. The
record shall be maintained for a minimum of two years. If the owner is not a
sole proprietor, the owner shall maintain a record of all persons with an
equity ownership interest in the owner. Upon the request of any officer of the
Honolulu police department, the owner shall provide any of the records required
by this subsection.
(b)   At all times during the operation of a teenage nightclub or a nude
dancing nightclub:
(1)   The owner shall post the name of the owner; and
(2)   The responsible managing agent or agents responsible for management of
the establishment at the time shall post their name or names and title.
The information required to be posted shall be posted in a conspicuous location
in the establishment within 5 feet of each entrance through which patrons of
the establishment may enter the establishment. The name or names shall be
posted in letters at least 2 inches in height, in a color that contrasts with
the wall or other background on which they are posted.
(c)   An owner may be designated as a responsible managing agent.
(d)   (1)   The failure of the owner to designate a responsible managing agent
or to maintain records of the designation or other records as required under
subsection (a) shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $250 and not more
than $1,000. Each day during which a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate violation.
(2)   Any owner or responsible managing agent who fails to comply with
subsection (b) shall be fined not less than $100 and not more than $250. Each
day during which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate violation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 41, § 41-41.5) (Added by Ord. 99-46)
§ 34-10.6 Security guards on premises.
   The responsible managing agent of any teenage nightclub or nude dancing
nightclub shall ensure that security guards, licensed pursuant to HRS Chapter
463, are on the premises of the nightclub during all hours of operation. At
least one such guard shall be on duty within the nightclub and at least one
such guard shall be on duty outside of the nightclub on the grounds or in the
parking area of the nightclub. Any person violating this section shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $500. Each day during
which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate violation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 41, § 41-41.6) (Added by Ord. 99-46)
§ 34-10.7 Financial records.
   The owner of any commercial business establishment meeting the definition of
“teenage nightclub” in §
34-10.1, but claiming to be excepted from that definition because the
establishment is a restaurant, shall maintain adequate records to demonstrate
that the establishment meets the definition of “restaurant” in that section,
including the requirement that at least 30 percent of the establishment’s gross
revenues are derived from the sale of foods. The failure to maintain such
records shall be grounds for treating an establishment as a teenage nightclub
under this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 41, § 41-41.7) (Added by Ord. 99-46)
§ 34-10.8 Teenage nightclub that is also a nude dancing nightclub or lap
dancing establishment.
(a)   Any establishment that operates as both a teenage nightclub and a nude
dancing nightclub shall comply with the requirements applicable to both teenage
nightclubs and nude dancing nightclubs.
(b)   Any establishment that operates as both a teenage nightclub and a lap
dancing establishment shall comply with the requirements applicable to both
teenage nightclubs and lap dancing establishments, including the amortization
provisions applicable to both uses; provided that if the amortization
provisions applicable to teenage nightclubs and to lap dancing establishments
are inconsistent, the stricter provision shall apply.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 41, § 41-41.8) (Added by Ord. 99-46)
§ 34-10.9 Criminal penalties—Enforcement.
(a)   The penalties provided in this article are criminal penalties and the
article shall be enforced by the Honolulu police department.
(b)   A police officer may arrest an alleged violator of any provision of this
article or may issue a citation in lieu of arrest as provided in HRS § 803-6.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 41, § 41-41.9) (Added by Ord. 99-46)
§ 34-10.10 Severability.
   If this article or the application thereof to any person, property, or
circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this article which can be given effect without
the invalid provision or application, and to this end this article shall be
severable.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 41, § 41-41.10) (Added by Ord. 99-46)
ARTICLE 11: SALE OF TOILETS AND URINALS
Sections
   
34-11.1   Sale of certain toilets and urinals prohibited
   
34-11.2   Enforcement—Penalty
§ 34-11.1 Sale of certain toilets and urinals prohibited.
   After November 25, 1993, only toilets and urinals that conform to the
requirements of the plumbing code shall be offered for sale for installation in
the city.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 8, § 40-8.1) (Added by Ord. 93-73)
§ 34-11.2 Enforcement—Penalty.
(a)   The department of planning and permitting shall enforce this article and
may adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 for the administration and
enforcement of this article.
(b)   Any person violating this article shall be fined not less than $100 and
not more than $250 for each violation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 8, § 40-8.2) (Added by Ord. 93-73)
ARTICLE 12: SALE OF SHOWERHEADS AND FAUCETS
Sections
   
34-12.1   Sale of certain showerheads and faucets prohibited
   
34-12.2   Enforcement—Penalty
§ 34-12.1 Sale of certain showerheads and faucets prohibited.
   Effective April 12, 1994, only showerheads and kitchen faucets that conform
to the requirements of the Energy Policy Act of 1992, P.L. 102-486, and only
lavatory faucets that conform to the requirements of the plumbing code shall be
offered for sale in the city.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 9, § 40-9.1) (Added by Ord. 93-77)
§ 34-12.2 Enforcement—Penalty.
(a)   The department of planning and permitting shall enforce this article and
may adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 for the administration and
enforcement of this article.
(b)   Any person violating this article shall be fined not less than $100 and
not more than $250 for each violation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 9, § 40-9.2) (Added by Ord. 93-77)
ARTICLE 13: POLYSTYRENE FOAM AND DISPOSABLE FOOD SERVICE WARE
Sections
   
34-13.1   Definitions
   
34-13.2   Restriction on polystyrene foam food ware, disposable plastic service
ware and disposable plastic food ware
   
34-13.3   Exemptions
   
34-13.4   Ban on sale of polystyrene foam food ware, disposable plastic service
ware, and disposable plastic food ware
   
34-13.5   Disposable service ware upon request
   
34-13.6   Enforcement, civil penalties, and injunctive relief
   
34-13.7   Rules
   
34-13.8   Severability
§ 34-13.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Business. Any commercial enterprise or establishment operating in the City and
County of Honolulu, including an individual proprietorship, joint venture,
partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or other legal entity,
whether for profit or not for profit, and includes all employees of the
business or any independent contractors associated with the business.
Catered Food. The provision of prepared food in bulk quantity amounts or
multiple servings with the intent for later consumption, or the service of
prepared food at a site or event venue.
Customer. Any person purchasing prepared food from a food vendor.
Department. The department of environmental services.
Disposable. Designed to be discarded after a single or limited number of uses
and not designed or manufactured for long-term multiple re-use.
Food Vendor. Any entity or person selling or providing prepared food for
consumption within the City and County of Honolulu, including any store, shop,
sales outlet, pharmacy, restaurant, bar, pub, coffee shop, cafeteria, caterer,
convenience store, liquor store, grocery store, supermarket, delicatessen, food
truck, catering vehicle or cart, roadside stand, or other establishment that
sells or provides prepared food for consumption within the city.
Plastic. Any material made of fossil fuel-derived or petrochemical polymeric
compounds and additives that can be shaped by flow.
Plastic Food Ware. Hot and cold beverage cups, cup lids, plates, bowls, bowl
lids, “clamshells,” trays, or other hinged or lidded containers that contain
plastic. The term does not include disposable plastic condiment packets; food-
related bags or wrappers, including but not limited to musubi wraps, plastic
film, poi bags, chip bags, cracker and cookie wrappers, bread bags, meal kits,
or ice bags; beverage-related bottles or cartons; non-plastic cups that contain
a polyethylene or plastic coating; packaging for unprepared food; and packaging
for wholesale distribution of prepared food, baked goods or dairy products.
Polystyrene Foam. Blown polystyrene and expanded and extruded foams which are
thermoplastic petrochemical materials utilizing a styrene monomer and processed
by any number of techniques including but not limited to fusion of polymer
spheres (expanded bead polystyrene) injection molding, foam molding, and
extrusion- blow molding (extruded foam polystyrene). Polystyrene foam does not
include clear, solid or oriented polystyrene.
Polystyrene Foam Food Ware. Hot and cold beverage cups, cup lids, plates,
bowls, bowl lids, “clamshells,” trays, or other hinged or lidded containers,
that are made of polystyrene foam; but the term does not include polystyrene
foam coolers and ice chests specifically designed and manufactured for multiple
re-use; and soup or noodles packaged with polystyrene foam that has been filled
and sealed prior to receipt by the food vendor.
Prepackaged Food. Prepared food that is sealed, contained, or wrapped in a
manner to protect and prevent the prepared food from having any direct human
contact, prior to being provided for sale by a food vendor to a customer,
including but not limited to bentos, kimchi, seaweed salad, takuan, tofu, pre-
made sandwiches, desserts, pies, noodles, salads, parfaits, and drinks.
Prepared Food. Food or beverages that are prepared for consumption on or off
the premises of a food vendor, by cooking, chopping, peeling, slicing, mixing,
brewing, freezing, squeezing, or otherwise processed at premises owned, leased,
or otherwise controlled by the food vendor; but the term does not include raw
meat, raw poultry, raw seafood, unprepared produce, and uncooked eggs. Prepared
food includes restaurant style food and beverages that are packaged after being
ordered and ready to be consumed without further preparation.
Produce. Any fruit or vegetable including mixes of intact fruits and vegetables
and includes mushrooms, sprouts irrespective of seed source, peanuts, tree
nuts, beans, honey, and herbs.
Service Ware. Any stirrers, straws, baran, and utensils including forks,
spoons, sporks, and knives; but the term does not include items contained
within or attached to packaging of food or beverages, including but not limited
to disposable plastic straws pre-packaged and sold with beverage boxes, or
disposable plastic utensils pre-packaged and sold with ice cream or salads.
Shelf Stable Food. Prepared food that can be safely stored at room temperature
and does not require refrigeration, freezing, or heating for food safety
purposes, prior to purchase by a customer.
Utensils. Implements intended to assist in the consumption of food or drink.
(Added by Ord. 19-30)
§ 34-13.2 Restriction on polystyrene foam food ware, disposable plastic service
ware and disposable plastic food ware.
(a)   Unless exempted under §
34-13.3, no food vendor shall sell, serve, or provide prepared food in any
polystyrene foam food ware to customers.
(b)   Unless exempted under §
34-13.3, no food vendor shall sell, serve, or provide disposable plastic
service ware to customers.
(c)   Unless exempted under §
34-13.3, no food vendor shall sell, serve, or provide prepared food in
disposable plastic food ware to customers.
(d)   Unless exempted under §
34-13.3, polystyrene foam food ware shall not be sold or provided, or offered
for sale or use at any city facility, city- authorized concession, city-
sponsored or city-permitted event, or city program.
(Added by Ord. 19-30)
§ 34-13.3 Exemptions.
(a)   The department may grant an exemption from compliance with the
restrictions of §
34-13.2 upon application and the provision of sufficient evidence that there
are no reasonable alternatives available to the food vendor to comply, or
compliance with the restriction would cause significant hardship for the food
vendor.
For purposes of this subsection, exemptions may be granted for a specified term
of up to two years, and may be subsequently renewed for specified terms of up
to two years thereafter, provided that during the term of the exemption,
diligent efforts are made by the food vendor to become compliant.
(1)   In situations where there are no reasonable alternatives available, a
food vendor may submit an application, preferably on a form provided by the
director, and shall set forth with specificity:
(A)   The food vendor’s name and address, and a copy of the food vendor’s most
current business registration certificate;
(B)   A description of the polystyrene foam food ware, disposable plastic
service ware, or disposable plastic food ware at issue;
(C)   The factual basis to support the requested determination that there is no
reasonable alternative to the use of the non-compliant product at issue, which
for example, may include packaging necessary for safely containing food that is
of significantly high or low temperature, impact to Hazard Analysis and
Critical Control Points plan applicable to the food vendor, or specific
transportation requirements or safeguards; and
(D)   Copies of all exemptions issued to the applicant under this article.
(2)   In situations where compliance would cause significant hardship, a food
vendor may submit an application, preferably on a form provided by the
director, and shall set forth with specificity:
(A)   The food vendor’s name and address, and a copy of the food vendor’s most
current business registration certificate;
   (B)   A description of the polystyrene foam food ware, disposable plastic
service ware, or disposable plastic food ware at issue;
(C)   The factual basis to support the requested determination that the use of
a compliant product at issue would cause the applicant significant hardship and
that there is no affordable compliant alternative; and
(D)   Copies of all exemptions issued to the applicant under this article.
(b)   The department may grant an “industry exemption” from compliance with the
restrictions of §
34-13.2 upon application and the provision of sufficient evidence that
compliance with §
34-13.2 would cause hardship to the food service industry. “Hardship” under
this subsection will be construed to include, but not be limited to: situations
where there are no acceptable alternatives to providing polystyrene foam food
ware, disposable plastic service ware, or disposable plastic food ware to
customers; or situations where acceptable alternatives are not readily
available due to market supply constraints.
For purposes of this subsection, an “industry exemption” may be granted for a
specified term of up to two years, and may be subsequently renewed for
specified terms of up to two years thereafter, provided that during the term of
the exemption, diligent efforts are made by the industry applicant to become
compliant.
(c)   Disposable plastic straws may be provided, upon request, to customers for
whom non-fossil-fuel-based straws are unsuitable due to medical or physical
conditions. Otherwise, straws must be fossil-fuel free or designed to be
reusable. The following entities are exempt from compliance with the
restriction of §
34-13.2(b), specific to disposable plastic straws:
(1)   A “hospital” as defined under Hawaii Administrative Rules § 11-93-2;
(2)   A “nursing facility” as defined under Hawaii Administrative Rules § 11-
94.1-2;
(3)   An “assisted living facility” as defined under Hawaii Administrative
Rules § 11-90-2;
(4)   An “adult residential care home” (“ARCH”) and “expanded ARCH” as defined
under Hawaii Administrative Rules § 11-100.1-2;
(5)   A “hospice service agency” as defined under HRS § 321-15.63(b);
(6)   A “hospice home” as defined under HRS § 321-15.1;
(7)   A “home health agency” as defined under Hawaii Administrative Rules § 11-
97-1; and
(8)   A “home care agency” as defined under Hawaii Administrative Rules § 11-
700-2.
(d)   The following shall be exempt from compliance with the restrictions of §
34-13.2:
(1)   Packaging for raw meat, raw poultry, raw seafood, unprepared produce, and
uncooked eggs;
(2)   Packaging for prepackaged food, shelf stable food, and catered food; and
(3)   Packaging in any situation deemed by the city to be an emergency
requiring immediate action for the preservation of life, health, property,
safety, or essential public services. This exemption shall be in place until
the emergency has ceased or the mayor has determined that the exemption is no
longer applicable to the situation.
(Added by Ord. 19-30)
§ 34-13.4 Ban on sale of polystyrene foam food ware, disposable plastic service
ware, and disposable plastic food ware.
(a)   No business within the City and County of Honolulu shall sell polystyrene
foam food ware, disposable plastic service ware, or disposable plastic food
ware, except for:
(1)   Packaging for raw meat, raw poultry, raw seafood, unprepared produce, and
uncooked eggs;
(2)   Packaging for prepackaged food and shelf stable food; and
(3)   Non-compliant products sold to a food vendor who has been granted an
exemption for said products under §
34-13.3.
(b)   The department may grant an exemption from compliance with the
prohibitions of this section upon application and the provision of sufficient
evidence that there are no reasonable alternatives available to the business to
comply, or compliance with the prohibition would cause significant hardship for
the business.
For purposes of this subsection, exemptions may be granted for a specified term
of up to two years, and may be subsequently renewed for specified terms of up
to two years thereafter, provided that during the term of the exemption,
diligent efforts are made by the business to become compliant.
(Added by Ord. 19-30)
§ 34-13.5 Disposable service ware upon request.
(a)   A food vendor may only provide or distribute disposable service ware for
prepared food or for a beverage upon the request or affirmative response of a
customer or person being provided the prepared food or beverage, or in a self-
service area or dispenser.
(b)   The department shall engage in an education and outreach campaign in
coordination with community and business partners to facilitate implementation
of this section.
(Added by Ord. 19-30)
§ 34-13.6 Enforcement, civil penalties, and injunctive relief.
(a)   Enforcement and administration of this article is under the jurisdiction
of the department of environmental services.
(b)   Any food vendor or business violating any provision of this article or
any rule adopted pursuant to this article shall:
(1)   Be ordered to discontinue the distribution or sale of items prohibited by
this article; and
(2)   If continuing the distribution despite the order, be subject to a civil
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each day of violation.
(c)   The director of the department of environmental services may institute a
civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive or other
relief to correct or abate violations of this article or any rule adopted
pursuant to this article, to collect administrative penalties, or to obtain
other relief.
(Added by Ord. 19-30)
§ 34-13.7 Rules.
   The director of the department of environmental services shall adopt rules
pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 regarding the implementation, administration, and
enforcement of this article.
(Added by Ord. 19-30)
§ 34-13.8 Severability.
   This article is hereby declared to be severable. In accordance therewith, if
any portion of this article is held invalid for any reason, the validity of any
other portion of this article shall not be affected and if the application of
any portion of this article to any person, property, or circumstance is held
invalid, the application hereof to any other person, property or circumstances
shall not be affected.
(Added by Ord. 19-30)
ARTICLE 14: REGULATION OF BAGS PROVIDED TO CUSTOMERS*
Sections
   
34-14.1   Definitions
   
34-14.2   Ban on plastic checkout bags and nonrecyclable paper bags
   
34-14.3   Penalties and injunctive relief
   
34-14.4   Rules
Editor’s note:
   * Article 14 is effective July 1, 2015.
§ 34-14.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Business. Any commercial enterprise or establishment operating in the City and
County of Honolulu, including an individual proprietorship, joint venture,
partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or other legal entity,
whether for profit or not for profit, and includes all employees of the
business or any independent contractors associated with the business.
Compostable Plastic Bag. A checkout bag that is provided to a customer for the
purpose of transporting groceries or other retail goods, that meets current
ASTM D6400 Standard Specifications for compostability and that is labeled:
(1)   With the Biodegradable Product Institute (“BPI”) logo as meeting the ASTM
standard for compostability; and
(2)   With “Compostable” on both sides of the bag in either green color
lettering that is at least 1 inch in height, or as otherwise specified; or
within a green color band that is at least 1 inch in height to be readily and
easily identifiable.
Customer. A person who purchases merchandise from a business.
Department. The department of environmental services.
Director. The director of the department of environmental services or the
director’s designee.
Mil. One thousandth of 1 inch.
Nonrecyclable Paper Bag. A paper bag that is not a recyclable paper bag.
Plastic. Any material made of fossil fuel-derived or petrochemical polymeric
compounds and additives that can be shaped by flow.
Plastic Checkout Bag.
(1)   A carryout bag that is provided by a business to a customer for the
purpose of transporting groceries, prepared food, or other retail goods, and is
made from plastic and not specifically designed and manufactured for long-term
re-use; and
(2)   This term does not include:
(A)   Handle-less plastic bags used by customers inside a business to package
loose items, such as bakery goods, fruits, vegetables, nuts, ground coffee,
grains, candies, or small hardware items;
(B)   Handle-less plastic bags used to contain or wrap frozen foods, meat, or
fish, flowers or potted plants, or other items to contain dampness;
(C)   Newspaper bags for home newspaper delivery;
(D)   Laundry, dry cleaning, or garment bags;
(E)   Bags sold in packages containing multiple bags intended for use as
garbage, pet waste, or yard waste bags;
(F)   Bags used to contain live animals, such as fish or insects sold in pet
stores; or
(G)   Bags used to transport chemical pesticides, drain-cleaning chemicals, or
other caustic chemicals sold at the retail level; provided that this exemption
shall be limited to one bag per customer.
Plastic Film Bag.
(1)   A plastic bag made out of thin flexible sheets of plastic with a
thickness of 10 mils or less; and
(2)   This term does not include:
(A)   Handle-less plastic bags used by customers inside a business to package
loose items, such as bakery goods, fruits, vegetables, nuts, ground coffee,
grains, candies, or small hardware items;
(B)   Handle-less plastic bags used to contain or wrap frozen foods, meat or
fish, flowers or potted plants, or other items to contain dampness;
(C)   Newspaper bags for home newspaper delivery;
(D)   Laundry, dry cleaning, or garment bags;
(E)   Bags sold in packages containing multiple bags intended for use as
garbage, pet waste, or yard waste bags;
(F)   Bags used to contain live animals, such as fish or insects sold in pet
stores; or
(G)   Bags used to transport chemical pesticides, drain-cleaning chemicals, or
other caustic chemicals sold at the retail level; provided that this exemption
shall be limited to one bag per customer.
Recyclable paper bag. A paper bag that:
(1)   Is 100 percent recyclable;
(2)   Contains a minimum of 40 percent post-consumer recycled content; and
(3)   Displays the words “Reusable” and “Recyclable” in a highly visible manner
on the outside of the bags.
Reusable bag. A bag with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured
for multiple reuse and is made of: (1) cloth or other washable fabric; or (2)
durable material suitable for reuse, including plastic that is at least 2.25
mils thick. After January 1, 2020, plastic film bags shall no longer be
considered to be “reusable bags.”
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 9, § 9-9.1) (Added by Ord. 12-8; Am. Ords. 14-29, 17-
37, 19-30)
§ 34-14.2 Ban on plastic checkout bags and non-recyclable paper bags (effective
7-1-2018).
(a)   Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), businesses shall be
prohibited from providing plastic checkout bags and nonrecyclable paper bags to
their customers at the point of sale for the purpose of transporting groceries
or other merchandise.
(b)   Businesses may provide, at the point of sale, reusable bags, compostable
plastic bags, or recyclable paper bags to customers for the purpose of
transporting groceries or other merchandise; provided that they charge the
customer a minimum of 15 cents per bag.
(c)   Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as prohibiting businesses
from providing nonrecyclable paper bags, with or without charge, to protect or
transport prepared foods, beverages, or bakery goods.
(d)   After January 1, 2020, compostable plastic bags shall no longer be
provided at the point of sale for the purpose of transporting groceries or
other merchandise.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 9, § 9-9.2) (Added by Ord. 12-8; Am. Ords. 14-29, 17-
37)
§ 34-14.3 Penalties and injunctive relief.
(a)   Any business violating this article or any rule adopted pursuant to this
article shall be:
(1)   Ordered to discontinue the distribution of bags prohibited by this
article at the point of sale; and
(2)   Subject to a civil fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for
each day of violation.
(b)   The director may institute a civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction for injunctive or other relief to correct or abate violations of
this article or any rule adopted pursuant to this article, to collect
administrative penalties, or to obtain other relief.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 9, § 9-9.3) (Added by Ord. 12-8)
§ 34-14.4 Rules.
   The director of the department of environmental services shall adopt rules
pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 regarding the implementation, administration, and
enforcement of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 9, § 9-9.4) (Added by Ord. 12-8)
ARTICLE 15: RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY DISCLOSURE
Sections
   
34-15.1   Definitions
   
34-15.2   Required disclosures
   
34-15.3   Violation—Penalties—Enforcement
§ 34-15.1 Definitions.
   For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Bed and Breakfast Home. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Department. The department of planning and permitting.
Leasehold Real Property. Real property leased for a lease period of 15 years or
more.
Real Estate Purchase Contract. A contract, as it may be amended, by which a
seller agrees to sell and a buyer agrees to buy residential real property,
which includes a deposit, receipt, offer, acceptance, or other similar
agreement for the sale or lease with option to buy residential real property.
Residential Real Property. Fee simple or leasehold real property developed as a
residence for people to live, or ownership of stock in a cooperative housing
corporation.
Seller. The person selling residential real property for consideration.
Short-term Rental. A bed and breakfast home or transient vacation unit.
Transient Vacation Unit. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
(Added by Ord. 22-6)
§ 34-15.2 Required disclosures.
(a)   Requirement. A seller of residential real property shall comply with the
requirements of this section. These requirements are in addition to the
disclosure requirements in HRS Chapter 508D.
(b)   Short-term rental disclosure. The seller shall provide to the buyer,
within the time period specified in subsection (d) and on a form prescribed by
the department, a disclosure, stating whether or not the operation of a short-
term rental is a legal use for the residential real property being sold, and
the reasons therefor. The department shall make the disclosure form available
on its website. The disclosure form must bear the following statement: "THE
REPRESENTATIONS ON THIS DOCUMENT ARE SOLELY THOSE OF THE SELLER. THE
INFORMATION HAS NOT BEEN CONFIRMED BY ANY AGENCY OF THE CITY AND COUNTY OF
HONOLULU."
(c)   Evidence of legal use as short-term rental. If the residential real
property is being used as a short-term rental on the date of the disclosure
document required by subsection (b), the seller shall also provide the
following to the buyer within the time period specified in subsection (d):
(1)   The applicable government permit number, such as a nonconforming use
certificate number, or short-term rental registration number; and
(2)   Tax clearance certificates evidencing payment of general excise taxes and
transient accommodation taxes owed to date.
The department may allow this information to be provided on or as part of the
disclosure form required by subsection (b).
(d)   Time period for disclosure. Prior to the execution of a real estate
purchase contract by the buyer, the seller shall deliver to the buyer the
documents and information required under subsections (b) and (c).
(e)   Submittal to the department. If, pursuant to subsection (b), the seller
discloses to the buyer that the operation of a short-term rental is a legal use
for the residential real property being sold, then within seven days after the
closing of the sale of the residential real property, the seller shall submit
to the department a document identifying the subject property by street address
and tax map key number, and containing copies of the documents and information
delivered to the buyer pursuant to subsections (b), (c), and (d).
(Added by Ord. 22-6)
§ 34-15.3 Violation—Penalties—Enforcement.
(a)   A person violating the provisions of this article is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction is subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, or both.
(b)   The provisions of §
21-2.150-1(e) through (i) apply to the enforcement of this section.
(Added by Ord. 22-6)
ARTICLE 16: NALOXONE
Sections
   
34-16.1   Definitions
   
34-16.2   Requirement to maintain naloxone
   
34-16.3   Employee training
   
34-16.4   Maintenance
   
34-16.5   Protection from liability
   
34-16.6   Penalty
§ 34-16.1 Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context indicates or requires a different meaning.
Included Business. A business licensed by the Honolulu liquor commission to
sell or serve liquor and included in one or more of the following classes under
State law:
(1)   Class 2: Restaurant license, as defined in HRS § 281-31(c);
(2)   Class 5: Dispenser license, as defined in HRS § 281-31(f);
(3)   Class 9: Tour or cruise vessel license, as defined in HRS § 281-31(i);
(4)   Class 11: Cabaret license, as defined in HRS § 281-31(k);
(5)   Class 14: Brewpub license, as defined in HRS § 281-31(n); and
(6)   Class 18: Small craft producer pub license, as defined in HRS § 281-31
(r).
Manager. The designated person duly registered with the Honolulu liquor
commission as a manager or assistant manager who is in active charge of the
licensed premises during the hours during which the business is permitted,
under its license, to sell or serve liquor.
(Added by Ord. 23-24)
§ 34-16.2 Requirement to maintain naloxone.
Included businesses must maintain a minimum of two doses of naloxone on their
premises, which may be administered to an individual to reverse the effects of
an opioid overdose.
(Added by Ord. 23-24)
§ 34-16.3 Employee training.
All managers of any included business must be trained in the proper
administration of naloxone.
(Added by Ord. 23-24)
§ 34-16.4 Maintenance.
Included businesses must:
(1)   Ensure that any naloxone required to be maintained on the premises is
stored in accordance with the guidelines set forth by the manufacturer; and
(2)   Replace any doses of naloxone that are past their expiration date, as
determined by the manufacturer.
(Added by Ord. 23-24)
§ 34-16.5 Protection from liability.
Any person who provides or administers naloxone pursuant to this article is
subject to the protection from liability of HRS § 663-1.5(a).
(Added by Ord. 23-24)
§ 34-16.6 Penalty.
Any included business violating this article is subject to a tine of not more
than $200. Nothing in this article may be interpreted to preclude the Honolulu
liquor commission from enforcing its own rules.
(Added by Ord. 23-24)
 
ARTICLE 17: SINGLE-USE PLASTIC BOTTLES
Sections
   
34-17.1   Definitions
   
34-17.2   Restrictions on single-use plastic bottles
   
34-17.3   Exemptions
§ 34-17.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Plastic. Any material made of fossil fuel-derived or petrochemical polymeric
compounds and additives that can be shaped by flow.
Plastic Bottle. A formed or molded container made from any type of plastic
having a relatively inflexible fixed shape or form with a neck that is smaller
than the container body.
Single-Use. An item that is designed to be discarded by the user after a single
or limited number of uses and not designed or manufactured for long-term or
multiple re-use.
(Added by Ord. 25-18)
§ 34-17.2 Restrictions on single-use plastic bottles.
   No single-use plastic bottle having a capacity of 1 liter or less may be
sold or offered for sale at any vending machine located at a city facility
after December 31, 2025. Any contracts in effect prior to the enactment of this
article may be fulfilled and any subsequent contract renewals must be executed
in compliance with this article.
(Added by Ord. 25-18)
§ 34-17.3 Exemptions.
   Vendors participating in the Licensed Blind Vendor program, which is also
known as the Vending Facilities program of the Randolph-Sheppard Act of 1936,
20 USC § 107 et. seq. and as amended in 1954 and 1974, are exempted from this
article.
(Added by Ord. 25-18)
ARTICLE 18: ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES
Sections
   
34-18.1   Definitions
   
34-18.2   Permits required
   
34-18.3   Permit types—Validity
   
34-18.4   Permit—Application, issuance, denial
   
34-18.5   Conditions of permit holders
   
34-18.6   Permits—General provisions
   
34-18.7   Inspection of video amusement devices, records, and location
   
34-18.8   Prohibited conduct
   
34-18.9   Permit suspension or revocation
   
34-18.10   Forfeiture
   
34-18.11   Enforcement—Implementation
   
34-18.12   Penalties
   
34-18.13   Appeals
   
34-18.14   Rules
   
34-18.15   Conflict with State law
§ 34-18.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Available to the Public. Open to an individual granted entry or admission to
physically enter a premises or participate in an activity.
Chief of Police or Police Chief. The chief of police of the Honolulu police
department or the police chief’s designee.
Department. The Honolulu police department.
Electronic Amusement Device. Any electronic amusement device, including
mechanical devices or video amusement devices, requiring the insertion of
money, tokens, credits, or other valuable consideration.
Gambling. Has the same definition as defined in HRS § 712-1220.
Location.  Any business establishment, public or private club, association, or
any other site where a video amusement device is displayed or operated for use
or play.
Mechanical Amusement Device. A non-digital electronic amusement device
involving mechanical or manual play mechanisms. Mechanical amusement devices
include but are not limited to games such as pinball, mechanical grab machines,
and pool tables.
Operator. Any person in substantial proprietary control or other authoritative
control over the location.
Person. Has the same meaning as defined in §
1-4.1.
Premises. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 708-800.
Property. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 708-800.
Video Amusement Device. A digital electronic amusement device that offers video
or graphic-based gameplay through electronic or digital means. Video amusement
devices include but are not limited to video games, virtual reality simulators,
and dance or motion games. Video amusement device excludes music devices and
vending machines.
(Added by Ord. 25-28)
§ 34-18.2 Permits required.
(a)   It is unlawful for any person to display or operate for use or play any
video amusement device in locations available to the public, unless the
required permits have been obtained, and the use or operation of the video
amusement device complies with this article.
(b)   Other electronic amusement devices, including mechanical amusement
devices, do not require permits.
(Added by Ord. 25-28)
§ 34-18.3 Permit types—Validity.
(a)   Annual. Annual video amusement device permits are valid for the calendar
year of issue, and expire on December 31 of that year.
(b)   Initial. Operators shall apply for video amusement device permits within
30 days of June 24, 2025, with the validity of the initial permits expiring on
December 31 of that year.
(Added by Ord. 25-28)
Editor’s note:
   “June 24, 2025” is substituted for “the effective date of this article.”
§ 34-18.4 Permit—Application, issuance, denial.
(a)   Application. Applications for video amusement device permits must be made
to the department, on forms provided by the department. The applicant must
provide all requested information on the form, including: the location of the
real property identified by address and a tax map key parcel number; the name
of the owner of the video amusement devices; the name of the permit applicant;
and the make, model, and serial number of all video amusement devices to be
operated at a location. Additional applications may be made to add video
amusement devices to a location.
(b)   Issuance. The chief of police may issue a video amusement device permit
after the applicant’s completion of the application form and following an
investigation of the applicant and the location.
(c)   Denial. The chief of police may deny a permit application if:
(1)   The applicant fails to provide any of the information requested on the
application;
(2)   Any statement in the application is found to be false; or
(3)   After an investigation of the proposed location, the proposed location
would be reasonably likely to result in an increase in criminal activity,
vandalism, litter, noise, or traffic congestion.
An applicant may appeal the denial of a video amusement device permit by filing
a written notice of appeal as provided in §
34-18.13.
(Added by Ord. 25-28)
§ 34-18.5 Conditions of permit holders.
   Any person issued a video amusement device permit shall supervise the use
and operation of the video amusement device to prevent its use or operation for
any purpose contrary to this article or any other applicable city, State, or
federal law or requirement.
(Added by Ord. 25-28)
§ 34-18.6 Permits—General provisions.
(a)   Required information. All permits must contain information regarding the
permittee’s identity.
(b)   Permit display.
(1)   All video amusement device permits issued pursuant to this article must
be:
(A)   Displayed so as to be visible to the public at all times such device is
in a location available to the public; or
(B)   Visible to the public in the same location as the permitted video
amusement device.
(2)   The entire video amusement device permit must be visible.
(3)   The permit must be displayed at all times that a video amusement device
is available for display or operation.
(c)   Permit location not transferable. Video amusement device permits allow
the operation of a video amusement device at the location specified in the
application and is not transferable.
(d)   Permits not transferable. Video amusement device permits are not
transferable.
(e)   Applicability of other laws and requirements.  Nothing in this article
may be construed to lessen or abrogate any city, State, or federal law or
requirement.
(Added by Ord. 25-28)
§ 34-18.7 Inspection of video amusement devices, records, and location.
(a)   Any person issued a video amusement device permit under this article, or
operator in which a permitted video amusement device is located, must allow a
police officer, or any other authorized city officer or employee, to enter the
location for the limited purposes of inspecting records, video amusement
devices, and premises regulated under this article to ensure compliance with
this article.
(b)   Inspections may only be conducted during the normal business hours of the
location or at any time the devices are made available to the public.
(c)   Failure to allow an inspection will be grounds for suspension or
revocation of a video amusement device permit.
(Added by Ord. 25-28)
§ 34-18.8 Prohibited conduct.
   A person who has been issued a video amusement device permit or who is in
control of a video amusement device may not display an expired permit.
(Added by Ord. 25-28)
§ 34-18.9 Permit suspension or revocation.
(a)   The chief of police may suspend or revoke any video amusement device
permit upon finding reasonable grounds to believe, based upon an investigation,
that:
(1)   Cause exists that would otherwise be grounds for the denial of the
permit; or
(2)   An intentional or knowing violation by the permittee of this article has
occurred.
(b)   A suspension or revocation of a video amusement device permit will not
become effective until the permittee is served with written notice of the
suspension or revocation, the reasons therefor, and the limited right of appeal
pursuant to §
34-18.13, either personally or by delivery or posting of the notice at the
location of the involved video amusement device or business. The suspension or
revocation may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal as provided in
§
34-18.13.
(Added by Ord. 25-28)
§ 34-18.10 Forfeiture.
   Property used in violation of this article mustl be authorized to be seized
and forfeited pursuant to HRS Chapter 712A.
(Added by Ord. 25-28)
§ 34-18.11 Enforcement—Implementation.
(a)   The chief of police is authorized to enforce this chapter.
(b)   The chief of police is authorized to issue a corrective warning to any
operator to comply with this article.
(c)   The chief of police may adopt procedures and forms necessary to implement
this chapter.
(Added by Ord. 25-28)
§ 34-18.12 Penalties.
(a)   Any person who violates intentionally or knowingly violates this article
or any condition of a video amusement device permit at a location operating
five or fewer video amusement devices will be guilty of a violation.
(b)   Any person who violates intentionally or knowingly violates this article
or any condition of a video amusement device permit at a location operating 19
or fewer video amusement devices will be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
(c)   Any person who violates intentionally or knowingly violates this article
or any condition of a video amusement device permit at a location operating 20
or more video amusement devices will be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Added by Ord. 25-28)
§ 34-18.13 Appeals.
(a)   Any person aggrieved by the police chief’s decision to deny, revoke, or
suspend a permit may file an appeal.
(b)   The notice of appeal must be filed with the chief of police within 10
days of receiving the notice of the decision. The notice of appeal must state
the name and address of the appellant to which all required notices should be
mailed. The notice of appeal must also indicate the reasons why the appealed
action was wrong and what the correct determination should be.
(c)   The appeal will be subject to the contested case procedures of HRS
Chapter 91 and heard by a hearings officer appointed by the chief of police.
The chief of police shall appoint as the hearing officer a city executive
branch officer or employee who did not participate in the appealed decision.
(Added by Ord. 25-28)
§ 34-18.14 Rules.
   The chief of police may adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 for the
implementation, administration, and enforcement of this article.
(Added by Ord. 25-28)
§ 34-18.15 Conflict with State law.
   Nothing in this article is intended to conflict with the provisions of State
law concerning gambling, gambling devices, or lotteries. In the event of direct
and express conflict between this article and State law, State law controls.
(Added by Ord. 25-28)
CHAPTER 35: RESERVED
 
CHAPTER 36: COMMON CARRIERS
Articles
   
1.   Taxicabs
   
2.   Reserved
   
3.   Reserved
   
4.   Reserved
   
5.   Pedicab
   
6.   Private Transportation Companies, Vehicles, and Drivers
ARTICLE 1: TAXICABS
Sections
   
36-1.1   Purpose—Scope—Definitions
   
36-1.2   Establishment of road taxi stands—Fees
   
36-1.3   Director of customer services—Authority
   
36-1.4   Prohibited acts
   
36-1.5   Fraudulent call and nonpayment
   
36-1.6   Bulky items
   
36-1.7   Disorderly persons
   
36-1.8   Taximeters
   
36-1.9   Director to establish rate of fare and baggage
charge—Exceptions—Conditions—Receipt required upon request
   
36-1.10   Special operations
   
36-1.11   Trip records
   
36-1.12   Soiling of taxicab
   
36-1.13   Condition of taxicabs
   
36-1.14   Taxi sign
   
36-1.15   Violation—Penalty
   
36-1.16   Severability
   
36-1.17   Taxicab certification numbers
   
36-1.18   Trip route
   
36-1.19   Evidence of financial responsibility
   
36-1.20   Shared-ride service
   
36-1.21   Loading and unloading passengers
   
36-1.22   No smoking prohibition in taxicabs
§ 36-1.1 Purpose—Scope—Definitions.
(a)   Because the transporting of passengers or property for hire in a taxicab
is a vital and integral part of the public transportation system in the city,
it shall be supervised, regulated, and controlled exclusively pursuant to this
article.
(b)   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Cruising. The movement or standing of a taxicab on a public highway or at a
public place, for the purpose of searching for or soliciting a passenger for
hire.
Director. The director of customer services or the director’s duly authorized
subordinates.
Passenger for Hire. A person transported in a taxicab for consideration.
Property for Hire. Property transported in a taxicab for consideration.
Road Taxi Stand. A space set aside on a public street or city-controlled
facility by the council for the exclusive use of taxicabs.
Shared-Ride Taxicab. A taxicab used in transporting passengers to and from
unrelated locations, which locations may be other than terminals or fixed
stands.
Taxicab. A vehicle that is manufactured to carry no more than eight passengers
(excluding the driver), operated by a taxicab driver, that is:
(1)   Used in the movement of passengers for hire on the public highways;
(2)   Directed to a destination by the passenger for hire or on the passenger’s
behalf; and
(3)   Operated on call or demand.
Taxicab Company. Any person or entity which rents or leases taxicabs to
certified taxi drivers to be used or operated as taxicabs, or which operates as
a central dispatch service for one or more taxicabs.
Taxicab Driver. A person duly licensed as a driver of a motor vehicle who has
obtained a valid taxicab driver’s certificate from the department or has been
certified by a taxicab company.
Total Stoppage. The complete halting of bus transportation service furnished by
a public bus system, resulting from a labor strike or a disaster, or both.
Waiting Time. The period during which a taxicab is standing at the direction of
or on behalf of a passenger for hire and the time consumed due to traffic
delays while transporting a passenger for hire, which time is automatically
computed by the taximeter when the speed of the vehicle falls at or below the
speed at which the fare computed using the basic distance rate is equal to the
fare computed using the basic time rate.
(Sec. 12-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, §
12-1.1) (Am. Ords. 88-98, 05-005, 16-25, 16-38)
§ 36-1.2 Establishment of road taxi stands—Fees.
(a)   The council shall establish road taxi stands on public streets and city-
controlled facilities upon recommendation of the department of transportation
services. The department of transportation services shall study and recommend
to the council the site placement of such stands. The director shall issue,
upon application therefor on forms furnished by the director and upon the
payment of annual fees as provided in this chapter, permits for the parking of
taxicabs. A permit, deemed granted upon approval of the application, shall
expire on June 30 of the year issued. However, an application for the renewal
of such permit for the following year may be made on or after June 1 and
approval thereof may be granted upon the payment of the permit fee. The permit
shall be evidenced by an appropriate decal furnished by the director, which
shall be placed as near as practicable on the upper right corner of the front
bumper.
(b)   The director shall charge and collect an annual fee of $120 for each
permit, and a fee of $1 for each decal; provided that where the application for
such permit is made in any month other than July, the permit fee shall be
reduced by $10 for each full month of the then permit year, which shall have
elapsed at time of the application; provided further, that when an annual
permit fee has already been paid on the vehicle and that vehicle is within the
year replaced by another vehicle, the unexpired portion of the permit fee
payable for the substitute vehicle and for the purpose hereof, the unexpired
portion of the permit fee shall be reduced by $10 for each full month remaining
of the current permit year. Where a decal is mutilated, defaced, or lost, a
replacement decal shall be issued upon payment of $1. The sums collected shall
be deposited in the highway fund.
(Sec. 12-1.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.2) (Am.
Ord. 88-98)
§ 36-1.3 Director of customer services—Authority.
   The director is authorized to adopt rules not inconsistent with this
chapter, having the force and effect of law, as provided for in HRS Chapter 91,
in the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
(Sec. 12-1.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.3) (Am.
Ords. 05-005, 16-25, 16-38)
§ 36-1.4 Prohibited acts.
(a)   Backing from and into a taxi stand. No person shall back a taxicab from a
taxi stand onto a public highway. No person shall back a taxicab from a public
highway into a taxi stand where it is otherwise legally possible to maneuver
such taxicab so as to thereafter emerge from the taxi stand without backing
onto the highway.
(b)   Intoxicating liquor. Intoxicating liquor, as defined by HRS § 281-1, as
amended, shall not be carried in any taxicab during the business hours of such
taxicab, except as the property of a passenger riding in the taxicab, or as
property for hire.
(c)   Responding to calls. The operator of a taxicab or taxicab company shall
not refuse to furnish an unengaged, available taxicab and driver during the
business hours of such taxicab or taxicab company upon call or request from an
orderly person located within 2 miles of such stand, by the most direct street
route. No taxicab driver, while on duty and not engaged in another call, shall
fail to drive an available taxicab in response to a call or request from an
orderly person.
(d)   Additional passengers. Except as provided in §
36-1.20 relating to shared-ride taxicab service, additional passengers shall
not be picked up without the consent of all the passengers for hire, already in
the taxicab. The fare of the additional passengers for hire shall be based upon
a new taximeter reading from the point of departure of the last departing
passenger for hire to the destination of the additional passengers for hire.
(e)   Kickbacks.
(1)   Taxicab companies and drivers are prohibited from paying kickbacks to
hotel doorpersons or other persons that dispatch taxicabs. It shall also be
unlawful for a hotel doorperson or other person to solicit or receive such a
kickback from a taxicab company or taxi driver. This provision shall not apply
to legitimate commissions paid to tour and travel companies, legitimate
payments to taxicab companies, or salaries or wages paid to dispatchers
employed by taxicab companies.
(2)   For the purpose of this subsection, “kickback” means a payment by a
taxicab company or driver to a hotel doorperson or other person who dispatches
the taxicab company or driver to carry a passenger for hire, property for hire,
or both, when the payment is required, explicitly or implicitly, by the hotel
doorperson or other person as consideration for the dispatch.
(Sec. 12-1.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.4) (Am.
Ords. 88-98, 89-13, 93-85)
§ 36-1.5 Fraudulent call and nonpayment.
   It is unlawful for any person to call for a taxicab for purposes of hire
without intending to use such taxicab or to use a taxicab for hire without
intending to pay the legal fare upon completion of the trip.
(Sec. 12-1.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.5)
§ 36-1.6 Bulky items.
   A taxicab driver may refuse to transport any item not capable of being
transported within the confines of the rear passenger compartments or the trunk
of the taxicab.
(Sec. 12-1.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.6)
§ 36-1.7 Disorderly persons.
   Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, the operator of a taxicab
stand may refuse to dispatch a taxicab to, and a taxicab driver may refuse to
furnish transportation to, a disorderly person.
(Sec. 12-1.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.7)
§ 36-1.8 Taximeters.
(a)   Installation. Each taxicab shall be equipped with a digital electronic
taximeter calibrated to charge the current fare established pursuant to §
36-1.9 and which shall meet or exceed the requirements of subsection (b).
(b)   The specifications, tolerances, and other technical requirements relating
thereto shall be as established by the State division of weights and measures.
The operation, visibility, lighting, and inspection will conform to all
applicable State laws or regulations.
(c)   Inspection. No driver, owner, or operator of a taxicab or taxi stand
shall use or cause to be used a taxicab for purposes of hire before the
taximeter, installed therein, has been inspected for accuracy in accordance
with all applicable laws and regulations.
(d)   Current rates. No driver, owner, or operator of a taxicab or taxi stand
shall use or cause to be used for purposes of hire, a taxicab installed with a
taximeter not reflecting the current rates.
(Sec. 12-1.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.8) (Am.
Ords. 88-98, 90-84)
§ 36-1.9 Director to establish rate of fare and baggage
charge—Exceptions—Conditions—Receipt required upon request.
(a)   The maximum fares and baggage charges that may be charged to passengers
of taxicabs shall be established by the director. The fares and charges shall
be established by rules adopted by the director. The fares and charges shall be
reviewed by the director at least once every two years following January 1,
1992 and shall be amended, as necessary, to reflect changes in the private
transportation component of the consumer price index for Honolulu, as
determined by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics; provided that the director
may amend the fares and charges more frequently than once every two years if
deemed necessary.
(b)   In addition to the fares and charges established in subsection (a), the
director may establish a fuel surcharge for taxicab operators to be charged to
passengers. Every six months, the director shall determine whether a fuel
surcharge should be established based on any increase in the base amount and
the average fuel prices. Any fuel surcharge shall be established by rules
adopted by the director pursuant to HRS Chapter 91.
(c)   The fares or charges established pursuant to this section shall be
subject to the following exceptions or conditions, whichever the case may be:
(1)   When fares or charges permitted. Fares are only applicable to the use of
the taxicab when actually occupied by or standing at the direction of the
passenger for hire or when occupied by parcels or baggage transported for hire;
provided that no other charges shall be made for the use of a taxicab for hire
except as provided herein.
(2)   Posting of fares and charges. The schedule of fares and charges
established pursuant to this section shall be printed in bold type letters, not
less than 3/16 of an inch in height, posted within 12 inches of the taximeters
and readily visible to all passengers for hire.
(3)   Exceptions and conditions for use of fares and charges lower than those
established. A taxicab driver or taxicab company may adjust the meters on a
taxicab so that a lower fare or charge may be assessed than those established
pursuant to this section; provided, that if a taxicab driver or taxicab company
owns or operates more than one taxicab, all of the taxicabs shall have their
taximeters adjusted to the lower fare or charge; and provided further, that
such lower fare or charge shall be posted as prescribed in subdivision (2). The
taxicab driver or taxicab company may waive the baggage charges established
pursuant to this section.
(4)   This section shall not be construed to preclude a taxicab driver or
taxicab company from charging a passenger less than the amount due indicated by
the taximeter.
(5)   The fares for shared-ride taxicab service shall be established by the
tariff filed under §
36-1.20, rather than the fares and charges established pursuant to this
section.
(d)   Receipt required upon request.
(1)   At the end of the taxicab trip, the operator shall, upon request, provide
at least one passenger with a receipt that records the following information:
origin, destination, time, and date of the taxicab service; all fares and
charges; the name of the taxicab operator, printed or written, so that it is
legible; the printed name and telephone number of the taxicab company; a
telephone number, as designated by the director, to call for the filing of
complaints; and any other information deemed necessary by the director.
(2)   All taxicab receipt forms shall be approved by the director before use by
a taxicab company.
(Sec. 12-1.11, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1,
§ 12-1.10) (Am. Ords. 88-98, 90-84, 93-85, 94-87, 05-005, 08-9)
§ 36-1.10 Special operations.
   Notwithstanding any provision contained herein to the contrary, any taxicab
operator may operate the taxicab operator’s taxicab as a jitney during a public
bus service total stoppage subject to the following:
(1)   The fare per passenger shall be no more than twice the current per-trip
adult city bus fare;
(2)   The taxicab operator may operate the taxicab as a jitney only along
existing public bus service routes; provided that the director is authorized to
add new jitney routes in addition to the routes mentioned in this section
whenever the director has sufficient evidence that the public, using the public
transit service, is desirous of having such additional jitney routes for their
convenience;
(3)   There shall be prominently displayed on the taxicab being operated as a
jitney a sign reading “jitney” and indicating the fare per passenger, which
shall be facing outward so it shall be visible by potential passengers and such
signs shall be furnished by the director;
(4)   The loading or unloading of passengers shall take place only at
established public bus service bus stops along the routes prescribed herein;
and
(5)   A baggage fee may be assessed during jitney operations according to the
fee for baggage established pursuant to §
36-1.9.
(Sec. 12-1.12, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.11)
(Am. Ords. 88-98, 90-84)
§ 36-1.11 Trip records.
(a)   All taxicab drivers shall keep a trip record containing the following
entries:
(1)   Number of passengers, time (to the minute), date, and odometer reading
when leaving the boarding point;
(2)   The time (to the minute), date, fare charged, and odometer reading at the
discharge point; and
(3)   The time (to the minute), date, and odometer reading of departure and
return to taxi stand when making trips for a personal purpose.
(b)   The trip record shall be open to inspection by the director during
regular business hours in accordance with rules adopted by the director.
(Sec. 12-1.13, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.12)
(Am. Ord. 05-005)
§ 36-1.12 Soiling of taxicab.
   A taxicab driver may require a passenger for hire, whose condition may be
likely to soil the seats of the taxicab, to sit upon protective material
furnished by such driver. Upon noncompliance with the request, the taxicab
driver may refuse to transport such passenger.
(Sec. 12-1.14, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.13)
§ 36-1.13 Condition of taxicabs.
   No vehicle shall be operated as a taxicab, unless it is in a reasonably
clean and safe condition inside, so as not to damage the person, clothing, or
possessions of a passenger. The vehicle’s exterior shall be reasonably clean
and shall be essentially free from cracks, breaks, and major dents. It shall be
painted to provide adequate protection and appearance. Each operating wheel
shall be equipped with hub caps or wheel covers. Repairs done to comply with
this section shall be done within a reasonable time based on availability of
parts and labor.
(Sec. 12-1.15, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.14)
§ 36-1.14 Taxi sign.
   A taxicab shall be identified with a sign (which may be a dome light sign)
on the roof of the taxicab. The name of the individual owning or operating the
taxicab or the name of the firm shall be shown on the front of the sign and it
will be optional to place either the name or telephone number of such
individual or firm on the rear of the sign. Such sign may have flashing
actuators. A taxicab driver may actuate such sign to call for police or other
assistance in cases when a robbery is in progress. The use of a flashing dome
light, except to signal when a robbery is in progress, shall be in violation of
§
15-19.22, traffic code of the City and County of Honolulu. Except as provided
herein, the type, design, and placement of the sign shall be as specified by
the director. The sign may be a detachable type so that it may be removed when
the vehicle is not used for taxicab purposes.
(Sec. 12-1.17, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.16)
(Am. Ord. 05-005)
§ 36-1.15 Violation—Penalty.
   The director, or any person or agency designated by the director, may issue
citations to taxicab drivers in violation of any provision of this article.
   Any person or entity violating this article and cited by any enforcement
officer or the director shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine
not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding one year, or to
both such fine and imprisonment per violation.
   Any person or entity violating this article and cited by the director, shall
be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 per violation and shall not be
duplicative of any fine issued after conviction. The director is authorized to
adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 to implement and enforce this section.
(Sec. 12-1.18, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.17)
(Am. Ord. 16-38)
§ 36-1.16 Severability.
   This article is declared to be severable. In accordance therewith, if any
portion of the article is held invalid for any reason, the validity of any
other portion of this article shall not be affected and if the application of
any portion of this article to any person, property, or circumstance is held
invalid, the application hereof to any other person, property, or circumstance
shall not be affected.
(Sec. 12-1.20, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.19)
§ 36-1.17 Taxicab certification numbers.
   No person may operate a taxicab unless the taxicab is clearly identified and
marked as prescribed herein with a taxicab certification number assigned by the
director. The taxicab certification number shall be prominently posted on the
exterior surfaces of the front and rear bumpers and on the sign or dome light,
described in §
36-1.14, of the taxicab. The taxicab certification number posted on the taxicab
as prescribed in this section must be no less than 2 inches in height, and must
conform to such other requirements or specifications as the director may
prescribe by rule.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.20) (Added by Ord. 88-98; Am. Ords. 93-85,
16-38)
§ 36-1.18 Trip route.
   No operator of a taxicab may transport a passenger, except to the requested
trip destination by the most direct or economical route, unless specifically
instructed or agreed to by the passenger.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.21) (Added by Ord. 88-98)
§ 36-1.19 Evidence of financial responsibility.
(a)   The director shall require evidence of financial responsibility from the
owner or operator, or both, of a taxicab company before issuing a taxicab
license and decal to engage in the taxicab business. The owner or operator, or
both, shall have insurance in force or other evidence of financial
responsibility, so long as the taxicab is used in business. Such evidence of
financial responsibility may be in one of the following two forms:
(1)   Insurance policy.
(A)   The director shall retain the original insurance policy issued by a
company licensed to do business in the State of Hawaii. The policy shall be
duly countersigned by its authorized Hawaii agent complete with all
endorsements and attachments or a certified copy thereof. Such policy shall
provide for primary public liability insurance coverage in the amount of
$100,000 because of bodily injury to or death of one person in any accident,
and in the amount of $200,000 because of bodily injury to or death of two or
more persons in any one accident, and property damage insurance in the amount
of $50,000 because of damage to or destruction of property of others in any one
accident for each taxicab for hire. All policies must be valid for the duration
of the taxicab business license. Insurance policies on vehicles regulated under
this article shall contain a provision that the policy will not be reduced in
coverage or canceled without 30 calendar days’ prior written notice to the
director by the authorized Hawaii agent for the insurance company.
(B)   The director may accept a binder for the issuance of an insurance policy
in lieu of the policy itself for a period not exceeding 90 days; provided that
the binder indicates that the policy shall be in conformance with the
requirements of this paragraph; provided further that a binder shall not be
accepted in lieu of a policy for an owner or operator, or both, who has
canceled or has had canceled an insurance policy referred to in this
subdivision within the previous three years.
(2)   Legal tender or other securities. A deposit with the director of legal
tender, cashier’s check, bank draft, irrevocable letter of credit, certified
check, bond, or other security determined to be satisfactory by the director in
the total amount of $200,000. Such security shall be held by and made payable
to the director and shall not expire for a period of 2 years after the
termination of the taxicab license for the taxicab carrying passengers or
property for hire. The licensee shall not receive interest for such deposit.
Upon expiration of such two-year period, the licensee shall be refunded the
deposit or balance thereof, provided no suit against the proceeds of such
security has been commenced during such period. The conditions of liability for
the security in this subdivision shall be the same as specified for the policy
of insurance contained in this section. The director shall satisfy from the
proceeds of such security any judgment against the licensee or operator, or
both, arising from the operation of a taxicab for hire. Neither the city, its
officers, employees, agents, or appointees shall be liable to the licensee or
operator, or both, for any payments made pursuant to such judgment.
(b)   If at any time after the issuance of the taxicab license and license
decal:
(1)   The required insurance coverage is reduced or canceled and the licensee
fails to immediately replace such coverage with the securities described in
subsection (a); or
(2)   The security deposited with the director falls below the required amount
as a result of claims satisfied against the licensee and the licensee fails to
immediately replenish such security to the required amount, the director shall
revoke or suspend the taxicab license and license decal.
(c)   If a binder is accepted in lieu of an insurance policy, and a policy
which conforms to the requirements of subsection (a)(1) is not provided to the
director within 90 days of issuance of the taxicab license and taxicab decal,
the director shall revoke or suspend the taxicab license and taxicab decal.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.23) (Added by Ord. 88-98; Am. Ords. 89-54,
93-85)
§ 36-1.20 Shared-ride service.
(a)   Notwithstanding any provision in this article to the contrary, any
taxicab company or operator may provide shared-ride taxicab service, whether or
not using vehicles, such as multi-passenger vans and limousines.
(b)   A taxicab company or operator which offers shared-ride taxicab services
shall file a tariff of shared-ride services and fares with the director. The
tariff may include fares classified according to the type of vehicle used, such
as multi-passenger vans and limousines.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.24) (Added by Ord. 88-98)
§ 36-1.21 Loading and unloading passengers.
   Notwithstanding any provision in
Chapter 15 to the contrary relating to the prohibition of parking, stopping,
standing, loading, or unloading in tow zones, taxicabs may load or unload
passengers for hire or property for hire in such tow zones; provided that such
loading or unloading shall not exceed 30 seconds.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.25) (Added by Ord. 88-98)
§ 36-1.22 No smoking prohibition in taxicabs.
(a)   Any taxicab company or a taxicab driver may elect to prohibit smoking in
the company’s or driver’s taxicab while in service. Any taxicab designated as a
nonsmoking taxicab shall display the international “no smoking” emblem
characterized by a lit cigarette within a red circle with a red slash line
drawn through the cigarette in the following locations:
(1)   Inside the taxicab on the glove compartment so that it is visible to any
person seated in the front passenger seat area and on the back of the front
seat so that it is visible to any passenger seated in the rear seat of the
taxicab; and
(2)   Outside the taxicab below each of the passenger door handles or affixed
to the upper part of the windows of each passenger door. Such exterior emblems
may be a plastic decal, magnetic, or painted directly on the vehicle doors or
windows. The no smoking emblem in the interior and on the exterior of taxicabs
must be at least 3 inches in diameter.
(b)   Notwithstanding §
36-1.4(c), the driver of a taxicab displaying the no smoking emblems required
by subsection (a) may refuse to transport any person who refuses to comply with
the ban on smoking in the taxicab.
(c)   A taxicab driver or taxicab company may waive the no smoking prohibition
in the company’s or driver’s taxicab.
(d)   It is unlawful for any person to smoke in any taxicab designated as a
nonsmoking taxicab pursuant to this section. Any person violating this
subsection shall be punished by a fine of not more than $20 for each violation.
Section 36-1.15 shall not apply to a violation of this subsection.
(e)   Enforcement of subsection (d) shall be under the jurisdiction of the
police department, which shall have the same authority with respect thereto to
issue summonses or citations and to eject persons from taxicabs as is provided
in subsections (a) and (d) of §
41-14.6.
(f)   As used in this section, “smoke” or “smoking” has the same meaning as is
defined in §
41-14.1.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.26) (Added by Ord. 93-88)
ARTICLE 2: RESERVED
ARTICLE 3: RESERVED
ARTICLE 4: RESERVED
ARTICLE 5: PEDICAB
Sections
   
36-5.1   Definitions
   
36-5.2   Business license—Issuance—Fee—Surrender
   
36-5.3   License—Decal
   
36-5.4   Bicycle license and tag
   
36-5.5   Evidence of financial responsibility
   
36-5.6   Certificate for pedicab operator for hire
   
36-5.7   Compliance with all applicable provisions of the traffic code
   
36-5.8   Prohibited acts
   
36-5.9   Fares
   
36-5.10   Establishment of road pedicab stands
   
36-5.11   Limitation of pedicabs
   
36-5.12   Condition of pedicabs for hire
   
36-5.13   Authority of director of budget and fiscal services
   
36-5.14   Transportation of bulky items
   
36-5.15   Disorderly persons
   
36-5.16   Soiling of pedicab
   
36-5.17   Violation—Penalty
   
36-5.18   Business license, operator’s certificate or application—Notice of
suspension, revocation, or denial—Hearing—Review
   
36-5.19   Severability
§ 36-5.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Chief of Police. The chief of police of the City and County of Honolulu, or the
chief of police’s duly authorized subordinates.
Director of Budget and Fiscal Services. The director of budget and fiscal
services or the director of budget and fiscal services’s duly authorized
representatives.
Director of Transportation Services. The director of transportation services or
the director of transportation’s duly authorized representatives.
Passenger for Hire. A person transported in a pedicab for consideration.
Pedicab. A multi-wheeled hooded or unhooded passenger vehicle that is moved by
human power or any pushcart or rickshaw-type vehicle with two wheels pulled or
propelled by any person, which is used in the movement of passengers or
property for hire on the public highways, and which is directed to a
destination by the passenger for hire or on the passenger’s behalf, and which
operates on call, demand, or on a schedule.
Pedicab Operator. A person duly licensed as the operator of a pedicab who has
obtained a valid pedicab operator’s certificate.
Property for Hire. Property transported in a pedicab for consideration.
Road Pedicab Stand. A space set aside on a public street or city-controlled
facility by the council for the exclusive use of pedicabs.
Waiting Time. The period during which a pedicab is standing at the direction of
or on behalf of a passenger for hire and the time consumed due to traffic
delays while transporting a passenger for hire.
(Sec. 12-5.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.1)
§ 36-5.2 Business license—Issuance—Fee—Surrender.
(a)   Issuance.
(1)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall issue business licenses
for pedicabs for hire and collect the required fees in accordance with this
article and any other applicable provisions of the law.
(2)   The issued business licenses shall not be transferable and shall be
mounted within the cab so that they are readily visible to all passengers.
(b)   Fees.
(1)   The annual fee for a business license for a pedicab shall be $26 per
vehicle; provided that when a business license fee has already been paid on a
vehicle and that vehicle is, within the year, replaced by another vehicle, the
unexpired portion of the business license fee paid on the vehicle so replaced
shall be credited to the business license fee payable for the substitute
vehicle. For the purposes hereof, the unexpired portion of the business license
fee paid on the vehicle which has been replaced shall be that portion of the
annual fee which is equal to 8-1/3 percent of the fee multiplied by the number
of full months remaining during the current licensing year. The business
licensing year shall start on July 1 and terminate on June 30, the year
following.
Whenever a vehicle licensed as a pedicab is replaced by another vehicle under
this article, the sum of $6 in addition to the business license fee shall be
assessed against the owner of the vehicle so replaced to defray the
administrative costs incurred by the city.
      The sums collected shall be deposited in the general fund.
(2)   Upon surrender, the license shall be canceled.
(c)   Surrender and cancellation.
(1)   The holder of a business license for a pedicab shall immediately
surrender the license to the director of budget and fiscal services:
(A)   Upon close out, transfer, or reassignment of the business for which a
license has been issued. The director of budget and fiscal services shall be
notified in writing within 30 calendar days of such closing out, transfer, or
reassignment; and
(B)   If in the interim, the vehicle is taken out of service permanently for
any reason.
(2)   Upon surrender, the license for a pedicab shall be canceled.
(Sec. 12-5.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.2) (Am.
Ord. 92-70)
§ 36-5.3 License—Decal.
(a)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall annually furnish the
owner of a pedicab a business license decal similar to that currently issued in
the licensing of taxis and buses upon the payment of $2, which shall be valid
until June 30 next following the date of issue.
(b)   The sums collected shall be deposited in the general fund.
(c)   The decal is partly for identification of the pedicab. It shall be large
enough to be legible from a reasonable distance.
(d)   The decal shall be fastened or displayed on the rear of the vehicle for
which it was issued. The decal shall be kept reasonably clean and displayed
entirely unobscured.
(e)   The decal shall be nontransferable and shall be removed and returned to
the director of budget and fiscal services for destruction upon the
termination, transfer, or reassignment of the business.
(f)   No pedicab shall be operated on a public highway or other public property
without a pedicab decal issued to that pedicab. All violators shall be cited by
the chief of police.
(g)   Any person who uses a license or decal not furnished in accordance with
this article or uses any license or decal described in such article for two
consecutive years, or who counterfeits any such license or decal or who
fraudulently removes such a license or decal from any pedicab shall be fined
not more than $1,000.
(Sec. 12-5.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.3) (Am.
Ord. 92-70)
§ 36-5.4 Bicycle license and tag.
   No provisions in this part shall be construed to relieve a pedicab owner
from complying with the requirements of HRS § 249-14, relating to bicycle tax.
(Sec. 12-5.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.4)
§ 36-5.5 Evidence of financial responsibility.
(a)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall require evidence of
financial responsibility from the owner or operator, or both, of the pedicab
for hire before issuing a business license and decal to engage in a pedicab for
hire. The owner or operator, or both, shall have insurance in force or other
evidence of financial responsibility so long as the pedicab is used in
business.
(b)   Such evidence of financial responsibility may be in one of the following
two methods.
(1)   Insurance policy. The director of budget and fiscal services shall retain
the original insurance policy issued by a company licensed to do business in
the State of Hawaii. The policy shall be duly countersigned by its authorized
Hawaii agent complete with all endorsements and attachments or a certified copy
thereof. Such policy shall provide for primary public liability insurance
coverage in the amount of $100,000 because of bodily injury to or death of one
person in any accident, and in the amount of $200,000 because of bodily injury
to or death of two or more persons in any one accident, and property damage
insurance in the amount of $20,000 because of damage to or destruction of
property of others in any one accident for each pedicab for hire. All policies
shall be on a fiscal year basis ending on June 30 of each year. Insurance
policies on vehicles regulated under this article shall contain a provision
that the policy will not be reduced in coverage or canceled without 30 calendar
days’ prior written notice to the director of budget and fiscal services by the
authorized Hawaii agent for the insurance company.
(2)   Legal tender or other securities. A deposit with the director of budget
and fiscal services of legal tender, cashier’s check, bank draft, irrevocable
letter of credit, certified check, bond, or other security determined to be
satisfactory by the director of budget and fiscal services in the total amount
of $200,000. Such security shall be held by and made payable to the director of
budget and fiscal services and shall not expire for a period of 2 years after
the termination of the business license for the secured pedicab carrying
passengers or property for hire. The licensee shall not receive interest for
such deposit. Upon expiration of such two-year period, the licensee shall be
refunded the deposit or balance thereof, provided no suit against the proceeds
of such security has been commenced during such period. The conditions of
liability for the security in this subsection shall be the same as specified
for policy of insurance contained hereinabove. The director of budget and
fiscal services shall satisfy from the proceeds of such security any judgment
against the licensee or operator, or both, arising from the operation of a
pedicab for hire. Neither the city, its officers, employees, agents, or
appointees shall be liable to the licensee or operator, or both, for any
payments made pursuant to such judgment.
(3)   Revocation of business license and license decal. If, at any time after
the issuance of the business license and license decal:
(A)   The required insurance coverage is reduced or canceled and the licensee
fails to immediately replace such coverage with the securities described in
subdivision (2); or
(B)   The security deposited with the director of budget and fiscal services
falls below the required amount as a result of claims satisfied against the
licensee and the licensee fails to immediately replenish the proceeds of such
security to the required amount; the director of budget and fiscal services
shall revoke or suspend the business license and license decal. Such revocation
shall be done in accordance with §
36-5.13(a).
(Sec. 12-5.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.5)
§ 36-5.6 Certificate for pedicab operator for hire.
(a)   No operator of a pedicab shall use or cause to be used, for purpose of
hire, a pedicab which does not have an operator’s certificate mounted within
the pedicab at a location fixed by the director of budget and fiscal services
so as to be visible from within and from outside the cab. The certificate for
an operator of a pedicab for hire shall be issued by the director of budget and
fiscal services. The face of the certificate shall contain a photograph of the
operator to be furnished by the operator, the operator’s name, and the
operator’s number, which shall be issued and stamped on the certificate by the
director of budget and fiscal services. Any other information specified by the
director of budget and fiscal services shall be placed on the back of the
pedicab operator’s certificate. The operator’s certificate shall be laminated
in plastic or so constructed so as to make alteration difficult. The photograph
shall be unretouched and must show a reasonable likeness of the operator. It
shall be a violation of this article for any person to alter such operator’s
certificate.
(b)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall collect a fee of $25 for
the issuance of each original operator’s certificate, and $2 for each duplicate
operator’s certificate, which will authorize the parking of one pedicab in one
authorized sidewalk pedicab stand and in one road pedicab stand. The sums
collected shall be deposited in the general fund.
(c)   No certificate for an operator of a pedicab shall be issued to any
person, unless such person has:
(1)   Satisfactorily passed an examination showing:
(A)   A sufficient understanding of the traffic laws or ordinances of the city,
and this article;
(B)   A sufficient understanding of the locations of streets, roads, and
highways within the city; and
(C)   A sufficient understanding of the English language by successfully
completing this examination;
(2)   Complied with the rules adopted by the director of budget and fiscal
services relating to moral character and physical fitness of the applicant
based on prior records or certified documents relative thereto; and
(3)   Obtained a State general excise tax license.
The director of budget and fiscal services shall furnish every pedicab operator
a copy of this article and any other pertinent laws and rules for information
and guidance. The cost shall be included in the $25 operator’s certificate fee.
(d)   Every pedicab operator’s certificate issued under this section shall
expire, unless otherwise revoked, one year after the issuance thereof and shall
be renewed on or before its expiration date upon meeting the standards set in
subsection (c), to determine the fitness of the applicant to continue as a
pedicab operator for hire by the director of budget and fiscal services. A new
set of unretouched photographs showing a reasonable likeness of the operator
shall be furnished with each application for renewal.
(e)   Whenever the operator’s certificate of any pedicab operator is suspended
or revoked, the director of budget and fiscal services shall require that the
pedicab operator’s certificate be surrendered to and be retained by the
director of budget and fiscal services, except that at the end of the period of
suspension, the certificate so surrendered shall be returned to the licensee.
(Sec. 12-5.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.6) (Am.
Ords. 92-70, 94-11)
§ 36-5.7 Compliance with all applicable provisions of the traffic code.
(a)   Pursuant to §
15-4.5, every person operating a pedicab shall be subject to provisions of
Chapter 15 (traffic code), as amended, applicable to the driver of any vehicle,
except those provisions which by their very nature, can have no application.
This is not to be interpreted to authorize pedicabs to travel at low speeds in
the fast lanes of traffic; to cut in and out of traffic abruptly; to travel
counter to the normal flow of traffic; to disregard traffic signals, markings,
and signs; to use the wrong side of the street; to block traffic and
pedestrians; to use sidewalks for any purpose, except as specifically
authorized; to stop or park, except in authorized places; to go the wrong way
on one-way streets; or to authorize any other uses not legally allowed the
operator (driver) of any other private vehicle. The preceding acts by pedicab
operators are specifically prohibited and violators shall be cited by the chief
of police.
(b)   Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, no pedicab
shall be operated on any sidewalk, except as provided in other parts of this
article and below:
(1)   While in motion on a sidewalk, a pedicab shall be walked by its operator;
and
(2)   No pedicab shall be stopped, parked, or left standing, whether attended
or unattended, on any sidewalk, for any purpose, except in an authorized
pedicab stand area. All portions of the pedicab shall be within the marked
pedicab stand while so stopped, parked, or left standing.
(c)   Pedicabs shall be allowed to use exclusive bus lanes but shall at no time
interfere with, slow, or block a bus that is in the bus lane. No pedicab shall
stop in a bus lane for any period of time, reason, or purpose.
(d)   Every person operating a pedicab upon a roadway at a speed less than the
normal speed of traffic moving in the same direction at such time shall ride as
near to the righthand curb or edge of the roadway as practicable, exercising
due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same
direction, except under any of the following situations:
(1)   When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road
or driveway, except where prohibited by official traffic control devices; and
(2)   When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions (including but not limited
to fixed or moving objects, vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, animals, surface
hazards, etc., or substandard width lanes) that make it unsafe to continue
along the righthand curb or edge. For purposes of this section, a “substandard
width lane” is a lane that is too narrow for a pedicab and a vehicle to travel
safely side by side within the lane; or when a roadway is designated and
signposted to carry traffic in one direction only and has two or more marked
traffic lanes, a person operating a pedicab may ride as near to the left-hand
curb or edge of such roadway as practicable.
(Sec. 12-5.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.7) (Am.
Ord. 96-58)
§ 36-5.8 Prohibited acts.
   In addition to complying with various provisions contained in this article
as well as the applicable traffic code:
(1)   Pedicabs shall not be operated or allowed on sidewalks except to park in
an authorized sidewalk pedicab stand and for the purpose of crossing, for
ingress or egress to and from a public highway in the shortest time and
distance possible, and as provided in another section of this article;
(2)   No person shall back a pedicab from a public highway into a fixed stand
where it is otherwise legally possible to maneuver such pedicab so as to
thereafter emerge from the fixed stand without backing onto the highway;
(3)   There shall be no more than two passengers to a pedicab at any one time
who shall remain seated throughout the ride;
(4)   An additional passenger shall not be picked up without the consent of the
other passenger for hire already in the pedicab. The fare of the additional
passenger for hire shall be determined by the passengers for hire among
themselves. The total fare shall be the same as for one passenger;
(5)   Pedicabs shall not be parked on public property, except in those
locations specifically designated as “road pedicab stands” or in other
locations designated for the parking of vehicles. When in metered stalls, all
fees shall be paid;
(6)   Pedicabs shall not violate pedestrians’ rights-of-way at any time;
(7)   Pedicabs shall not be operated side by side with, or abreast of, each
other at any time, except when passing;
(8)   No procession, caravan, parade, or train of more than 15 shall occupy or
proceed along any street, except in accordance with a permit issued by the
director of transportation services and such other regulations as are set forth
herein and in the traffic code which may apply:
No pedicab procession, caravan, parade or train of any number shall be
permitted during the hours of 6:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. to 5:30
p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays; and
(9)   No person shall use any pedicab upon the highway, unless it is equipped
with a bell or any other device, except a siren or a whistle which are
prohibited, capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100
feet.
(Sec. 12-5.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.8)
§ 36-5.9 Fares.
(a)   Time charges. Unless reduced or waived by the pedicab operator pursuant
to subsection (d), any driver, owner, or operator of a pedicab shall charge $2
per minute for the use of a pedicab for purposes of hire per trip, regardless
of the number of passengers on the trip. The fare shall be measured by a meter,
approved by the director, calibrated to charge the current fare on a per-minute
basis. The meter shall be reset at the beginning of each trip.
(b)   Posting of fares. Signs indicating the current fare to be charged per
minute shall be in English and Japanese and shall be posted and visible from
within and from outside the cab. Information on the fare shall specify the
charge per minute on a per-trip basis. Such signs shall also indicate a 24-hour
telephone number to call for pedicab complaints. During all hours when vehicles
are required to be lighted, the signs and the meter shall also be readily
discernible to the passengers for hire. Signs posting the fares shall be
printed in bold type letters and numerals not less than 0.375 of an inch in
height, shall not be abbreviated and shall be approved by the director of
budget and fiscal services before they are mounted on the pedicab.
(c)   Fares may only be charged for the use of the pedicab when actually
occupied by the passenger for hire. No other charges shall be made for the use
of a pedicab for hire.
(d)   The collection of any charge may, at the option of the pedicab operator,
be reduced or waived.
(e)   At the end of a pedicab trip, the operator shall provide at least one
passenger with a receipt that records the passenger’s name, date of pedicab
service, the number of minutes of the pedicab trip, the fare received, the name
of the pedicab operator, and the pedicab operator’s number.
(Sec. 12-5.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.9) (Am.
Ords. 92-126, 94-11)
§ 36-5.10 Establishment of road pedicab stands.
   The council shall establish road pedicab stands on public streets and city-
controlled facilities upon recommendation of the director of transportation
services. The director of transportation services shall study and recommend to
the council the site placement of such stands. The director of budget and
fiscal services shall issue pedicab operator certificates under another section
of this article, which will automatically include pedicab stand permits. The
fees for such pedicab stand permits shall be established pursuant to law.
(Sec. 12-5.10, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.10)
§ 36-5.11 Limitation of pedicabs.
(a)   The council shall establish a limit on the number of pedicabs used to
carry fare-paying passengers for hire operating in the city upon a finding of
public convenience and necessity based on the recommendation by the director of
transportation services. The director of transportation services may
periodically recommend modification of the established limit to the council
based upon the director of transportation services’ study and review, that
shall include but not be limited to the following:
(1)   The effect on the consumer;
(2)   The number of pedicabs for hire already in operation;
(3)   Whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public needs;
(4)   The probable effect of pedicab for hire service on traffic conditions,
especially in the Waikiki resort areas;
(5)   The effect on revenues of existing holders of taxi business licenses;
(6)   The effect on the wages or compensation and working conditions of
existing pedicab licensees;
(7)   Public convenience and necessity; and
(8)   Any other facts which the director deems relevant.
(b)   After the adoption and approval of this article, there will be no
issuance of any business license for pedicabs for hire until action by the
council, or the recommendation on the limit on the number of such vehicles, is
taken.
(Sec. 12-5.11, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.11)
(Am. Ord. 14-24)
§ 36-5.12 Condition of pedicabs for hire.
   No vehicle shall be operated as a pedicab for hire, unless it is in a
reasonably clean and safe condition inside, as well as externally, so as not to
injure or damage the person, clothing, or possessions of a passenger. The
vehicles’ exterior shall be reasonably clean and shall be essentially free from
cracks, breaks, and major dents. It shall be painted to provide adequate
protection and a neat and clean appearance. Repairs done to comply with this
section shall be done within a reasonable time based on availability of parts
and labor. Every pedicab while on a public street shall carry a battery or
generator operated headlight and taillight and shall carry spoke reflectors
placed on each wheel and tape type reflectors showing the front and the back
width of the vehicle.
(Sec. 12-5.12, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.12)
§ 36-5.13 Authority of director of budget and fiscal services.
(a)   Denial, suspension, or revocation of pedicab operator’s certificate or
business license and license decal. The director of budget and fiscal services
is authorized to deny initial issuance or renewal, or suspend or revoke any
certificate for a pedicab operator for hire and to suspend or revoke any
business license and license decal if an applicant cannot meet the requirements
set forth in this article, or an operator violates any of the provisions
contained in this article. In the case of suspension or revocation of a
certificate or business license and license decal by the director of budget and
fiscal services, the pedicab operator shall be afforded notice and an
opportunity for a hearing before the suspension or revocation, pursuant to HRS
Chapter 91.
(b)   Rule making powers. The director of budget and fiscal services is
authorized to adopt any rules or regulations not inconsistent with this
article, having the force and effect of law, as provided for in HRS Chapter 91,
in the administration and enforcement of this article.
(Sec. 12-5.13, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.13)
§ 36-5.14 Transportation of bulky items.
   A pedicab operator may refuse to transport any item not capable of being
transported within the confines of the passenger compartment of the pedicab.
(Sec. 12-5.14, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.14)
§ 36-5.15 Disorderly persons.
   Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, the operator of a fixed
stand may refuse to dispatch a pedicab to, and the operator may refuse to
furnish transportation to, a disorderly person.
(Sec. 12-5.15, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.15)
§ 36-5.16 Soiling of pedicab.
   A pedicab operator may require a passenger for hire, whose condition may be
likely to soil the seats of the pedicab, to sit upon protective material
furnished by such operator. Upon noncompliance with the request, the pedicab
operator may refuse to transport such passenger.
(Sec. 12-5.16, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.16)
§ 36-5.17 Violation—Penalty.
(a)   Unless otherwise provided for in this article or subsection (b), any
person violating this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine not exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding one year,
or to both such fine and imprisonment.
(b)   Any person who violates or causes a pedicab to violate any provision of §
36-5.7 or
36-5.8 shall be fined not less than $15, but not more than $500.
(Sec. 12-5.17, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.17)
(Am. Ords. 90-77, 94-11)
§ 36-5.18 Business license, operator’s certificate or application—Notice of
suspension, revocation, or denial—Hearing—Review.
(a)   Notice of intent. The director of budget and fiscal services shall issue
and serve upon a licensee, permittee, or applicant (hereinafter referred to as
“appropriate party”) a notice of intent to suspend, revoke, or deny a business
license or operator’s certificate and license decal (hereinafter referred to as
“business documents”) before the director of budget and fiscal services shall
take any of the foregoing actions until and unless the appropriate party has
been granted a hearing, unless the appropriate party waives such hearing. If
the appropriate party waives such person’s right or privilege for a hearing,
the director of budget and fiscal services may issue in writing an appropriate
decision and order.
(b)   Service of notice. The director of budget and fiscal services shall serve
the notice of intent by mailing the notice by certified or registered mail to
the appropriate party at the party’s last known address.
(c)   Request for hearing. The appropriate party who has received a notice of
intent as prescribed in subsection (a) shall, if the party desires a hearing,
affix such person’s signature as designated on the copy and have the same
returned to the director of budget and fiscal services, either through the
process server or by certified mail.
(d)   Notice of date of hearing. Whenever the appropriate party requests a
hearing, the director of budget and fiscal services shall issue a notice of
such hearing to the appropriate party, and such hearing shall be held no later
than 20 working days after the director of budget and fiscal services has
received the request for hearing from the appropriate party.
(e)   Procedure for hearing. Any hearing conducted under this section shall be
pursuant to rules adopted under HRS Chapter 91. Such hearing may be conducted
by a panel consisting of three officers of the executive branch who shall be
appointed by the mayor.
(f)   Panel to suspend, revoke, or deny business documents. After the panel has
conducted a hearing, it may rule either in favor or against the action to be
taken by the director of budget and fiscal services and if the panel’s decision
is adverse to the appropriate party, it shall be in writing or stated in the
record, and shall be accompanied by separate findings of fact and conclusions
of law.
(g)   Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by the final decision and order of
the panel may appeal the same to the circuit court as provided in HRS § 91-14.
(Sec. 12-5.18, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.18)
(Am. Ord. 94-11)
§ 36-5.19 Severability.
   This article is declared to be severable. In accordance therewith, if any
portion of the article is held invalid for any reason, the validity of any
portion of this article shall not be affected and if the application of any
portion of this article to any person, property, or circumstance is held
invalid, the application hereof to any other person, property, or circumstance
shall not be affected.
(Sec. 12-5.19, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.19)
ARTICLE 6: PRIVATE TRANSPORTATION COMPANIES, VEHICLES, AND DRIVERS
Sections
   
36-6.1   Definitions
   
36-6.2   Director of customer services—Authority
   
36-6.3   Private transportation company—Registration
   
36-6.4   Trade dress, logo or company identifier —Approval
   
36-6.5   Certification of private transportation driver
   
36-6.6   Private transportation driver operating standards, passenger relations
standards, and standards of moral character
   
36-6.7   Private transportation driver’s certificate
   
36-6.8   Receipt
   
36-6.9   Private transportation company vehicle certification
   
36-6.10   Suspension of private transportation vehicles
   
36-6.11   Identification of private transportation vehicles
   
36-6.12   Audit or inspection of records of private transportation companies,
drivers, and vehicles
   
36-6.13   Audit or inspection of specific private transportation driver or
vehicle records
   
36-6.14   Violations—Penalty
   
36-6.15   Suspension or revocation of a private transportation company’s
registration or denial of renewal of registration—Other
§ 36-6.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Department. The department of customer services.
Digital Network. Any online-enabled application, software, website, or system
offered or used by a transportation network company that enables the
prearrangement of rides with transportation network company drivers.
Director. The director of customer services or the director’s duly authorized
subordinates.
Passenger Vehicle. A vehicle manufactured with seating accommodations for eight
or fewer passengers, (excluding the driver), but does not include motorcycles,
mopeds, motor scooters, trucks, three-wheeled vehicles, or low-speed vehicles.
Personal Vehicle. A motor vehicle that is:
(1)   Used by a transportation network company driver to provide a prearranged
ride;
(2)   Owned, leased, or otherwise authorized for use by the transportation
network company driver;
(3)   Not a taxicab, limousine, or other for-hire vehicle; and
(4)   A passenger vehicle operated by a private transportation driver.
Prearranged Ride. The provision of transportation by a transportation network
company driver to a passenger, beginning when a transportation network company
driver accepts a passenger’s request for a ride through a digital network or
software application service controlled by a transportation network company,
continuing while the transportation network company driver transports the
requesting passenger, and ending when the requesting passenger, or the last
passenger from the requesting passenger’s party, departs from the personal
vehicle. A prearranged ride does not include transportation provided through a
ridesharing arrangement, as defined in HRS § 279G-1; use of a taxicab,
limousine, or other for-hire vehicle; or a regional transportation provider.
Private Transportation Company. A taxicab company or a transportation network
company.
Private Transportation Driver or Driver. An individual who:
(1)   Is a taxicab driver; or
(2)   Is a transportation network company driver.
Private Transportation Vehicle. A personal vehicle used by a transportation
network company driver or a taxicab.
Taxicab. Has the same meaning as defined in §
36-1.1.
Taxicab Company. Has the same meaning as defined in §
36-1.1.
Taxicab Driver. Has the same meaning as defined in §
36-1.1.
Transportation Network Company. A person or an entity that uses a digital
network or software application service to connect passengers to transportation
network company drivers; provided that the person or entity:
(1)   Does not own, control, operate, or manage the personal vehicles used by
transportation network company drivers; and
(2)   Is not a taxicab company or a for-hire vehicle owner.
Transportation Network Company Driver. A person who receives connections to
potential riders and related services from a transportation network company in
exchange for payment of a fee to the transportation network company, and uses a
personal vehicle to offer or provide a prearranged ride to riders upon
connection through a digital network controlled by a transportation network
company in return for compensation or payment of a fee.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.1) (Added by Ord. 16-25; Am. Ord. 16-38)
§ 36-6.2 Director of customer services—Authority.
(a)   The director is authorized to ensure that all private transportation
companies comply with this article. The director is authorized to suspend or
revoke any private transportation driver’s certification or private
transportation company vehicle certification for noncompliance with this
article. For violations by a private transportation company, the director is
authorized to suspend or revoke the registration of a private transportation
company and demand the suspension or revocation of all certifications of the
private transportation company’s drivers. The director may deny the
registration or renewal of a registration for a private transportation company.
Private transportation drivers and private transportation companies must be
afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the director or a hearing officer
appointed by the director, pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, if the director
determines there has been a violation of this article.
(b)   The director shall maintain a database of private transportation
companies and require the registration of each private transportation company.
(c)   The director is authorized to adopt rules that are consistent with this
article, having the force and effect of law, as provided for in HRS Chapter 91,
for the administration and enforcement of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.2) (Added by Ord. 16-25; Am. Ord. 16-38)
§ 36-6.3 Private transportation company—Registration.
   Any person or entity operating as a private transportation company in the
city must register with the director annually. The director may establish fees,
to be collected by the department, for registering a private transportation
company and the renewal of such registration. No private transportation company
registration may be renewed, unless the renewal fee, if any, and all
outstanding penalties assessed against the private transportation company, have
been paid to the department.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.3) (Added by Ord. 16-38)
§ 36-6.4 Trade dress, logo or company identifier—Approval.
   The private transportation company must submit the trade dress, logo, or
company identifier, which will be placed on the personal vehicle or taxicab for
the director’s approval at the time of the initial application.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.4) (Added by Ord. 16-38)
§ 36-6.5 Certification of private transportation driver.
(a)   No person shall act as a private transportation driver in the city
without certification by a registered private transportation company or by the
department if the private transportation driver and private transportation
company are one and the same person, pursuant to this article.
In the event a private transportation company is required to certify the
driver, the private transportation company shall conduct an investigation
regarding the certification of the driver at no expense to the city concerning
the character, experience, and qualifications of the driver to determine
whether the driver is fit, willing, and able to operate a vehicle for hire in a
manner consistent with the general welfare of the public and in accordance with
the requirements of this article and all other applicable laws and rules.
(b)   No private transportation driver may be certified, and any existing
certification must be revoked for any driver, who:
(1)   Has been found to have committed five infractions, as defined in HRS §
291D-2, in the prior two-year period, other than traffic infractions involving
parking, standing, or equipment, including seat belts and offenses committed as
a pedestrian;
(2)   Has been convicted once in the prior two-year period for the offense of
resisting an order to stop a motor vehicle, reckless driving, excessive
speeding, racing on a highway, or driving with a suspended or revoked driver
license;
(3)   Is not at least 21 years of age;
(4)   Has been convicted in the prior seven-year period of driving under the
influence of an intoxicant, including drugs or alcohol;
(5)   Has been convicted in the prior seven-year period of any of the
following:
(A)   Offenses against the person or property of another, including:
(i)   Assault;
(ii)   Kidnapping;
(iii)   Manslaughter;
(iv)   Murder;
(v)   Negligent homicide;
(vi)   Reckless endangering;
(vii)   Robbery;
(viii)   Theft;
(ix)   Computer crimes;
(x)   Credit card offenses; or
(xi)   Identity theft;
(B)   Offenses that are sex related, including:
(i)   Displaying indecent matter;
(ii)   Indecent exposure;
(iii)   Open lewdness;
(iv)   Promoting pornography;
(v)   Prostitution or promoting prostitution;
(vi)   Sexual assault; or
(vii)   Sexual abuse;
(C)   Offenses that are drug related, including:
(i)   Promoting a dangerous drug;
(ii)   Promoting a detrimental drug;
(iii)   Promoting a harmful drug; or
(iv)   Promoting intoxicating compounds; or
(6)   Is a match in the National Sex Offender Public Website.
(c)   To determine if a driver is qualified for certification, the private
transportation company shall, at a minimum, obtain records to establish that
the driver:
(1)   Has a current and valid Hawaii State driver’s license;
(2)   Has one year of driving experience;
(3)   Is at least 21 years of age;
(4)   Has a valid automobile insurance policy as required by law;
(5)   Completed a seven year national criminal background check, which includes
a director-approved Multi-State/Multi-Jurisdiction Criminal Locator or other
similar validated nationwide database and National Sex Offender Public Website
search, which reflects the absence of convictions for any of the offenses
identified in this article. The criminal background check must be conducted
before the initial certification of the driver and every two years thereafter;
(6)   Has certified that the driver is physically and mentally fit to be a
private transportation driver and is free of any known medical condition that
would put a passenger at risk;
(7)   Submitted a current traffic violations bureau certified abstract; and
(8)   Has met all other qualifications under this article.
(d)   As part of the certification process, a private transportation company or
a third party vendor retained at the private transportation company’s cost,
shall determine whether that the driver has a sufficient:
(1)   Understanding of the traffic laws and ordinances applicable in the city;
(2)   Understanding of the locations of streets, roads, highways, and
significant landmarks within the city;
(3)   Method of communicating with passengers; and
(4)   Ability to respond to emergency situations, including but not limited to
the ability to call for emergency assistance and knowledge of locations of
major medical facilities.
(e)   A private transportation company shall suspend a driver’s certificate and
require the driver to submit a medical clearance from a physician licensed in
the State of Hawaii if there are indications that the driver is or has become
physically or mentally unfit to be a private transportation driver.
(f)   When a private transportation company is made aware of a driver’s failure
to comply with any requirement of this article or that the driver submitted
false information to the company, the private transportation company must
notify the department and ensure that the driver does not operate as a private
transportation driver.
(g)   The private transportation company must certify to the department that
the company’s private transportation drivers have satisfied the requirements of
this article. The company must maintain records that substantiate that the
requirements are satisfied. Such records must be maintained within the city for
a period of at least two years following the date on which a private
transportation driver is no longer affiliated with a private transportation
company or is no longer permitted to act as a transportation network company
driver on the transportation network company’s digital network. The records are
subject to inspection by the department in accordance with §§
36-6.12 and
36-6.13. The private transportation company will be deemed in violation of this
article and subject to the penalties under this article each time the
department determines that the records do not substantiate compliance with the
requirements for an individual driver.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.5) (Added by Ord. 16-38)
§ 36-6.6 Private transportation driver operating standards, passenger relations
standards, and standards of moral character.
(a)   The private transportation drivers must comply the following operating,
conduct, and passenger relations standards:
(1)   Private transportation drivers shall not transport more passengers than
the number of seat belts available, nor more luggage than the vehicle capacity
will safely and legally allow;
(2)   Private transportation drivers shall not operate a vehicle that was not
certified by a private transportation company to transport passengers;
(3)   Private transportation drivers shall have evidence of a valid vehicle
insurance policy in their possession at all times;
(4)   Private transportation drivers shall report articles left behind by
passengers to the private transportation company as found articles, and follow
the private transportation company’s lost and found policy and procedures;
(5)   Private transportation drivers shall permit the department to inspect the
private transportation vehicle upon request;
(6)   Private transportation drivers shall not consume any alcohol while on
duty or less than eight hours before going on duty;
(7)   Private transportation drivers shall not have any container of any
alcoholic beverage in the private transportation vehicle unless the container
belongs to the passenger;
(8)   Private transportation drivers shall comply with any written notice of
violation issued by the director;
(9)   Private transportation drivers shall not operate a private transportation
vehicle:
(A)   With an expired, suspended, or revoked driver’s license;
(B)   When the private transportation vehicle has an expired registration or
safety inspection sticker; or
(C)   When the private transportation vehicle fails the annual safety
inspection;
(10)   Private transportation drivers shall immediately surrender their driver
certification and vehicle certification to the director upon written notice
that the driver certification has been suspended, not renewed, or revoked by
either the private transportation company or the director. Any decal, logo, or
unique company identifier must be removed from the front and rear bumper;
(11)   Private transportation drivers shall operate the private transportation
vehicle with due regard for the safety, comfort, and convenience of passengers;
(12)   Private transportation drivers shall not allow or knowingly permit the
private transportation vehicle to be used for any unlawful purpose;
(13)   Private transportation drivers shall transport their passengers using
the most cost effective and direct route, unless:
(A)   Directed otherwise by the passenger; or
(B)   An emergency situation, such as road closure or accident, requires an
alternate direct route;
(14)   Private transportation drivers shall keep their vehicles in a clean
condition, deposit all refuse appropriately, and under no circumstances,
litter;
(15)   Private transportation drivers shall not use offensive language,
expressions, or gestures to any person while driving, operating, picking up
customers, or in control of a private vehicle or taxicab;
(16)   Private transportation drivers shall not smoke in the private
transportation vehicle while a passenger is in the vehicle;
(17)   Private transportation drivers shall, upon request by the director or a
police officer, provide the private transportation driver certificate, the
vehicle certificate, and any other documents requested for inspection;
(18)   Private transportation drivers shall not operate any electronic,
digital, or GPS device in a private transportation vehicle without a hands-free
mount and in hands-free mode;
(19)   Private transportation drivers shall not sublease or permit another to
operate their private transportation vehicle as a private transportation
driver; and
(20)   Private transportation drivers shall not refuse to transport any person,
except when upon arrival at the place of pick-up, the passenger is acting in a
disorderly or threatening manner, or otherwise is acting in a manner that would
cause a reasonable person to believe that the private transportation driver’s
health or safety, or that of others, may be endangered.
(b)   A violation of any of the standards set forth in subsection (a) may
result in the suspension or revocation of the transportation driver certificate
by the director, in addition to the assessment of a fine.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.6) (Added by Ord. 16-38)
§ 36-6.7 Private transportation driver’s certificate.
   Every private transportation driver shall have a driver’s certificate within
the private transportation vehicle readily visible to passengers in the
vehicle. The private transportation driver’s certificate must be printed or
available electronically.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.7) (Added by Ord. 16-38)
§ 36-6.8 Receipt.
   Either the private transportation driver or the private transportation
company, as applicable, must, upon request, provide any passenger with a
printed or electronic receipt showing the total fare paid and any other
information specified by the director.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.8) (Added by Ord. 16-38)
§ 36-6.9 Private transportation company vehicle certification.
(a)   No vehicle may be used for private transportation services, unless the
private transportation company or the department, if the driver and the company
are one and the same, has certified for each vehicle:
(1)   Proof of registration for the motor vehicle in the name of the driver or
proof of authorization from the registered owner for the driver to operate the
motor vehicle as a private transportation driver; and
(2)   Proof of current vehicle safety inspection for the motor vehicle in the
name of the driver or registered owner of the motor vehicle.
(b)   A private transportation company shall certify each motor vehicle in
compliance with subsection (a) and include the following information:
(1)   The vehicle identification number (VIN);
(2)   The registered owner’s full legal name;
(3)   License plate number and expiration date;
(4)   Date of the annual safety inspection; and
(5)   Proof of insurance.
Every private transportation company vehicle certificate provided under this
section will expire two years after the issuance thereof, unless it has
previously been revoked.
(c)   No private transportation vehicle may be recertified, unless all
outstanding penalties assessed against the private transportation driver
operating the vehicle being recertified are paid in full to the director.
(d)   A private transportation company shall ensure that the private
transportation driver has timely renewed the private transportation vehicle’s
annual registration and passed the annual safety inspection. A private
transportation company shall suspend the private transportation driver’s access
to its digital network or dispatch system upon discovery of a private
transportation driver’s failure to timely renew the private transportation
vehicle’s annual registration and passed the annual motor vehicle safety
inspection. Access to digital network or dispatch system may be restored upon
the private transportation driver’s submission of documents confirming the
renewal of the private transportation vehicle’s annual registration and passing
the annual safety inspection.
(e)   Each failure to meet any of these requirements constitutes a separate
violation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.9) (Added by Ord. 16-38)
§ 36-6.10 Suspension of private transportation vehicles.
   Upon notification that a private transportation vehicle has been involved in
an accident, the private transportation company shall suspend the private
transportation driver’s access to its digital network or dispatch system until
the private transportation driver has provided to the private transportation
company proof that the vehicle can be safely operated.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.10) (Added by Ord. 16-38)
§ 36-6.11 Identification of private transportation vehicles.
   Upon approval by the director, the private transportation company will
direct its drivers on the placement of the trade dress, logo, or company
identifier on the personal vehicle or taxicab, whichever the case may be, but
trade dress, logo, or company identifier placed on the front and rear bumpers
pursuant to this article must be between 2 inches and 3 inches in height, and a
minimum of 4 inches in width. The trade dress, logo, or company identifier may
be placed on the vehicle’s body, but not on the roof (unless it is a taxi sign
or dome) or cover any window, vehicle lights, or obscure the view of any
mirrors. In addition, any vehicle for hire which transports passengers to and
from the Daniel K. Inouye International Airport must display permits or decals
required by the applicable State laws.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.11) (Added by Ord. 16-38)
§ 36-6.12 Audit or inspection of records of private transportation companies,
drivers, and vehicles.
(a)   The department may visually inspect, no more than annually, a sample of
records, randomly selected by the department, that a private transportation
company is required to maintain for the sole purpose of verifying that the
private transportation company is in compliance with the requirements of this
article. The records of the private transportation company must substantiate
the certification of the private transportation drivers and vehicles, and
include all complaints made against the private transportation driver to the
company by any passenger or member of the general public. Any record furnished
to the department may exclude information that would tend to identify specific
drivers or riders. The records must be located at the local business address
stated in the private transportation company’s registration with the
department, in accordance with §
36-6.3, for inspection, and may be in either paper or electronic format. The
records must be retained by the private transportation company for a period of
two years.
(b)   Any records inspected by the department pursuant to this section are:
(1)   Designated confidential;
(2)   Not subject to disclosure to a third party by the department without
prior written consent of the private transportation company; and
(3)   Exempt from disclosure under HRS Chapter 92F, the Hawaii Uniform
Information Practices Act (“UIPA”).
Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the applicability of any
other exemptions under HRS Chapter 92F.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.12) (Added by Ord. 16-38)
§ 36-6.13 Audit or inspection of specific private transportation driver or
vehicle records.
(a)   Upon notice of a passenger complaint, traffic accident, arrest, or other
incident, which jeopardized or may have jeopardized the safety, health, or
welfare of the passengers or members of the general public by a specific
private transportation driver, the department may immediately demand, and the
private transportation company shall provide, unrestricted access to the
records of, or pertaining to, that private transportation driver. Any record
furnished to the department may exclude information that would tend to identify
specific drivers or riders, unless the identity of a driver is relevant to the
complaint.
(b)   Any records inspected by the department pursuant to this section are:
(1)   Designated confidential;
(2)   Not subject to disclosure to a third party by the department without
prior written consent of the private transportation company; and
(3)   Exempt from disclosure under HRS Chapter 92F, the Hawaii Uniform
Information Practices Act (“UIPA”).
Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the applicability of any
other exemptions under HRS Chapter 92F.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.13) (Added by Ord. 16-38)
§ 36-6.14 Violations—Penalty.
(a)   The director and any person or agency designated by the director may
issue citations to a private transportation company or private transportation
driver that is in violation of this article.
(b)   Each citation must be in writing and describe the basis of the citation,
including the specific provisions alleged to have been violated, and an
assessment of administrative fines as provided in this article.
(c)   Any person or entity violating this article and cited by the police
department shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding one year, or to both such
fine and imprisonment for each violation.
(d)   Any person or entity violating this article and cited by the director,
shall be subject to an administrative fine not exceeding $1,000 per violation
or suspension or revocation of the certification, or both, for a private
transportation driver or vehicle, which shall not be duplicative of any fine
issued or penalty imposed after conviction. The director is authorized to adopt
rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 to implement and enforce this section.
(e)   Service of a citation issued under this section will be made by personal
service or by certified mail, restricted delivery, sent to the mailing address
of the private transportation company listed in the private transportation
company’s registration with the department pursuant to §
36-6.3.
(f)   Any private transportation company or private transportation driver cited
by the director may submit a written request to the director for a hearing with
respect to the violations alleged or the amount of the administrative fine
assessed. Such request must be submitted within 20 days from the date of
service of the citation.
(g)   If a private transportation company or private transportation driver
cited under subsection (a) timely notifies the director of the request for a
hearing, the director shall afford an opportunity for a hearing under HRS
Chapter 91. The hearing shall be conducted by the director or the director may
designate a hearings officer to hold the hearing. The director or any hearings
officer designated by the director shall have the power to issue subpoenas,
administer oaths, hear testimony, find facts, make conclusions of law, and
issue a final order.
(h)   If the private transportation company or private transportation driver
issued a citation does not submit a written request to the director for a
hearing within 20 days from the date of service of the citation, the citation
shall be deemed a final order of the director.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.14) (Added by Ord. 16-38)
§ 36-6.15 Suspension or revocation of a private transportation company’s
registration or denial of renewal of registration—Other.
   The director may suspend or revoke the registration of a private
transportation company, and suspend or revoke all of the certifications of its
private transportation drivers, if a private transportation company has been
found to have engaged in a pattern or practice of violating this article
governing the certification of private transportation drivers or vehicles, or
the inspections or audits by the department. Any notice of intent to suspend or
revoke the private transportation company’s registration based upon multiple
violations within a six-month period will issue by personal service or by
certified mail, to the mailing address of the private transportation company
listed in the private transportation company’s registration with the department
pursuant to §
36-6.3, and afford the private transportation company an opportunity to be
heard in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
36-6.14.
(1990 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.15) (Added by Ord. 16-38)
TITLE VIII: PROPERTY
   Chapters
      
37.   REAL PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS INVOLVING THE CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU
      
38.   LEASE AND RENTAL OF CITY REAL PROPERTY, INCLUDING FEES
      
39.   MAXIMUM ANNUAL RENEGOTIATED LEASE RENT
      
40.   OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY
CHAPTER 37: REAL PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS INVOLVING THE CITY
AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU
Articles
   
1.   Disposal of Real Property Owned by the City and County of Honolulu
   
2.   Acquisition of Remnant Real Property
ARTICLE 1: DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY OWNED BY THE CITY AND
COUNTY OF HONOLULU
Sections
   
37-1.1   Definitions
   
37-1.2   Transfers of use of city real property—Surplus real property—Disposal
   
37-1.3   Disposal of real property other than surplus real property
   
37-1.4   Special procedures and provisions
   
37-1.5   Exemptions
   
37-1.6   General provisions for disposal by sale
   
37-1.7   General provisions for disposal of city real property by exchange
   
37-1.8   General provisions for disposal of city real property by gift
   
37-1.9   Preparation of documents—Appraisals
   
37-1.10   Disposal of interests in property not subject to this article
   
37-1.11   Proposed sale of high value property
§ 37-1.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Agency. Any office, department, board, commission, or other governmental unit
of the city, other than the board of water supply.
Director. The director of budget and fiscal services.
Dispose of Real Property. To transfer or alienate real property by sale, gift,
exchange, or other voluntary action, but shall not include the lease or rental
of real property or the destruction or demolition of an improvement to real
property. The phrase shall include the cancellation of any easement for access
to the ocean.
Real Property. Includes a fee simple interest, a life estate, or a remainder or
executory interest in land or any improvements thereon, whether legal or
equitable, and any easement for access to the ocean, but does not include any
license or any easement other than an easement for access to the ocean.
(1990 Code, Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.1) (Added by Ord. 92-108; Am. Ord. 04-11)
§ 37-1.2 Transfers of use of city real property—Surplus real property—Disposal.
(a)   Any agency of the city having under its jurisdiction and control real
property, which is no longer desired or needed by the agency for its own use
shall submit a list of such real property to the director, which shall include
a description of the property and an estimate as to the fair market value.
(b)   The director shall prepare an inventory of all real property found on any
list submitted pursuant to subsection (a), including the descriptions of the
properties and estimated fair market values, and shall circulate copies of the
inventory to such agencies of the city as the director shall determine, and any
agency receiving copies of the inventory shall, within 30 days of the receipt
thereof, file with the director a statement as to whether any of the real
property included in the inventory is needed by the agency for its use.
(c)   If an agency submits a statement to the director indicating a need for
the use of any real property included in the inventory, the statement shall
also contain a request for the use of such real property. The director may then
recommend to the mayor the transfer of the use of the real property to the
agency indicating a need to use the real property. Before making a transfer,
the director shall provide written notification of the proposed transfer to the
neighborhood board of the district in which the subject property is situated
and to any abutting property owners at least 10 days before such transfer;
provided written notification shall not be required for the transfer of real
property with an estimated fair market value under $5,000. This subsection
shall not preclude the mayor from making lawful transfers of the use of city
property between agencies by means other than those provided in this section.
(d)   Any real property included in the inventory which is not recommended by
the director to the mayor for transfer, or which is recommended by the director
to the mayor for transfer, but is not transferred within a reasonable time, as
determined by the director, shall be deemed surplus real property.
(e)   The director, with the concurrence of the corporation counsel, shall
determine whether to recommend to the council the disposal of surplus real
property.
(f)   Before any surplus real property owned by the city may be disposed of,
the director shall submit a recommendation and a draft resolution with respect
to the proposed disposal of the surplus real property to the council. The draft
resolution shall include a description of the real property, an estimate as to
the fair market value of the real property, and a statement whether the real
property will be disposed of by gift, exchange, sale, or other means. If the
real property is proposed to be exchanged, the draft resolution shall state the
property for which the real property is proposed to be exchanged. If the real
property is proposed to be sold, the draft resolution shall state whether the
property is proposed to be sold at auction, by negotiated sale, or otherwise,
and shall state the minimum price for which the property will be sold.
(g)   If the council finds that the proposed disposal of surplus city real
property is in the interest of the inhabitants of the city and adopts a
resolution authorizing the director to dispose of the surplus real property,
the surplus real property may be disposed of in accordance with the terms of
the resolution and in accordance with §
37-1.6,
37-1.7, or
37-1.8, whichever is appropriate. Otherwise, the surplus real property may not
be disposed of.
(1990 Code, Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.2) (Added by Ord. 92-108)
§ 37-1.3 Disposal of real property other than surplus real property.
(a)   The city may not dispose of real property that is not surplus real
property, as determined in §
37-1.2, except pursuant to this section.
(b)   If the director or the mayor, with the concurrence of the corporation
counsel, finds it to be in the interest of the inhabitants of the city to
dispose of city real property that is not surplus real property, as determined
in §
37-1.2, the director or the mayor may propose to the council that real property
be disposed of pursuant to this section.
Any such proposal shall state the public interest being served by the proposal
and shall state that the real property is not surplus real property.
(c)   The council, either pursuant to a proposal made under subsection (b), or
on its own proposal, may, if it finds it to be in the interest of the
inhabitants of the city, adopt a resolution authorizing the director to dispose
of city real property.
(d)   After the council’s adoption of a resolution pursuant to subsection (c),
the director may dispose of the real property that is the subject of the
resolution in accordance with the terms of the resolution and with §
37-1.6,
37-1.7, or
37-1.8, whichever is appropriate.
(1990 Code, Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.3) (Added by Ord. 92-108)
§ 37-1.4 Special procedures and provisions.
(a)   Any real property held by the city for school purposes may not be
disposed of without the consent of the superintendent of education.
(b)   No city real property bordering the ocean shall be sold or otherwise
disposed of.
(c)   All proceeds from the sale of park lands shall be expended only for the
acquisition of property for park or recreational purposes.
(d)   The disposal of an abandoned county highway shall be subject to HRS §
264-3.
(e)   The transfer of a county highway to the State shall be subject to HRS §
264-2.
(f)   Real property acquired by the city by foreclosure of a real property tax
lien shall be disposed of pursuant to Chapter 8.
(g)   Real property acquired by the city by default in the payment of any
special assessment shall be disposed of pursuant to §
14-11.9 of this code.
(h)   Real property acquired by the city under its power of eminent domain
pursuant to HRS § 46-61 and Chapter 101, in excess of that needed for a public
purpose, shall be disposed of pursuant to HRS §§ 46-61 and 101-2, to the extent
that these sections apply to such excess real property.
(i)   Any category of real property owned by the city, the disposal of which is
governed by State law, shall be disposed of in accordance with such State law
and, to the extent not inconsistent herewith, in accordance with this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.4) (Added by Ord. 92-108)
§ 37-1.5 Exemptions.
(a)   The following are exempt from this article:
(1)   Disposal of real property of the board of water supply;
(2)   Disposal of any real property acquired by the city specifically for the
purpose of disposing of the property, provided that the ordinance or resolution
authorizing the acquisition specifically provides for the disposal of the city
real property by means other than those specified in this article; and
(3)   Disposal of real property constituting a housing unit or unimproved
housing lot acquired or developed by the city when the unit or lot is disposed
individually.
(b)   A unit or lot is disposed “individually” when disposed:
(1)   After a solicitation of bids or offers for that unit or lot by itself;
and
(2)   In a transaction separate from the transaction disposing any other city
real property.
(c)   When units or lots in a housing project are placed for sale to the public
or class of the public, the solicitation of offers for a unit or lot in the
project shall be deemed a solicitation for “that unit or lot by itself” which
complies with subsection (a)(1).
(d)   For the purposes of this section, “housing unit” means a single-, two-,
or duplex-unit dwelling, including the zoning lot that the single-, two-, or
duplex-unit dwelling is situated on, and other appertaining real property
interests. “Housing unit” also means a dwelling unit in a multi-unit dwelling
and the appurtenant real property interests to the unit. “Unimproved housing
lot” means a zoning lot, with no or only infrastructure improvements, on which
a single-, two-, or duplex-unit dwelling must be constructed by the acquisitor.
“Duplex-unit dwelling,” “multi-unit dwelling,” “single-unit dwelling,” and
“two-unit dwelling” has the same meaning as defined under Chapter 21.
(1990 Code, Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.5) (Added by Ord. 92-108; Am. Ords. 98-48,
25-2)
§ 37-1.6 General provisions for disposal by sale.
(a)   Real property owned by the city which is to be disposed of by sale shall
be sold subject to the following provisions, except to the extent that they are
inconsistent with §
37-1.4:
(1)   The resolution authorizing the sale of the property shall state whether
the property is proposed to be sold at auction, by negotiated sale, or
otherwise, and shall state the minimum price for which the property will be
sold;
(2)   The property shall be disposed of by public auction, unless otherwise
provided in the resolution authorizing the sale;
(3)   If the council determines by resolution that city real property may be
disposed of by auction, the director shall, before selling the city real
property by auction, give notice of the proposed sale at least once a week for
two weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city; and
(4)   The property shall not be disposed of for a sales price less than any
minimum, or upset price, stated in the resolution authorizing the sale.
(b)   If the city real property to be sold, whether surplus or nonsurplus, has
an assessed value greater than $1,000,000, the resolution authorizing the sale
of the property shall, in addition to complying with subsection (a), contain
the following information:
(1)   The intended use of the property by the buyer; and
(2)   The information required in §
37-1.11(a)(1), (a)(2) and (a)(4).
(1990 Code, Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.6) (Added by Ord. 92-108; Am. Ord. 04-11)
§ 37-1.7 General provisions for disposal of city real property by exchange.
   Real property owned by the city which is to be disposed of by exchange shall
be exchanged subject to the following provisions, except to the extent that
they are inconsistent with §
37-1.4.
(a)   A description of the property being exchanged and the property for which
it is being exchanged, and the name of the owner or owners of the property for
which city real property is being exchanged shall be set forth in the
resolution authorizing the exchange.
(b)   The city may accept property of less than equivalent value for city real
property only when the difference is made up by a cash payment or when
permitted as a gift pursuant to §
37-1.8.
(1990 Code, Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.7) (Added by Ord. 92-108)
§ 37-1.8 General provisions for disposal of city real property by gift.
(a)   Real property owned by the city which is to be disposed of by gift shall
be disposed of subject to the following provisions, except to the extent that
they are inconsistent with §
37-1.4.
(1)   A description of the city real property being disposed of by gift, an
estimate of the value thereof, and the name of the donee thereof shall be set
forth in the resolution authorizing the disposal by gift.
(2)   The council shall make a determination and declare in the disposal
resolution that the disposal by gift shall serve a public purpose.
(3)   The council may impose any conditions or restrictions upon the disposal
by gift, including but not limited to restrictions upon the use of the real
property for a period of time or in perpetuity and may provide for the
reversion of the property to the city if such conditions or restrictions as are
imposed are not adhered to.
(b)   Any negotiated sale or any exchange of city real property for less than
the fair market value of the city real property shall be treated as a gift of
city real property to the extent that fair market value of the city real
property exceeds the sales price of the city real property (in the case of a
negotiated sale) or the fair market value of the property for which the city
real property is exchanged (in the case of an exchange). Any such gift shall
comply with this section and may be made subject to conditions or restrictions
as provided in subsection (a)(3) above.
(1990 Code, Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.8) (Added by Ord. 92-108)
§ 37-1.9 Preparation of documents—Appraisals.
   The director is authorized to prepare, subject to the approval of the
corporation counsel, such deeds and other documents as are necessary to effect
the disposal of city real property as authorized by council resolution. When
requested by the council, the director or the director of design and
construction shall prepare an appraisal of the fair market value of city
property or of property proposed to be exchanged for city real property. The
council shall make the final determination as to the sales price of city real
property and of the exchange value of property to be exchanged for city real
property.
(1990 Code, Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.9) (Added by Ord. 92-108; Am. Ord. 04-11)
§ 37-1.10 Disposal of interests in property not subject to this article.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the director or any
officer or agency of the city from utilizing the procedures set forth in this
article for the disposal of interests in property that are not subject to this
article, including but not limited to easements other than easements for access
to the ocean.
(1990 Code, Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.10) (Added by Ord. 92-108)
§ 37-1.11 Proposed sale of high value property.
(a)   The director shall submit a draft resolution to the council containing
the following information before city surplus or nonsurplus real property, with
an assessed value of more than $1,000,000, is marketed:
(1)   A description of the property, including its size, location, existing
zoning, and any city facilities or improvements on the property;
(2)   The assessed value of the property;
(3)   A marketing plan or approach that describes how the property will be
marketed, including the manner of advertising the property’s availability, the
extent of any planned local, national, or international advertising or other
marketing efforts and a copy of any proposed brokerage agreement with a real
property brokerage firm for the sale of the property; and
(4)   Any conditions or restrictions which the director proposes to be
applicable to the property upon its sale, including permitted uses of the
property; height restrictions; preservation of view planes; landscaping;
preservation of existing structures; maintenance of existing public facilities,
including parking; retention of existing rental housing units, elderly or
special needs housing units, moderate-income housing units, low-income housing
units, very low-income housing units, or extremely low-income housing units, if
applicable; and any other proposed conditions or restrictions.
(b)   The council may adopt the resolution in the form transmitted by the
director, or with additional conditions or restrictions. Upon the adoption of
the resolution, the director may proceed with the marketing of the property. No
resolution for the sale of city property, as described in §
37-1.6, shall be considered by the council, unless the resolution described in
this section has first been approved.
(1990 Code, Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.11) (Added by Ord. 04-11)
ARTICLE 2: ACQUISITION OF REMNANT REAL PROPERTY
Sections
   
37-2.1   Purpose
   
37-2.2   Definitions
   
37-2.3   Review and evaluation
   
37-2.4   Rules
§ 37-2.1 Purpose.
   This article establishes a regulatory scheme for the consideration of
acquisition of remaining portions of parcels of real property being partially
condemned by the Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation along the route of
the Honolulu High-Capacity Transit Corridor Project. It requires the city to
review and evaluate whether the acquisition of the remaining portions of a
parcel of real property by the city serves a public interest.
(Added by Ord. 18-42)
§ 37-2.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Director. The director of land management or the director’s authorized
representative.
Public Utility. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 269-1.
Rail Project Remnant Property. The portion or portions of a parcel of real
property that remain after the rest of the parcel is acquired by the Honolulu
Authority for Rapid Transportation for the Honolulu High-Capacity Transit
Corridor Project; but does not include real property owned by a public utility
for the production, conveyance, transmission, delivery, or furnishing of
electric power.
(Added by Ord. 18-42)
§ 37-2.3 Review and evaluation.
   For each rail project remnant property, the director shall consider whether
the acquisition of the rail project remnant property for city purposes serves
the public interest and supplements the inventory of city real property
interests, taking into consideration the development potential for city real
property interests in transit-oriented development special districts, all in
accordance with the director’s responsibilities under Charter § 6-1802(e) and
(f).
(Added by Ord. 18-42)
§ 37-2.4 Rules.
   The director may, pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, adopt rules having the force
and effect of law for the implementation, administration, and enforcement of
this article.
(Added by Ord. 18-42)
CHAPTER 38: LEASE AND RENTAL OF CITY REAL PROPERTY, INCLUDING FEES
Articles
   
1.   General Provisions
   
2.   Bidding Requirements and Procedures
   
3.   Exceptions to Bidding Requirement
   
4.   Term of Agreements
   
5.   Penalty
   
6.   General Provisions for the Lease and Rental Policy for the Department of
Enterprise Services
   
7.   Rental Schedule
   
8.   Concessions
   
9.   Nonprofit Organizations
   
10.   Severability
   
11.   Lease and Permit Policy for the Grounds of City Hall and the Mayor Frank
F. Fasi Municipal Building
   
12.   Telecommunications Facilities
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections
   
38-1.1   Purpose
   
38-1.2   Scope
   
38-1.3   Definitions
§ 38-1.1 Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a uniform procedure for the
lease or rental of real property owned by the city, with the exception of the
city hall building and the Mayor Frank F. Fasi municipal building. Any and all
office spaces located within the subject two buildings shall be reserved for
the exclusive use by agencies of the city.
(Sec. 30-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 1, § 28-1.1)
§ 38-1.2 Scope.
   The scope of this chapter includes the policy that the lease or rental of
property of the city or the award of concessions shall require public
advertisements and bids, except under specific circumstances. This chapter also
includes the required bidding procedures and attendant terms of agreements and
penalties.
(Sec. 30-1.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 1, § 28-1.2) (Am.
Ords. 91-27, 97-02)
§ 38-1.3 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Agency. Any office, department, board, commission, or other governmental unit
of the city, including the council and its offices.
Concession. The grant to a private individual, partnership, or corporation of
the privilege to conduct operations essentially retail in nature, involving the
sale of goods, wares, merchandise, or services to the general public, such as
restaurants, retail stores, parking facilities, golf driving ranges, canoe
storage facilities (halaus), in or on land or buildings owned or controlled by
the City and County of Honolulu.
Director. The director of budget and fiscal services.
Managing Director. The managing director of the City and County of Honolulu.
Nonprofit Organization. An association, corporation, or other entity, organized
and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, literary,
cultural, educational, recreational, or other nonprofit purposes, no part of
the assets, income, or earnings of which inures to the benefit of any
individual or member thereof, and whose charter or other enabling act contains
a provision that, in the event of dissolution, the assets owned by such
association, corporation, or other entity shall be distributed to another
association, corporation, or other entity organized and operated exclusively
for nonprofit purposes, and which further qualifies for exemption from the
general excise tax provisions of HRS Chapter 237, as amended, and under § 501
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended. Such nonprofit organization
must not merely be a sponsor of the event, production, attraction, or activity
being given, but must actively promote, produce, stage, or conduct such event,
production, attraction, or activity.
(Sec. 30-1.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 1, §
28-1.3)
ARTICLE 2: BIDDING REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
Sections
   
38-2.1   Bidding required
   
38-2.2   Call for bids
   
38-2.3   Qualification of bidders
   
38-2.4   Advertisement for bids
   
38-2.5   Cost of publication
   
38-2.6   Bids—Opening—Rejection
   
38-2.7   Bids—Withdrawals
   
38-2.8   Deposits to accompany bid
   
38-2.9   Forfeiture of deposits—Return
   
38-2.10   Bond in lieu of deposit
   
38-2.11   Contract execution—Award to highest responsible bidder
   
38-2.12   Security deposit
   
38-2.13   Surety on bond—Justification
   
38-2.14   Violation voids contract
   
38-2.15   Competitive sealed proposals
§ 38-2.1 Bidding required.
   Unless expressly excepted in this chapter, no real property or any
concession or concession space in any building or on any land owned by or under
the jurisdiction of the city shall be leased or rented, except under contract
let under public advertisement for sealed tenders in the manner provided
hereinafter.
(Sec. 30-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.1)
§ 38-2.2 Call for bids.
   The director shall call for bids, accept bids, and award concessions or
award contracts to lease or rent property on terms, conditions, and rentals
approved by the corporation counsel, as to form and legality.
(Sec. 30-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.2)
§ 38-2.3 Qualification of bidders.
   Before any prospective bidder shall be entitled to submit any bid required
under this chapter, the bidder shall, not less than six calendar days before
the day designated for opening bids, give written notice to the director of the
bidder’s intention to bid, and the director shall satisfy the director of the
prospective bidder’s financial ability, experience, and competence to carry out
the terms and conditions of any contract that may be awarded. For this purpose,
the director may require prospective bidders to submit answers, under oath, to
questions contained in a questionnaire setting forth a complete statement of
the experience, competence, and financial standing of such prospective bidders.
Whenever it appears to the director that any prospective bidder is not fully
qualified and able to carry out the terms and conditions of the contract that
may be awarded, the director may, after affording such prospective bidder an
opportunity to be heard, refuse to receive or consider any bid offered by such
prospective bidder. All information contained in the answers to questionnaires
shall remain confidential, and any government officer or employee who knowingly
divulges or permits to be divulged any such information to any person not fully
entitled thereto shall be subject to penalties as provided by law.
Questionnaires so submitted shall be returned to the bidders after having
served their purpose.
(Sec. 30-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.3)
§ 38-2.4 Advertisement for bids.
(a)   Publication of a call for tenders for the awarding of concessions or
concession spaces shall be made at least on three separate days in a daily
newspaper of general circulation in the city.
(b)   Publication of a call for tenders for leasing of real property or any
improvements thereon, other than a concession or concession space, shall be
made once a week for at least two weeks in a daily newspaper of general
circulation in the city.
(c)   Such public announcement shall include but not be limited to the
following information:
(1)   Description of the concession, real property, or improvements and the
objectives for it;
(2)   Location;
(3)   Scope of the award or lease;
(4)   Length of the award or lease;
(5)   Amount and type of government funds, if any, available for the project;
and
(6)   Description of any special requirements of unique features.
(Sec. 30-2.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.4)
§ 38-2.5 Cost of publication.
   The director may require the party requesting the publication of a call for
tenders to deposit with the director a certified check or cash equal to or
greater than the estimated cost of publishing the advertisement for bids,
before such advertisement is published. The cost of publication may be deducted
from the deposit and retained by the city if the party fails to submit a bid.
(Sec. 30-2.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.5)
§ 38-2.6 Bids—Opening—Rejection.
   The time of opening of such tenders shall not be less than five days after
the last publication. All bids shall be sealed and delivered to the director,
and shall be opened by the director at the hour and place to be stated in the
call for tenders, in the presence of all bidders who attend, and may be
inspected by any bidder. The director may reject any or all bids and waive any
defects, when in the director’s opinion, such rejection or waiver will be for
the best interest of the city. Upon completion of the evaluation and selection
process, the director shall file a written report with the city clerk,
including the results with the successful bidder. The city clerk, upon receipt
of the written report, shall post same for public inspection under an
appropriate title on the bulletin board on which meeting notices of the
council, including its agenda, are posted and such report shall be a public
record.
(Sec. 30-2.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.6)
§ 38-2.7 Bids—Withdrawals.
   No bidder may withdraw such bid for a period of 60 days after the opening
thereof.
(Sec. 30-2.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.7)
§ 38-2.8 Deposits to accompany bid.
   All bids shall be accompanied by a deposit of legal tender or by a certified
check payable to the director drawn on a bank doing business within the State,
for or in a sum equal to 5 percent of the amount bid, but in no event, to be
less than $50; provided that when the amount bid exceeds $50,000, the
certificate of deposit or certified check shall be $2,500 plus 2 percent of the
amount in excess thereof.
(Sec. 30-2.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.8)
§ 38-2.9 Forfeiture of deposits—Return.
   If the bidder to whom the contract is awarded fails or neglects to enter
into the contract and furnish satisfactory security as required by this
article, within 10 days after the award or within such further time as the
director may allow, the director shall pay the deposit into the treasury as a
realization of the city. If the contract is entered into and the security
furnished within the required time, the deposit shall be returned to the
successful bidder. Deposits made by the unsuccessful bidders shall be returned
to them after the contract is entered into or, if the contract is not entered
into, after the expiration of 60 days after the opening of the bids or after
the director publishes another call for tenders, whichever is sooner.
(Sec. 30-2.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.9)
§ 38-2.10 Bond in lieu of deposit.
   In lieu of the deposit of legal tender or a certified check, a bid may be
accompanied by a surety bond naming the city as obligee, with the bidder as
principal, and a surety company, authorized to do business as such in this
State, as surety, in a penal sum equal to the deposit required under §
38-2.8, conditioned upon the bidder entering into the contract and furnishing
the required security within 10 days after the award or within such further
time as the director may allow.
(Sec. 30-2.10, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.10)
§ 38-2.11 Contract execution—Award to highest responsible bidder.
   All such contracts shall be in writing, shall be executed by the director in
the name of the city, and shall be made with the highest responsible bidder, if
such bidder shall qualify by providing the security required hereinbelow. If
the highest and best bid or any other bid has been rejected, or if the bidder
to whom the contract was awarded has failed to enter into the contract and
furnish satisfactory security, the director may, in the director’s discretion,
award the contract to the next highest responsible bidder.
(Sec. 30-2.11, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.11)
§ 38-2.12 Security deposit.
   Before any contract is entered into, the bidder shall give security for
compliance therewith by deposit of an amount equal to two months’ rental or
other charge required under the contract, except that in the case of a contract
for the lease of residential property, a security deposit in an amount equal to
one month’s rent shall be required. In lieu thereof, the director may accept
good and sufficient bond for the amount, naming the city as obligee, with the
bidder as principal, and a surety company authorized to do business as such in
this State, as surety.
(Sec. 30-2.12, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.12)
§ 38-2.13 Surety on bond—Justification.
   If the surety or sureties on such bond shall be other than a surety company
authorized to do business under the laws of this State, there shall be not more
than four such sureties who shall severally justify such amounts as, taken
together, will aggregate the full amount of the bond; provided that in the case
of such sureties, they shall deposit with the director certified checks or
certificates of deposit (payable on demand on or after such period as the
director may stipulate) or bonds, stocks, or other negotiable securities, or
execute and deliver to such officer a deed or deeds of trust of real property,
all of such character as shall be satisfactory to the director, in security
equal to the full cash value of 100 percent of the amount for which each surety
shall have assumed. The director may waive the necessity of furnishing such
security, in cases where the director is satisfied as to the financial
responsibility of the proposed surety or sureties; provided that if there be
but one personal surety, the surety shall justify the full amount of the bond.
(Sec. 30-2.13, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.13)
§ 38-2.14 Violation voids contract.
   After the effective date of this chapter, any contract awarded or executed
in violation of this chapter shall be void and of no effect.
(Sec. 30-2.14, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.14)
§ 38-2.15 Competitive sealed proposals.
(a)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the city may
lease or rent real property or improvements thereon, or both, by competitive
sealed proposals when:
(1)   Such property or improvements, or both, will be used for cultural, arts,
nature, sports, recreational, historical, or other similar activities open to
the public;
(2)   The council approves of the use of such process by ordinance or
resolution in advance of the issuance of the request for proposals; and
(3)   The director determines in writing that the use of competitive sealed
bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the city.
Factors to be considered in determining whether competitive sealed bidding is
not practicable or not advantageous include:
(4)   Whether the award determination involves the consideration of factors in
addition to financial return to the city;
(5)   Whether oral or written discussions may need to be conducted with
offerors concerning technical and financial aspects of their proposals;
(6)   Whether offerors may need to be afforded the opportunity to revise their
proposals, including revision of the financial return to the city; and
(7)   Whether an award may need to be based upon a comparative evaluation as
stated in the request for proposals of differing financial return, quality, and
contractual factors, to determine the most advantageous offering to the city.
Quality factors may include technical and performance capability and the
content of the technical proposal.
(b)   Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals.
(c)   Public notice of the request for proposals shall be given in the same
form and manner for advertisements for bids.
(d)   Proposals shall be opened so as to avoid disclosure of contents to
competing offerors during discussion. A register of proposals shall be prepared
and shall be open for public inspection after the contract award.
(e)   The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of:
(1)   Financial return to the city; and
(2)   Other evaluation factors.
(f)   Discussions may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit
proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award
for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of, and
responsiveness to, the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded
fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and
revision of proposals, and revisions may be permitted after submissions and
before award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In conducting
discussions, there shall be no disclosure of any information derived from
proposals submitted by competing offerors.
(g)   Award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is
determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the city, taking into
consideration the financial return to the city and the evaluation factors set
forth in the request for proposals. No other factors or criteria shall be used
in the evaluation. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award
is made.
(1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.15) (Added by Ord. 02-64)
ARTICLE 3: EXCEPTIONS TO BIDDING REQUIREMENT
Sections
   
38-3.1   Bidding not required—Leased or rental property—Conditions
   
38-3.2   Bidding not required—Concessions
   
38-3.3   Bidding not required—Leasing to private developers
   
38-3.4   Bidding not required—Housing or human services providers
   
38-3.5   Bidding not required—Outdoor dining services
§ 38-3.1 Bidding not required—Leased or rental property—Conditions.
   The director may award contracts to lease or rent property on terms,
conditions, and rentals approved by the corporation counsel as to form and
legality without calling for public bids, when:
(1)   Eminent domain. Real property or improvements thereon, or both, have been
acquired by the city by eminent domain proceedings, or by negotiated purchase
or exchange in lieu thereof, and where immediate use of the property acquired
is not necessary. In that case, the property shall be rented on a month-to-
month tenancy for up to one year. Upon recommendation of the director, the
council may, by resolution, annually approve successive continuations of a
month-to-month tenancy, each for up to one year. If the director determines
there to be extraordinary circumstances, the director may recommend, and the
council may, by adoption of a single resolution, approve a continuation of a
month-to-month tenancy for up to four years. Each month-to-month tenancy
approved pursuant to this paragraph shall be revocable at the option of the
city upon 30 days’ written notice to vacate. In lieu of obtaining council
approval under the previous terms of this subdivision (1), the director may
lease or rent such property by public bidding for a period in excess of one
year, pursuant to this chapter;
(2)   Employee of the City and County of Honolulu or the State of Hawaii. Real
property and improvements thereon are leased or rented to employees of the city
or the State. The property shall be leased or rented only under the following
conditions:
(A)   The party or parties to whom the property is leased or rented must be and
continue to be an employee of the city or the State during the term of the
demise; and
(B)   The leasing or renting of the property to the employee must be related to
the employee’s employment;
(3)   Thirty-day period or less. Real property or improvements thereon, or
both, are leased for a period not to exceed 30 days. No extension of such lease
shall be permitted without calling for public bids;
(4)   Tourist activities without charge. Enterprises, shows, or activities
presented without charge primarily for the promotion of the tourist industry in
and for the city, regardless of which person, association, or company sponsors
such enterprise, show, or activity; provided that such lessee or tenant does
not sell merchandise on the premises, directly or indirectly, or engage in any
business promotionals or advertising, whether oral, by printed matter, signs,
displays, or electronic devices;
(5)   Neal S. Blaisdell Center or the Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell. The rental is
for the use of facilities for the purpose of holding any event or attraction at
the Neal S. Blaisdell Center or the Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell in accordance
with
Articles 6 through
9;
(6)   City employee organizations. Real property or office spaces, or both,
that are leased or rented to any federal credit union of city employees or
employees of city affiliate groups or organizations;
(7)   Eleemosynary corporations. Real property or improvements thereon, or
both, are leased or rented to any eleemosynary corporation, society, or
organization formed for the prevention of cruelty to animals, and which is
authorized and empowered by law to seize and impound stray dogs running at
large;
(8)   Government employment training programs. Real property or improvements
thereon, or both, are leased or rented to any nonprofit organization primarily
engaged in employment training programs sponsored by the federal, State, or
city government;
(9)   Accessory uses. Real property is leased or rented to contractors who are
awarded city construction contracts for use as a field office and storage of
equipment and supplies. Rental shall be at the fair market rental and shall be
limited to the duration of the construction contract only;
(10)   Governmental subdivisions. Real property and improvements thereon are
leased or rented for the use of any political or governmental subdivision of
the federal, State, or county governments;
(11)   Private developer. Real property and improvements thereon are leased or
rented to a private developer as described in §
38-3.3;
(12)   Housing and human services providers. Real property or improvements
thereon, or both, are leased to a provider of housing and human services as
prescribed in §
38-3.4; or
(13)   Telecommunications facilities. City property is leased for use as
telecommunications facilities under
Article 12.
(Sec. 30-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 3, § 28-3.1) (Am.
Ords. 90-14, 92-95, 04-33, 05-020, 06-45)
§ 38-3.2 Bidding not required—Concessions.
   The director may award concessions on terms and conditions approved by the
corporation counsel as to form and legality without calling for public bids
when:
(1)   Activities without charge. Concessions or concession spaces that are set
aside without any charge for events, productions, attractions, or activities,
including the exhibition and sale of handcrafts, works of art, produce, or
products of a nonprofit organization, as defined in
Article 1, or its members as long as the sale of any craft items, works of art,
produce, or products are made by the member of the organization who actually
makes, creates, grows, or gathers the items being sold, and as long as all net
profits earned by the nonprofit organization from the concession are to be
applied to the expenses of the organization incurred in connection with events
or activities directly related to the purpose for which it has been organized;
(2)   Periods of two days or less. Concessions or concession spaces that are
set aside for a period or periods of time not to exceed two successive days
without any charge:
(A)   For the exhibition and sale of works of art by artists who actually
produce the works of art being exhibited and sold;
(B)   For the exhibition and sale of handcrafted items being exhibited and
sold; and
(C)   For the display and sale of fruits and vegetables, seafoods, and prepared
but not manufactured food products by the person who actually grows or gathers
the fruits and vegetables, catches the seafoods, or prepares the food products
being displayed and sold;
(3)   Handicapped or blind persons. Concessions or concession spaces that are
set aside for the use of handicapped or blind persons or any nonprofit
organization primarily engaged in physical rehabilitative programs.
(A)   Definition. For the purposes of this subdivision, “handicapped or blind
persons” includes those persons referred to as “blind or visually handicapped
persons” in HRS § 102-14.
(B)   Nonprofit private corporations. The word “persons” contained herein
includes a nonprofit private corporation that has been exempted from taxation
as prescribed under § 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and
its articles of incorporation or association must have a provision contained
therein that the primary objective of the corporation is to service, aid or
abet, or assist the handicapped or blind persons.
(C)   No rent, except for maintenance cost. Notwithstanding any provisions to
the contrary contained herein, the director shall assess no rent for leasing or
renting of concessions or concession space to handicapped or blind persons,
including any vending machines assigned to such vendors; provided that for real
property, including improvements thereon, the director shall assess the cost of
maintenance of that portion of such real property leased or rented to
handicapped or blind persons;
(4)   Governmental subdivisions. Concessions or concession spaces that are set
aside for the use of any political or governmental subdivision of the federal,
State, or county governments;
(5)   Nonprofit beachboy concessions. Concessions or concession spaces that are
set aside for beachboys.
(A)   Policy. The council finds that Hawaiian beachboys are rooted in the
State’s historical and cultural traditions and that there is a need for the
city to provide for concessions available to licensed beachboys on beach
property under the jurisdiction of the city.
(B)   Definition. “Nonprofit beachboy concession” is the grant to a qualified
beachboy association of the privilege to conduct operations essentially retail
in nature, involving the rental of surfboards, bodyboards, or canoes. A
qualified beachboy association is an association that is dedicated to the
preservation of the beachboy tradition, is incorporated as a nonprofit
corporation in accordance with State law, and is exempted from taxation as
prescribed under 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
(C)   Special conditions to be met when providing nonprofit beachboy
concessions on beach park property under the jurisdiction of the city. The
following special conditions govern the award of nonprofit beachboy concessions
on beach park property under the jurisdiction of the city:
(i)   The department of parks and recreation shall designate the specific site
on the beach for the nonprofit beachboy concession near or around the Duke
Kahanamoku Statue, within Tax Map Key: 2-6-001-008-0000, to the extent
possible, and shall locate the site so as not to impede access to and use of
the beach by the public; provided that the location of the nonprofit beachboy
concession is subject to environmental factors, including but not limited to
sea level rise, erosion, and beach enlargement, and nothing herein requires the
city to maintain beachboy concession services;
(ii)   A beachboy concession may offer to provide instruction for the use of
rental equipment incidental to the rental of the equipment, and may offer the
sale of canoe rides incidental to the rental of canoes; and
(iii)   The department of enterprise services shall establish policies to
ensure that the use of the nonprofit beachboy concessions is restricted to a
qualified beachboy association as defined in subdivision (5)(B).
(D)   Fees and charges for beachboy concessions. The department of enterprise
services is authorized to set the fees charged by the beachboy concessions.
(E)   Rules. The director of enterprise services shall adopt rules pursuant to
HRS Chapter 91 necessary for the purposes of this subdivision;
(6)   Beach and ocean-related recreational services. Concessions or concession
spaces that provide for beach- or ocean-related recreational services; provided
that the concessions are awarded to the responsible offeror whose proposal is
determined to be most advantageous, taking into consideration prices and
evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals;
(7)   Nonprofit zoo, botanical garden, and unique park concessions. Concessions
or concession space at city zoos, botanical gardens, or parks that are
designated by the director of parks and recreation, in the director’s sole
discretion, as environmentally, culturally, historically, or operationally
unique that are set aside for use by support groups and are incorporated as
nonprofit corporations in accordance with State law, for the purpose of
supporting city aims and goals for the zoo, botanical gardens, and designated
parks; provided that each support group shall annually submit to the director
of parks and recreation and the council an audited financial statement of the
revenues and expenditures of that support group;
(8)   Zoo, botanical garden, and unique park concessions. Concessions or
concession spaces that are located within or at city zoos, botanical gardens,
or city parks that are designated by the director of parks and recreation, in
the director's sole discretion, as environmentally, culturally, historically,
or operationally unique; provided that the concessions are awarded to the
responsible offeror whose proposal is determined to be the most advantageous,
taking into consideration prices and evaluation factors set forth in the
request for proposals;
(9)   Vending machines. Concession spaces that are leased or rented for vending
machines, except insurance vending machines;
(10)   Public pay telephones. Concession spaces that are leased or rented for
public pay telephones;
(11)   Hans L’Orange baseball facility. Concessions or concession spaces at the
Hans L’Orange baseball facility that are set aside without charge to the
permittee of a professional sports activity; provided that the period of use of
such concessions or concession space is limited to the term of the permit. For
the purposes of this subdivision, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Permittee. The promoter, sponsor, exhibitor, league, or other person who
obtains a permit for the purposes of conducting a professional sports activity
at a professional sports facility for which admission fees are charged.
Professional Sports Activity. A game, event, exhibition, or activity of a
recognized sport for which admission fees are charged and in which the
participants receive compensation in return for participation in the sport.
Hans L’Orange Baseball Facility. The playing field, bleachers, stands, and
other areas of the facility enclosed by a fence;
(12)   Parking stalls for shared micromobility vehicles. Concessions or
concession spaces, including parking stalls, set aside for shared micromobility
vehicle businesses. For the purposes of this subdivision, “shared micromobility
vehicle business” has the same meaning as defined in §
15-31.1:
(13)   Lei vendors. Concessions or concession spaces for the purposes of the
sales of lei and lei-related products;
(14)   Automated teller machines. Concession spaces for the purposes of
placement and operation of automated teller machines;
(15)   Permits revocable with notice of 30 days or less. Concessions or
concession spaces that are contracted through permits revocable on notice of 30
days or less; provided that no permits are issued for more than a one-year
period;
(16)   Sole source concessions. Concessions that furnish goods or services for
which there is only one source, as determined by the director in writing;
provided that the written determination is included in the contract file; or
(17)   Concessions without charge. Concessions or concession spaces set aside
without any charge.
(Sec. 30-3.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 3, § 28-3.3) (Am.
Ords. 90-74, 94-53, 94-80, 95-61, 19-29, 23-26, 24-4)
§ 38-3.3 Bidding not required—Leasing to private developers.
(a)   The city may lease or rent real property, including improvements thereon,
to a private developer without calling for bids for the purpose of constructing
housing, commercial, parking, and other facilities or uses in implementing the
housing and human services programs of the city. As used in this section,
“developers” includes both for-profit and nonprofit developers of housing or
other facilities for any need group, including low-moderate income persons and
persons receiving human services as defined in § 
38-3.4.
(b)   The city agency shall make a public announcement on each occasion when
any project is proposed or contemplated and set forth the objectives to be
achieved for the project and request interested persons to submit proposals
therefor. The city agency shall make such announcements in a daily newspaper of
general circulation in the State once a week for two successive weeks. Such
public announcement shall include but not be limited to the following
information:
(1)   Description of the proposed project and the objectives for the project,
including a description of the type of need group to be served;
(2)   Location of the proposed project;
(3)   Scope of the project;
(4)   Length of the lease;
(5)   Amount and type of government funds available for the project; and
(6)   Description of any special requirements or unique features of the
project.
Any interested developer shall file a statement of the developer’s intention to
submit a proposal with the city agency on or before 30 days after the last
public announcement.
(c)   (1)   The city agency shall examine all proposals from interested
developers and determine those developers the city agency deems qualified to
perform the services for the specific project under consideration. The agency
shall thereafter select no fewer than three developers who are considered most
qualified to perform the required services; provided that if there are fewer
than three developers, after the deadline for submitting proposals, the agency
may still select a developer and file such report with the city clerk. The city
agency may negotiate with developers submitting the best three proposals in
making a final selection. If no qualified proposals are received in response to
the notice, the city agency may negotiate with and select a developer; provided
that that fact is noted in the report filed pursuant to subdivision (2).
(2)   Upon completion of the evaluation and selection process, the director
shall file a written report with the city clerk, including the results of the
negotiations with the successful developer. The city clerk shall post the
report for public inspection in City Hall where other public notices and
meeting agendas of the council are posted. The report shall be a public record.
(d)   The evaluation and selection by any city agency of the design and
developer for any housing project may include consideration of the following
criteria:
(1)   Implementation of the general plan objectives and policies in the area of
housing;
(2)   Compatibility with all other applicable general plan objectives and
policies;
(3)   Contribution toward implementing the planned land use pattern and other
development or redevelopment policies for the site and surrounding area, as
specified in the adopted development plan and any adopted special or special
area plan district covering the area;
(4)   Attractiveness and functionality of the project design. Specific
considerations shall include:
(A)   Conformance with the urban design principles and controls specified in
the adopted development plan for the area;
(B)   Relationship of structures within the project to each other, and of the
entire project to surrounding structures, in terms of providing a harmonious
composition of masses, colors, and textures;
(C)   Integration of spaces and building forms;
(D)   Relationship of off-street parking to the overall vehicular circulation
system;
(E)   Pedestrian circulation plan;
(F)   Provision of recreational and other facilities for community and leisure
time activities; and
(G)   Landscaping of the site.
(5)   Economic feasibility of the project. Specific considerations shall
include:
(A)   Demand for the type and price of housing to be provided;
(B)   Projected development costs;
(C)   Projected income from unit sales/rentals;
(D)   Availability of federal aid; and
(E)   Anticipated cash flow.
(6)   Developer’s previous experience and financial capability; and
(7)   Compensation to be provided the city for the land lease or rental.
(e)   After selection of the developer, the city agency shall issue to the
developer a letter of intent which shall indicate to the developer that the
developer may proceed at the developer’s own expense and risk to initiate and
undertake such studies as the developer may wish.
(f)   After the receipt by the city clerk of the developer selection report,
the council may require the city administration to prepare an appraisal of the
land on which the project is proposed. The council may require the appraisal to
be based on the land’s highest and best use, the developer’s proposed use, or
both. In either case, the appraisal shall be based on the current Uniform
Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice (USPAP) and Advisory Opinions as
adopted by the Appraisal Standards Board of the Appraisal Foundation. The
requirements shall be expressed in a resolution approved by the council. The
resolution also must include a due date for submittal of the appraisal to the
council. The mayor may refuse to prepare the appraisal, provided notice thereof
is submitted to the council within five working days of the city
administration’s receiving the resolution.
(g)   At the earliest feasible date, a lease and development contract shall be
submitted by the city agency to the council for approval by resolution;
provided that the council, before approval by resolution, may add, delete, or
amend any term or condition of the lease and development contract.
The development contract must set forth in detail all covenants, obligations,
restrictions, requirements, and conditions to govern the proposed development
and subsequent operation of the project; provided that the development contract
must indicate the studies and design work that must be satisfactorily carried
out and approved as a condition to the execution of a lease for the property.
The lease may be submitted to the council for approval by resolution separately
from and after the submission of the development contract.
(h)   The lease rent may be negotiated. If the lease rent is for a nominal
amount, the city agency shall certify that:
(1)   A public hearing was held on the project, including the lease terms;
(2)   There is a compelling public need for the housing or human services to be
provided;
(3)   A suitable and reasonably priced private facility is not available to
meet the need;
(4)   The developer has demonstrated financial need; and
(5)   The lease complies with the restrictions specified in §
38-4.2.
(i)   Any city agency administering a city housing project affected by this
chapter shall establish a system to determine preferences by lot in the event
the number of qualified applicants exceeds the number of housing units
available. Where the city has established preferences for housing units by
ordinance or rules, the order of preferences within each category for the
selection of units must be determined by lot.
(j)   With respect to any lease of city property used for the housing of low-
moderate income persons, notwithstanding §
38-4.2(1), the city agency may extend any existing lease, subject to council
approval by resolution, including a lease executed before October 22, 2015,*
one or more times with the original lessee or a subsequent lessee approved by
the city, each time for a period of up to an additional 75 years, if the city
agency certifies that:
(1)   The city continues to have the public need for the affordable housing
located on the leased land and is reasonably likely to continue to have such
public need for the period for which the lease is being extended;
(2)   The lease extension will support the lessee’s ability to finance any
necessary rehabilitation and continued upkeep of the affordable units; and
(3)   The lessee has experience operating, rehabilitating, and owning or
leasing multi-family housing for low-moderate income persons.
(1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 3, § 28-3.4) (Added by Ord. 90-14; Am. Ords. 97-08,
04-33, 15-43)
Editor’s note:
   * “October 22, 2015” is substituted for “the effective date of this
ordinance.”
§ 38-3.4 Bidding not required—Housing or human services providers.
(a)   The city may lease or rent real property or improvements thereon, or
both, without recourse to public bidding to providers of housing or human
services. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Human Services. Includes child care, health services, and social services.
Providers. Operators or managers of housing units for designated need groups,
or operators or managers of other facilities wherein human services are
provided to designated need groups.
Social Services. Those services required by persons with social problems or
physical or mental disabilities. Persons requiring health or social services
are also termed persons with special needs.
(b)   When such lease or rental to providers of housing or human services is
contemplated, the director shall cause to be published a notice stating:
(1)   The service objectives to be achieved, including the type or types of
housing or human services to be provided and any limits on client fees charged;
(2)   The minimum qualifications that providers of housing or human services
must meet;
(3)   The criteria to be used to rank and select proposals; and
(4)   The proposal form, applicable deadlines, and other information necessary
for interested persons to submit proposals.
The notice shall be published in a daily newspaper of general circulation at
least once a week for two successive weeks, and the last notice shall be
published at least 14 days before the deadline for submission of proposals.
(c)   The appropriate city agency shall examine all proposals properly
submitted from interested persons, evaluate them according to the stated
criteria, and determine the best three proposals thereby. The city agency may
negotiate with persons submitting the best three proposals in making a final
selection of a proposal.
(d)   Following selection of a proposal, the city agency shall file a written
report with the city clerk containing the public notice published to request
proposals, a listing of the top three proposals, and identifying the proposal
selected, including the results of any negotiations with the selected proposer.
(e)   Upon receipt of the report, the city clerk shall post the report for
public inspection in City Hall where other public notices and meeting agendas
of the council are posted. The report shall be a public record.
(f)   Following selection of the proposal, the city agency shall submit a lease
or rental agreement therefor to the council for approval by resolution. The
lease agreement shall contain any conditions and requirements applicable to the
housing or human service to be provided, including client fees to be charged.
(g)   The lease rent may be negotiated. If the lease rent is for a nominal
amount, the city agency shall certify that:
(1)   A public hearing was held on the project, including the lease terms;
(2)   There is a compelling public need for the housing or human services to be
provided;
(3)   A suitable and reasonably priced private facility is not available;
(4)   The developer has demonstrated financial need; and
(5)   The lease complies with the restrictions specified in §
38-4.2.
(h)   Notwithstanding subsections (b) through (g), in cases of impending
foreclosure affecting a nonprofit housing or human services provider, the
council, by resolution, may authorize the director to assign a lease to a new
nonprofit housing or human services provider without a request for proposals.
(1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 3, § 28-3.5) (Added by Ord. 92-95; Am. Ord. 04-33)
§ 38-3.5 Bidding not required—Outdoor dining services.
   The city department or agency designated by the mayor under §
13-20.3 may issue permits for outdoor dining services pursuant to that section
without calling for public bids.
(Added by Ord. 25-14)
ARTICLE 4: TERM OF AGREEMENTS
Sections
   
38-4.1   Duration
   
38-4.2   Lease restrictions—Generally
§ 38-4.1 Duration.
   The term of any contract to lease or rent property of the city shall not
exceed five years; provided that the council, by resolution, may authorize the
leasing or renting of property for a longer period when deemed necessary in the
public interest and:
(1)   When the lessee or tenant is required by the terms of the proposed
contract to expend the sum of $25,000 or more for capital assets, or to provide
for the renovation or maintenance of any capital asset, or the lessee’s or
tenant’s expenditure is equal to or in excess of the sum of $25,000, as
determined by the council. The term “capital asset” as used herein shall
include not only the construction of improvements, but the installation of
furniture and fixtures, the cost of which would be depreciable over the period
of the concession or lease in excess of five years;
(2)   When the property is devoted to the training and education of handicapped
or blind persons and by the terms of the proposed contract, the lessee or
tenant is required to construct on such property any improvement, the estimated
cost of which, including cost of labor and materials, is equal to, or in excess
of, the sum of $10,000, as determined by the council;
(3)   When the real property is leased or rented for the use of the State or
federal government or any agency thereof or the board of water supply;
(4)   When the city enters into a development contract with a person for the
development of the property and the construction of housing units of all kinds
and types as permitted in the area where the property is situated, or any other
type of structural development which may be beneficial to the city; or
(5)   When the real property is leased to a housing or human services provider
in accordance with §
38-3.4 and the city agency proposing the lease certifies that the longer term
is necessary to secure noncity financing or to enable the transfer of the real
property to a different housing or human services provider.
(Sec. 30-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 4, § 28-4.1) (Am.
Ords. 90-14, 02-55, 04-33)
§ 38-4.2 Lease restrictions—Generally.
   Except as otherwise provided, the following restrictions apply to all leases
made in accordance with this chapter:
(1)   No lease shall be for a longer term than 75 years, including the initial
term and any renewal or extension; and
(2)   No lease shall be made to any person who is in arrears in the payment of
taxes, rents, or other obligations owing to the city.
(1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 4, § 28-4.2) (Added by Ord. 90-14; Am. Ord. 04-33)
ARTICLE 5: PENALTY
Section
   
38-5.1   Disciplinary action
§ 38-5.1 Disciplinary action.
(a)   Any officer or employee who violates this chapter upon a finding pursuant
to a hearing to be conducted by such person’s appointing authority, shall be
subject to disciplinary action by such person’s appointing authority.
(b)   Any lessee or tenant violating this chapter shall cause the termination
of the lease or tenancy and the lessee or tenant may be subject to the payment
of any outstanding rental before and after such hearing.
(c)   Any person, officer, or employee violating this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to §
1-3.1.
(Sec. 30-5.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 5, § 28-5.1)
ARTICLE 6: GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR THE LEASE AND RENTAL POLICY
FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF ENTERPRISE SERVICES
Sections
   
38-6.1   Purpose
   
38-6.2   Definitions
   
38-6.3   Rental of facilities
   
38-6.4   Equal treatment
   
38-6.5   Payment in advance
   
38-6.6   Form of payment
   
38-6.7   Use without payment prohibited
   
38-6.8   Bookings and cancellation—Appeal
   
38-6.9   Insurance
   
38-6.10   Security
   
38-6.11   Waiver of fees—Use of facilities for fundraising—Authority
   
38-6.12   Waiver of rental rates, charges and rules—Conditions
   
38-6.13   Co-promotion of events by the department of enterprise services
§ 38-6.1 Purpose.
   The purpose of
Articles 6 through
9 is to establish a uniform policy for the lease and rental of facilities at
the Neal S. Blaisdell Center and the Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell, including
awarding of concessions therein.
(Sec. 29-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 6, §
28-6.1)
§ 38-6.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of
Articles 6 through
9, the following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
Admission Event. An event at which a fee is charged to or other consideration
is exacted from an exhibitor, organization, or member of the public for use of
facilities or attendance at the event.
Agency. Any office, department, board, commission, or other governmental unit
of the city, including the council and its officers.
Concession. The grant to a private individual, partnership, corporation, or
other entity of the privilege to conduct operations essentially retail in
nature, involving the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, or services to the
general public, such as restaurants, retail stores, parking facilities, and
golf driving ranges, in or on land or buildings owned by the city.
Deposit. The established portion of the rent charged to the tenant of an
admission event to complete a contract.
Dark Day Cost. The one-day cost of maintaining a facility in good condition,
when it is not rented.
Director of Enterprise Services. The director of enterprise services of the
City and County of Honolulu.
Exhibit Show. Any event where the primary performance is a group of individual
displays of products or services.
Facility Daily Operating Cost. The combined dark day and use day cost to
operate a facility, excluding any cost for services, that is not part of the
rental. The facility daily operating cost shall be the basis for the fixed
rental rate.
Gross Receipts from Admission Charges. Any consideration or value received by
or on behalf of the tenant, less federal admission tax and State general excise
tax, in connection with the use of the facilities rented, including admission
to partake of food and refreshment to be served at the facilities covered by
this chapter, whether such consideration or value is designated as a donation,
gratuity, contribution, or the like, and whether receipt of such consideration
or value is evidenced by a ticket, card, ribbon, button, token, badge, or the
like.
Managing Director. The managing director of the City and County of Honolulu.
Meeting Room. The following rooms located at the Neal S. Blaisdell Center:
Pikake Room; Hawaii Suites 1 to 12; Galleria 1st floor or 2nd floor; Maui Room;
Oahu Room; Kauai Room; and Waikiki Room.
Net Square Footage Rent. The rent charged for the square footage of sold booth
space in any trade or exhibit show.
Nonadmission Event. An event at which members of the public and exhibitors are
admitted without charge or other obligation to pay for attendance at the event
or use of the facilities, except for an event where the facilities are rented
to a nonprofit organization which rents the facilities pursuant to the terms
and conditions set forth in
Article 9.
Nonperformance Day. The period from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight when the
facilities are used for any purpose not amounting to a “performance day.” The
term nonperformance day shall include but is not limited to the use of the
facilities for rehearsals, moving in and out of equipment, and preparation of
the facilities for the performance or event. The costs set forth in §
38-7.2 shall apply.
Nonprofit Organization. An association, corporation, or other entity actively
pursuing its primary purpose in the State, organized and operated exclusively
for religious, charitable, scientific, literary, cultural, educational,
recreational, or other nonprofit purposes, no part of the assets, income, or
earnings of which inures to the benefit of any individual or member thereof,
and whose charter or other enabling act contains a provision that, in the event
of dissolution, the assets owned by such association, corporation, or other
entity shall be distributed to another association, corporation, or other
entity organized and operated exclusively for nonprofit purposes, and which
further qualifies for exemption from the general excise tax provisions of HRS
Chapter 237, as amended, and under § 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954,
as amended. Such nonprofit organization must not merely be a sponsor of the
event, production, attraction, or activity being given, but must actively
promote, produce, stage, or conduct such event, production, attraction, or
activity.
Overtime Rate. The rate quoted per each hour or fraction thereof and will be
applicable when any facility is used beyond the rental periods specified
herein, meaning the time period after 12:00 midnight. However, at the
discretion of the director of enterprise services, a one-hour grace period
before the overtime rate for major events becomes applicable may be allowed.
Rental of a facility solely on overtime rates is not authorized.
Performance Day. The period from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight when the
facilities are used for an attraction, event, or occasion attended by the
public audience or members of a group. The term performance day shall include
the use of the facilities for the purpose of recording, filming, or televising
an attraction or event for a commercial purpose or for a purpose other than for
the personal use of the camera or recording operator. However, the recording,
filming, or televising of an event or attraction, without charge by the tenant,
for a bona fide news purpose or to advertise the event or attraction to be
show, at the facilities covered herein, shall not otherwise convert a
nonperformance day to a performance day.
Sold Booth Space. Any booth space paid by cash, trade, or other form of
payment.
Use Day Operating Cost. The incremental operating cost (above dark day cost)
incurred when the facility is in use. Use day operating cost includes labor,
equipment, and services not otherwise assessed as a direct cost to the tenant.
Use day operating cost shall be the basis for the reduced rental rates assessed
for nonadmission events and the deposits assessed for admission events.
(Sec. 29-1.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 6, §
28-6.2) (Am. Ords. 03-03, 05-017)
§ 38-6.3 Rental of facilities.
   The use and rental of facilities at the Neal S. Blaisdell Center and the Tom
Moffatt Waikiki Shell (hereinafter referred to as “facilities”) shall be
permitted according to
Articles 6 through
9.
(Sec. 29-1.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 6, §
28-6.3) (Am. Ord. 03-03)
§ 38-6.4 Equal treatment.
   Rent and all other charges shall apply equally to all tenants using the
facilities covered under this chapter, except as provided herein.
(Sec. 29-1.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 6, §
28-6.4) (Am. Ord. 03-03)
§ 38-6.5 Payment in advance.
   All charges shall be paid in advance of an event, except for charges that
cannot be determined in advance. The applicable rent shall be paid upon
execution of the rental agreement, except that at the discretion of the
director of enterprise services, the rent may be paid on a payment schedule.
(Sec. 29-1.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 6, §
28-6.5) (Am. Ord. 03-03)
§ 38-6.6 Form of payment.
   All payments to the city shall be by legal tender, certified check,
cashier’s check, bank draft, postal money order, traveler’s check, accepted
charge card, or some other similar form determined to be suitable by the
director; provided that the director may authorize use of a performance bond or
other guaranty in lieu of any deposit required for use of any facility at the
Neal S. Blaisdell Center.
(Sec. 29-1.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 6, §
28-6.6) (Am. Ords. 98-17, 03-03)
§ 38-6.7 Use without payment prohibited.
   The director of enterprise services is prohibited from allowing the use of
any facility without payment except as specified herein.
(Sec. 29-1.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 6, §
28-6.7) (Am. Ord. 03-03)
§ 38-6.8 Bookings and cancellation—Appeal.
(a)   The facilities covered under this section shall be opened for bookings
for use by any individual or entity, without discrimination as to race, color,
creed, or belief; provided that the director of enterprise services may cancel
or refuse a booking if the director finds that the event or attraction booked
or being booked will involve activities which are contrary to law, inconsistent
with the public interest, or threaten public safety, and provided that the
director may give preference to events which promote Hawaii-based artists,
whenever practicable. Except as hereinafter provided, the director of
enterprise services shall have full authority in scheduling events or
attractions, taking into consideration the possible financial return to the
city and the overall economic benefits to the people of the city; the matter of
public appeal, including the presentation of a diversity of events and
attractions to the people of the city and the avoidance of oversaturation of
bookings of events or attractions of a similar nature; the possible conflict of
interests between the event or attraction of a prospective tenant and a tenant
already booked; the maximum and full-time utilization of the facilities covered
by this article; and other pertinent factors, all according to the best
interests of the city. In scheduling events or attractions at the Neal S.
Blaisdell Center Concert Hall, the director of enterprise services also shall
take into consideration the need to make available and to preserve
opportunities for the residents of the city to experience, on a continuing
basis, performances of symphonic music, opera, and ballet in an appropriate
concert hall setting, and the director, in accordance with this consideration,
may give preference in concert hall scheduling to performances of symphonic
music, opera, and ballet by Hawaii-based nonprofit organizations dedicated to
these performing arts.
(b)   The director of enterprise services shall render a decision on the matter
of any application for a booking within a reasonable time after such
application has been made. Any party aggrieved by a decision of the director of
enterprise services on the matter of bookings shall be entitled to have the
decision reviewed by the managing director; provided that the request for
review is submitted in writing to the managing director within five calendar
days after notification of the decision made by the director of enterprise
services. If the managing director finds that the director of enterprise
services’ action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact or that
the director of enterprise services had acted in an arbitrary or capricious
manner or had manifestly abused the director’s discretion, the managing
director shall modify or reverse the decision of the director of enterprise
services; otherwise, the managing director shall affirm the decision of the
director of enterprise services.
(c)   The managing director shall take action within a reasonable time after
receipt of the request for review. The decision of the managing director shall
be final.
(Sec. 29-1.8, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 6, §
28-6.8) (Am. Ords. 94-77, 03-03)
§ 38-6.9 Insurance.
   The city may procure public liability insurance protecting the city from
liability resulting from the use of the facilities mentioned herein in amounts
and coverage as recommended by the director of enterprise services and as
approved by the director. Fire and property damage insurance protecting such
facilities shall be procured in such amounts and under such conditions as may
be prescribed by ordinance. The director of enterprise services is authorized
to require a tenant to procure public liability, workers’ compensation,
property damage, and fire insurance in such amounts and coverage as may be
required by the director of enterprise services. The director of enterprise
services may require other insurance coverage, such as food products’ liability
coverage, if the director deems the same necessary. Any party aggrieved by the
decision of the director of enterprise services under this section shall have
the right of appeal to the managing director as provided in §
38-6.8.
(Sec. 29-1.9, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 6, §
28-6.9) (Am. Ord. 03-03)
§ 38-6.10 Security.
   Where the risks of nonperformance or improper performance of the rental
agreement appear great, the director of enterprise services may require the
tenant to give performance security by means of legal tender, certified check,
cashier’s check, bank draft, postal money order, traveler’s check, surety bond,
or in some other suitable form to be approved by the director, in an amount
deemed appropriate by the director of enterprise services to assure full
performance on the part of the tenant or to secure the interests of the city
against improper performance or use of the rented facility.
(Sec. 29-1.10, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 6,
§ 28-6.10) (Am. Ord. 03-03)
§ 38-6.11 Waiver of fees—Use of facilities for fundraising—Authority.
(a)   Any other provision of this chapter notwithstanding, the director of
enterprise services shall waive any and all rental fees and related charges,
including service charges, for the use of the Neal S. Blaisdell Center and the
Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell for persons wishing to use such facilities to hold a
fundraising event for victims of a major disaster occurring within the city.
(b)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Fundraiser. An event planned within six months of the occurrence of a major
disaster wherein any and all proceeds collected, with the exception of all
customary expenses for the production of such an event and the actual expenses
for items which are sold to raise additional proceeds at the event, are to be
used to aid the victims of the major disaster. The director of enterprise
services shall adopt rules pursuant to subsection (d) establishing and defining
“customary expenses” as used in this section.
Major Disaster. Any hurricane, tornado, storm, flood, high water, tidal wave,
tsunami, earthquake, volcanic eruption, landslide, mud slide, drought, fire,
explosion, or other catastrophe occurring in any part of the city which causes
damage, suffering, and loss to such a degree that:
(1)   The president of the United States has declared, pursuant to the Disaster
Relief Act of 1974, P.L. 93-288, that a major disaster exists such that the
city or any part thereof is eligible for federal disaster assistance programs;
(2)   The governor of the State has declared pursuant to HRS Chapter 209 that a
major disaster has occurred;
(3)   The mayor has issued a proclamation declaring the existence of a major
disaster; or
(4)   The council has adopted a resolution declaring the existence of a major
disaster.
(c)   Any person making application to the director of enterprise services to
use the facilities at the Neal S. Blaisdell Center or Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell
pursuant to this section shall certify in writing that all the proceeds shall
be used in conformity with the requirements of this section.
(d)   The director of enterprise services is authorized to adopt rules pursuant
to HRS Chapter 91 not inconsistent with this section, to administer and
implement this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 6, § 28-6.11) (Added by Ord. 88-23; Am. Ords. 88-96,
96-58, 03-03)
§ 38-6.12 Waiver of rental rates, charges and rules—Conditions.
(a)   The director of enterprise services may waive the percentage rental
charges set forth in §
38-7.1 and any or all rules governing the reservation, rental, and use of the
Neal S. Blaisdell Center Arena for a party applying for a waiver, for a maximum
of two consecutive years; provided that the director determines that an event
or attraction to be presented by the party:
(1)   Offers the potential for revenues to the city in subsequent years that
are greater than the amount of the charges waived;
(2)   Offers the public a form of entertainment or sporting event that is not
currently available at any facility in the city;
(3)   Will involve the rental of the facilities for at least six performance or
game days per year;
(4)   Offers the potential to enhance the economic growth of the city by
increasing tourism, attracting attendance by off-island fans or sports
enthusiasts, promoting Hawaii by broadcasting the events nationally and
internationally, and boosting retail sales in the city;
(5)   Will not preclude the use of the Neal S. Blaisdell Center Arena by the
regular tenants of these facilities during the year;
(6)   Will not require the city to incur any costs for improvements or the
purchase of new or additional equipment for a single event or attraction or to
incur increased maintenance costs; and
(7)   Will not interfere with or impair any existing contracts entered into by
the city with commercial vendors, concessionaires, or third parties involving
the use of the Neal S. Blaisdell Center Arena.
(b)   The director of enterprise services is authorized to adopt rules pursuant
to HRS Chapter 91 to implement this section, including establishing the waiver
application form to be used by an applicant requesting a waiver.
(1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 6, § 28-6.12) (Added by Ord. 98-17; Am. Ord. 03-03)
§ 38-6.13 Co-promotion of events by the department of enterprise services.
   The director of enterprise services may waive the percentage rental charges
set forth in §
38-7.1 and enter into a co-promotion relationship with a tenant to bring to the
Neal S. Blaisdell Center Arena, the Neal S. Blaisdell Center Exhibition Hall,
the Neal S. Blaisdell Center Concert Hall, or the Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell a
major commercial event which will be popular with the community and whose
initial cost of presentation creates a financial risk which would prohibit the
tenant from booking the event without a shared risk arrangement. The director
of enterprise services may then co-promote the event with the tenant. All
expenses from the event for both the city and the tenant will be netted from
gross receipts. The net proceeds from the event would then be split equally
between the tenant and the city.
   The director of enterprise services shall report to the council no later
than 30 days after June 30 of each year detailing, for the fiscal year just
ended, the events co-promoted by the department and the increased revenues and
bookings resulting therefrom compared to the previous year.
(1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 6, § 28-6.13) (Added by Ord. 06-35)
ARTICLE 7: RENTAL SCHEDULE
Sections
   
38-7.1   Rates
   
38-7.2   Services included in rental charge
   
38-7.3   Assignment of rights or privileges prohibited
   
38-7.4   Broadcasting, taping, or filming—Permission required
   
38-7.5   Facilities use by city agencies
   
38-7.6   Rules
§ 38-7.1 Rates.
(a)   Nonadmission events. Users of facilities used for nonadmission events
shall pay the following charges as applicable.
(1)   Except for events qualifying for reduced rental rates, the following
fixed rental rates will be charged. The fixed rental rates must cover the
facility daily operating cost of each facility.
(A) Arena                                    
   Performance day                       $5,396
   Nonperformance day                    $2,698
   Overtime rate (per hour)              $594
(B) Concert Hall
   Performance day                       $3,409
   Nonperformance day                    $1,705
   Overtime rate (per hour)              $375
(C) Exhibition Hall
   Performance day                       $3,901
   Nonperformance day                    $1,951
   Overtime rate (per hour)              $429
(D) Pikake Room
   Performance day                       $950
   Nonperformance day                    $475
   Overtime rate (per hour)              $105
(E) Hawaii Suites 1 to 12
   Performance day                       $92
   Nonperformance day                    $92
(F) Galleria 1st floor or 2nd floor
   Performance day                       $230
   Nonperformance day                    $115
   Overtime rate (per hour)              $25
(G) Maui Room
   Performance day                       $144
   Nonperformance day                    $144
(H) Oahu Room
   Performance day                       $121
   Nonperformance day                    $121
(I) Kauai Room
   Performance day                       $109
   Nonperformance day                    $109
(J)  Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell
   Performance Day                       $1,948
   Nonperformance Day                    $974
(K)  Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell Amphitheater
   Performance day                       $649
   Nonperformance day                    $325
(L) Nonfacility Space
   Performance day                       $0.04/sq. ft.
   Nonperformance day                    $0.02/sq. ft.
 
(2)   Reduced rental rates. When facilities are only rented on low use days
(Mondays, Tuesdays, or Wednesdays) or less than five weeks in advance of the
use day, the tenant shall pay a reduced rent. The reduced rental rates must
cover the use day operating cost for each facility. Facility rentals by the
Blaisdell Center’s in-house caterers for all events approved by the director of
enterprise services will be assessed at the reduced rental rate except where
the caterer’s client is a qualified nonprofit organization as defined in this
article. In such situation, the caterer will be assessed the applicable
nonprofit rate.
(A) Arena
   Performance day                       $3,788
   Nonperformance day                    $1,894
(B) Concert Hall
   Performance day                       $2,121
   Nonperformance day                    $1,061
(C) Exhibition Hall
   Performance day                       $2,473
   Nonperformance day                    $1,237
(D) Pikake Room
   Performance day                       $685
   Nonperformance day                    $343
(E) Hawaii Suites 1 to 12
   Performance day                       $69
(F) Galleria 1st floor or 2nd floor
   Performance day                       $230
(G) Maui Room
   Performance day                       $144
(H) Oahu Room
   Performance day                       $121
(I) Kauai Room
   Performance day                       $110
(J)  Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell
   Performance day                       $1,558
   Nonperformance day                    $779
(K)  Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell Amphitheater
   Performance day                       $520
   Nonperformance day                    $260
(L) Nonfacility Space                       $0.04/sq. ft.
 
(b)   Admission events. Users of facilities used for admission events shall pay
the following charges as applicable:
(1)   Deposits. Deposits for admission events must cover the facility use day
operating cost and are due upon execution of the rental agreement:
(A) Arena and Arena Theater Configuration (1/2 arena seating and  
setup for stage shows)
   Performance day                                            $3,788
   Nonperformance day                                         $1,894
(B) Concert Hall
   Performance day                                            $2,121
   Nonperformance day                                         $1,061
(C) Exhibition Hall
   Performance day                                            $2,473
   Nonperformance day                                         $1,237
(D) Pikake Room
   Performance day                                            $685
   Nonperformance day                                         $343
(E) Hawaii Suites 1 to 12
   Performance day                                            $69
(F) Galleria 1st floor or 2nd floor
   Performance day                                            $230
(G) Maui Room
   Performance day                                            $144
(H) Oahu Room
   Performance day                                            $121
(I) Kauai Room
   Performance day                                            $109
(J)  Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell
   Performance day                                            $1,557
   Nonperformance day                                         $779
(K)  Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell Amphitheater
   Performance day                                            $520
   Nonperformance day                                         $260
(L) Nonfacility Space                                            $0.04/sq. ft.
 
(2)   Percentage rental rates.
The tenant shall pay the applicable deposit or percentage rent, whichever is
greater, based upon gross receipts from admission charges. Percentage rent will
be based upon the schedule listed below and calculated on gross receipts from
admission charges for each contracted event, which performances must occur in a
period of up to seven consecutive days. Each seven consecutive day period or
portion thereof begins a new calculation of the percentage rent period.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a nonprofit organization, as defined in §
38-6.2, which takes a collection or donation from attendees at an event held at
the Blaisdell Center or the Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell, but does not charge a
formal admission fee, will be charged no more than three times the minimum
deposit for each performance day as facility rent.
(A)   Arena.
(i)   Full arena.
10 percent of gross receipts up to $150,000; plus
8.5 percent of gross receipts from $150,000.01 to $250,000; plus
7.5 percent of gross receipts from $250,000.01 to $350,000; plus
6.5 percent of gross receipts from $350,000.01 to $450,000; plus
5.5 percent of gross receipts from $450,000.01 to $550,000; plus
5 percent of gross receipts over $550,000.
(ii)   Arena in theater configuration. 5 percent of gross receipts.
(iii)   Should a tenant request a cap on the percentage rent as a condition of
bringing to the Arena a major popular commercial event with a minimum of two
consecutive performances, the director may set a rent cap as follows:
For the first two performances, the percentage rent will be calculated as
prescribed in this section and the percentage rent will be capped at a total of
$53,000.
For each additional performance of the event, the percentage rent will be
calculated as prescribed in this section and the percentage rent will be capped
at $26,500.
(B)   Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell.
(i)   Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell.
When the Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell is rented during the months of April through
August, the following percentage rates will apply:
10 percent of gross receipts up to $75,000; plus
8.5 percent of gross receipts from $75,000.01 to $150,000; plus
5 percent of gross receipts over $150,000.
When the Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell is rented during the low-use months of
September through March, the following percentage rates will apply:
8.5 percent of gross receipts up to $150,000; plus
5 percent of gross receipts over $150,000.
(ii)   Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell Amphitheater. 5 percent of gross receipts.
(C)   Concert Hall.
5 percent of gross receipts up to $500,000; plus
5 percent of gross receipts in excess of 75 percent of the weekly gross
potential (based upon ticket price and salable seats). The maximum weekly
percentage rent for the Concert Hall will be $40,250.
(D)   Exhibition Hall. 10 percent of gross receipts.
(E)   Pikake Room. 5 percent of gross receipts.
(F)   Hawaii Suites, Maui, Oahu, Kauai, and Galleria. 5 percent of gross
receipts.
(3)   Net square footage rental. Net square footage is calculated by the
facility in which the booth space is located. The booth space will be the area
a subcontractor of the tenant has rented to present a product, service, or
other commercial display. Rent will be 18 cents per net square foot per event
day. A tenant shall pay the greater of the deposit, the total net square
footage rental, or the percentage rental rate for each event day.
(4)   Exhibition hall and meeting rooms rental for fundraisers. Where the
exhibition hall and meeting rooms are rented for the presentation of a
fundraising event sponsored by a nonprofit organization, a bona fide political
party, which qualifies under Hawaii’s election laws, or a bona fide political
candidate, who qualifies under Hawaii’s election laws, the tenant of the
exhibition hall shall pay the applicable rental charge or 10 percent of the
donated gross receipts collected for the event, whichever is greater; provided
that a rental cap will apply which provides that the percentage rental must not
exceed twice the applicable deposit; and this rental cap will not apply to the
Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell, arena, or the concert hall if it is used for a
fundraising event.
(5)   Facility use for indoor sports practice rental. When the sports surface
is already installed, ordinary lighting is used, and there are no additional
labor, cleanup, and air conditioning costs incurred by the city, the use of the
facility for practice purposes, at the discretion of the director of enterprise
services, is permissible without charge; provided that a waiver of liability is
signed by the tenant.
(c)   Nonperformance day rental.
(1)   When renting either the exhibition hall or the Pikake Room, the tenant
will be entitled to the nonperformance day rental rate for the number of days
equal to the number of performance days. Any nonperformance days exceeding that
number will be charged at the fixed rental rate, reduced rental rates, or
deposit, as applicable, for a performance day for the facility.
(2)   Any tenant renting the arena for an event which requires more than eight
hours to change over the facility for that event will be charged a
nonperformance day at the beginning and end of the booking.
(d)   Charges for facilities and services not specified. The director of
enterprise services is authorized to establish and assess reasonable rental
charges for those facilities and services not specified herein.
(Sec. 29-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 7, §
28-7.1) (Am. Ords. 98-17, 03-03, 05-017, 06-35, 06-42, 11-15, 20-34, 22-23 )
§ 38-7.2 Services included in rental charge.
   In return for the rental payment, the city shall furnish the tenant with the
use of the facilities for the purposes specified, ordinary lighting, ordinary
cleanup, and air conditioning, if available. The rental payment shall not
include the services of electricians, spotlight operators, stagehands,
musicians, ticket sellers, ushering personnel, janitors, security, medical
services, or any other services and extraordinary costs, unless specified in
the rental agreement. The director of enterprise services may require a tenant
to make a reasonable deposit to be determined at the director’s discretion to
cover anticipated extraordinary cleanup costs, or require the tenant to arrange
for cleanup of the facility at the tenant’s own expense, or both.
(Sec. 29-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 7, §
28-7.3) (Am. Ord. 03-03)
§ 38-7.3 Assignment of rights or privileges prohibited.
   The assignment of any rights or privileges under a rental agreement is
prohibited without the written consent of the director. When there is an
authorized full or partial assignment of such rights or privileges, the
director of enterprise services is authorized to charge and collect from the
tenant-assignor an additional sum equal to the total assessment for the
facility rented. Sections 38-6.9 and 38-6.10 shall also apply to an assignee.
(Sec. 29-2.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 7, §
28-7.4) (Am. Ord. 03-03)
§ 38-7.4 Broadcasting, taping, or filming—Permission required.
   All rental agreements shall reserve the right to the city to negotiate
charges for radio and television broadcasts, motion picture, or recording
privileges in the facilities, not exceeding 10 percent of anticipated receipts
from the sale of broadcast rights by the tenant, and residual payments for the
use of any film, videotape, recording, or taping made in a facility covered by
the policy. The use of the facilities to broadcast, film, videotape, or record
without the written permission of the city shall be prohibited. Any tenant who
films, tapes, broadcasts, or records any event in the facilities rented without
the permission of the city may be assessed a charge fixed at the discretion of
the director of enterprise services consistent with charges negotiated with
tenants similarly situated plus a 25 percent penalty of such charge.
(Sec. 29-2.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 7, §
28-7.5) (Am. Ord. 03-03)
§ 38-7.5 Facilities use by city agencies.
   Any city agency may reserve and use any of the facilities covered herein
upon written confirmation by the director of enterprise services. Before
issuing such confirmation, the director of enterprise services shall ensure
that the appropriate departmental transfer of funds representing minimum rental
and all other charges shall be accomplished. Rental charges may be waived, at
the discretion of the director of enterprise services, if the facility is
available and booked no more than three weeks in advance of the event date.
(Sec. 29-2.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 7, §
28-7.6) (Am. Ord. 03-03)
§ 38-7.6 Rules.
   The director of enterprise services shall adopt rules, in accordance with
HRS Chapter 91, not inconsistent with this chapter, governing the reservation,
renting, and use of the facilities covered herein.
(Sec. 29-2.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 7, §
28-7.7) (Am. Ord. 03-03)
ARTICLE 8: CONCESSIONS
Section
   
38-8.1   Awarding of concessions
§ 38-8.1 Awarding of concessions.
(a)   Concessions in the facilities must be awarded as provided by law. The
term of any concession must not exceed a period of 25 years; provided that any
concession term longer than five years must be authorized by resolution by the
council, as deemed necessary in the public interest.
(b)   The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages must be in conformity
with applicable laws. However, the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages
will be prohibited if the tenant of the facility in which such concession is
located objects to such sale and consumption.
(Sec. 29-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 8, §
28-8.1) (Am. Ords. 03-03, 23-26)
ARTICLE 9: NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
Sections
   
38-9.1   Facilities use and rental by nonprofit organizations
   
38-9.2   Proof of nonprofit status
   
38-9.3   Rental rates
   
38-9.4   Special performances
   
38-9.5   Equipment rental
   
38-9.6   Scheduling of nonperformance days
   
38-9.7   Applicability of Articles 6 through 9
§ 38-9.1 Facilities use and rental by nonprofit organizations.
   A nonprofit organization may use the facilities of the Neal S. Blaisdell
Center and the Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell under the terms and conditions
provided herein.
(Sec. 29-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 9, §
28-9.1)
§ 38-9.2 Proof of nonprofit status.
   The nonprofit organization shall provide proof to the director of enterprise
services that it qualifies under the definition of a “nonprofit organization”
set forth in §
38-6.2.
(Sec. 29-4.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 9, §
28-9.2) (Am. Ord. 03-03)
§ 38-9.3 Rental rates.
(a)   Nonprofit fixed rental.
(1)   The department of enterprise services has established nonprofit fixed
rental rates at the Neal Blaisdell Center Arena, Concert Hall, Pikake Room, and
Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell equivalent to the applicable use day operating cost
for facilities rentals of any week. Rates will be adjusted annually at the
beginning of each fiscal year commencing on July 1, 2011 in accordance with the
rate schedule in this section below until the nonprofit fixed rental rate for
the facilities identified is equivalent to, but no more than, the use day
operating cost for the appropriate facility. After attainment of such coverage,
the department will conduct a use day operating cost review on a biennial basis
thereafter and undertake rental adjustment through the adoption of rules
pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 to maintain the nonprofit rental rates at the use
day operating cost described herein.
(2)   Nonprofit fixed rental from July 1, 2011 through July 1, 2015.
Facility/Day From July 1, 2011 to From July 1, 2013 to June From July 1, 2015
             June 30, 2013        30, 2015
                                 From July 1,     From July 1,     From July 1,
Facility/Day                     2011 to June 30, 2013 to June 30, 2015
                                 2013             2015
Arena—Performance day          $3,459           $3,623           $3,788
Arena—Nonperformance day       $1,730           $1,812           $1,894
Concert Hall—Performance day   $1,936           $2,028           $2,121
Concert Hall—Nonperformance day$968             $1,014           $1,061
Exhibition Hall—Performance day$2,258           $2,365           $2,473
Exhibition Hall—Nonperformance $1,129           $1,183           $1,237
day
Pikake Room—Performance day    $626             $656             $685
Pikake Room—Nonperformance day $313             $328             $343
Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell
   Performance day            $1,422           $1,489           $1,557
   Nonperformance day         $711             $745             $779
 
(3)   The nonprofit organization shall pay the nonprofit fixed rental rates,
reduced rental rates, or deposit, as applicable, for each day of use. The
percentage rental rates as set forth in §
38-7.1(b)(2), shall apply to a nonprofit organization, except for the rental of
the concert hall for which the additional rental charge shall be 5 percent of
the gross receipts in excess of $40,250 as established in §
38-7.1(b)(2)(C).
(4)   Public educational institutions or private educational institutions which
are licensed by the State department of education and qualify as nonprofit
organizations shall pay the nonprofit fixed rental rates, reduced rental rates,
or deposit, as applicable, for each day of use; provided that the activity or
the sponsored program which takes place at the center is an integral part or
extension of an established school curriculum, including but not limited to
athletic, musical, cultural (plays and dramas), social (school dances or
graduation exercises), and educational (lectures and seminars) activities;
provided further, that this exception shall not be available if the activity or
program is primarily for fundraising purposes. Any activity or program shall be
deemed primarily for fundraising purposes when the funds raised through
admissions, donations, or gifts or other things of value exceed the cost of
sponsoring the activity or program at the center or exceed the amount budgeted
for the curriculum activity or program for which the center was rented. The
percentage rental rates, as set forth in this section or §
38-7.1(b)(2), shall apply to a nonprofit organization, except for the rental of
the concert hall for which the additional rental charge shall be 5 percent of
the gross receipts in excess of $40,250.
(b)   (1)   Any nonprofit organization renting the concert hall for 21 or more
consecutive days shall pay the minimum rental due for that rental period as
specified in subsection (a) plus 5 percent of gross receipts for the rental
period in excess of $250,000.
(2)   Any nonprofit organization that rents the concert hall and qualifies for
the rental adjustment contained in subsection (b)(1) may, before receiving a
signed contract from the city, or with their agreement after receiving a signed
contract from the city, be displaced from the contracted date by the department
of enterprise services to allow the use of the facility by another tenant that
will provide an event that offers greater financial benefit to the department;
be of large public appeal; and offer an attraction to the community that would
not otherwise be presented without the availability of the concert hall. If a
nonprofit organization is displaced as described above, the nonprofit
organization shall be given replacement use of the Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell,
but at the same not-for-profit rate as is established here for the Concert
Hall.
(Sec. 29-4.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 9, §
28-9.3) (Am. Ords. 03-03, 05-017, 06-35, 11-15)
§ 38-9.4 Special performances.
   The nonprofit organization shall be accorded the use of the concert hall at
no charge for fixed rental, and no charge levied for equipment rental or usher
fees, under the following conditions:
(1)   The performance shall consist of events or attractions staged primarily
for the educational and cultural betterment of the youth of Hawaii 18 years old
and under;
(2)   The performance shall be authorized in writing by the State department of
education and shall be held on regular school days;
(3)   The performance shall be held between the matinee hours of 9:00 a.m. and
2:00 p.m. on a space available basis to be determined by the director of
enterprise services; and
(4)   The admission price for the performance shall not exceed $2 per student.
(Sec. 29-4.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 9, §
28-9.4) (Am. Ords. 99-03, 03-03)
§ 38-9.5 Equipment rental.
   The nonprofit organization shall pay the prevailing equipment rental rates
established by the director of enterprise services for the use of equipment.
(Sec. 29-4.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 9, §
28-9.5) (Am. Ord. 03-03)
§ 38-9.6 Scheduling of nonperformance days.
   The scheduling of nonperformance days shall be on a space available basis to
be determined by the director of enterprise services.
(Sec. 29-4.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 9, §
28-9.6) (Am. Ord. 03-03)
§ 38-9.7 Applicability of Articles 6 through 9.
   Except as otherwise provided in this article,
Articles 6 through
9 shall apply to nonprofit organizations.
(Sec. 29-4.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 9, §
28-9.7) (Am. Ord. 03-03)
ARTICLE 10: SEVERABILITY
Section
   
38-10.1   Severability
§ 38-10.1 Severability.
   This chapter, as enacted by this ordinance, is declared to be severable. In
accordance therewith, if any portion of the chapter is held invalid for any
reason, the validity of any other portion of this chapter shall not be affected
and if the application of any portion of this chapter to any person, property,
or circumstance is held invalid, the application hereof to any other person,
property, or circumstances shall not be affected.
(Sec. 30-6.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) (Sec. 29-5.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983
Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 10, § 28-10.1)
ARTICLE 11: LEASE AND PERMIT POLICY FOR THE GROUNDS OF CITY HALL
AND THE MAYOR FRANK F. FASI MUNICIPAL BUILDING
Sections
   
38-11.1   Definitions
   
38-11.2   Applicability
   
38-11.3   Terms and conditions
   
38-11.4   Permitted private uses of grounds
   
38-11.5   Application procedure
   
38-11.6   Copies of permit and lease applications to be provided to
council—Notice of approval
§ 38-11.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Active Use. Use of the grounds while activities or events are being held for
patrons, or goods or services are being sold to patrons.
Entry Fees. Any fees charged during a major event by any person, including the
lessee, to persons for:
(1)   Entry onto the grounds of City Hall and the Mayor Frank F. Fasi Municipal
Building or into any contiguous area of the grounds in excess of 1,000 square
feet; or
(2)   Use of any public walkway.
Event. Any gathering, held in whole or in part by a person or persons on the
grounds of City Hall and the Mayor Frank F. Fasi Municipal Building.
Exempt Event. Any event:
   (A)   In which no more than 25 persons are anticipated to participate;
   (B)   For which there is no sound amplification;
   (C)   Which lasts for a period of less than three hours;
   (D)   For which no fee is charged for participation;
   (E)   Involving no sales or solicitations for the sale of any product or
service; and
   (F)   For which no temporary structures are set up.
Fee. Includes any charge, however denominated, whether in the form of money,
token, script, or other medium of value.
Food. Includes beverages, condiments, and utensils.
Grounds of City Hall and the Mayor Frank F. Fasi Municipal Building or Grounds.
Tax Map Key parcels 2-1-033:007 and 2-1-033:010, but excluding City Hall, the
Mayor Frank F. Fasi Municipal Building, the Mission Memorial Building, the
portion of Tax Map Key parcel 2-1-033:010 that is set aside for use as the
Civic Center child care facility and, to the extent that they may be within
those parcels, the public sidewalks immediately abutting King Street, Alapai
Street, and Beretania Street. For the purposes of this definition, the inner
courtyards of City Hall and the Mayor Frank F. Fasi Municipal Building shall be
deemed a part of those buildings.
Hold. Includes “conduct,” “sponsor,” or “promote.”
Lease. Any lease agreement, rental agreement, or concession agreement.
Lessee. Any person holding any lease for use of all or any portion of the
grounds of City Hall and the Mayor Frank F. Fasi Municipal Building.
Major Event. An event for which the person holding the event desires authority
to:
(1)   Impede any person from access to, or charge a fee to any person for
access across, the grounds of City Hall and the Mayor Frank F. Fasi Municipal
Building to, City Hall, the Mayor Frank F. Fasi Municipal Building, the Mission
Memorial Building, the Civic Center parking facility, or the Civic Center child
care facility;
(2)   Prevent any person from having use of, or charge any person a fee for use
of, any public walkway; or
(3)   Partition, fence, rope, cordon off, or otherwise demarcate any contiguous
area of more than 1,000 square feet of the grounds for purposes of precluding
any person from entering the area or for purposes of charging a fee to any
person to enter the area.
Minor Event. Any event other than a major event or exempt event.
Person. Includes any natural person; any limited or general partnership or
joint venture; any limited liability company; any corporation, whether
professional, for profit or not-for-profit; any trust, including any business
or land trust; and any other private organization, association, or entity. The
term shall not include a governmental agency.
Public Walkway. Any walkway or pathway, including any ramp or steps, designed
to accommodate pedestrian traffic, whether paved with asphalt, concrete, brick,
or any other material located on the grounds of City Hall and the Mayor Frank
F. Fasi Municipal Building, but excluding the public sidewalks immediately
abutting King Street, Alapai Street, Punchbowl Street, and Beretania Street.
Sublessee. A person authorized, expressly or impliedly, by any person holding a
lease entered into under this article for a major event, to provide goods or
services to the patrons of the major event.
Subpermittee. A person authorized, expressly or impliedly, by any person
holding a permit issued under this article for a minor event, to provide goods
or services to the patrons of the minor event.
Temporary Structures. Includes tents, booths, stages, viewing stands, risers,
rides, games, portable toilets, and similar structures set up on the grounds
for an event.
(1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 11, § 28-11.1) (Added by Ord. 99-05)
§ 38-11.2 Applicability.
(a)   This article shall apply to any lease, license, permit, or agreement
entered into by the city for the use of all or any portion of the grounds of
City Hall and the Mayor Frank F. Fasi Municipal Building for the purposes of
conducting an event.
(b)   This article shall not apply to:
(1)   Any easement, including any utility easement;
(2)   Any temporary license for the purposes of permitting the repair or
renovation of or additions to City Hall, the Mayor Frank F. Fasi Municipal
Building, the Mission Memorial Building, the Civic Center parking facility, or
the Civic Center child care facility;
(3)   Any peddling activity by any peddler duly licensed pursuant to HRS § 445-
141;
(4)   Any handbilling activity;
(5)   Any display permitted under the city’s Honolulu city lights program;
(6)   Any food vending concession awarded by the city;
(7)   The city-sponsored people’s open market program;
(8)   Any gathering held exclusively by a governmental entity or a combination
of governmental entities; or
(9)   Any gathering of persons for the purpose of exercising first amendment
rights, involving no fee for participation, and involving no sales or
solicitations for the sale of any product or service, in the area bounded by:
(A)   City Hall;
(B)   The public sidewalks immediately abutting South King Street and Punchbowl
Street;
(C)   The public walkway along the eastern (Diamond Head) wall of City Hall and
connecting with the public sidewalk immediately abutting South King Street; and
(D)   The public walkway connecting the western (Ewa) entrance of City Hall
with the public sidewalk immediately abutting Punchbowl Street.
This subsection shall not be construed to preclude the holder of a lease
entered into under §
38-11.4 from charging a permitted fee for persons subject to subdivisions (3)
and (4).
(1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 11, § 28-11.2) (Added by Ord. 99-05)
§ 38-11.3 Terms and conditions.
(a)   The holder of a permit for a minor event shall be subject to the
following conditions.
(1)   The permittee shall not prevent any person from having access to, and
shall not charge a fee to any person for access to, City Hall, the Mayor Frank
F. Fasi Municipal Building, the Mission Memorial Building, the Civic Center
parking facility, or the Civic Center child care facility.
This condition shall not preclude the designation of parking stalls or areas
within the Civic Center parking facility for the exclusive use of certain
persons or classes of persons or the charging of a fee for parking within the
facility to the extent allowed under the minor permit. This condition shall
also not preclude the city or the operator of the Civic Center child care
facility from closing a building on the grounds of City Hall and the Mayor
Frank F. Fasi Municipal Building to the public as permitted by law or by lawful
order of the city official in charge of the city building or, for the Civic
Center child care facility, at the direction of the operator of the facility.
(2)   The permittee shall not prevent any person from having use of, nor shall
the permittee charge a fee to any person for use of, any public walkway for
purposes of crossing the grounds or for purposes of access to any of the
facilities enumerated in subdivision (1), except that the permittee may prevent
a person from using such a public walkway to allow for the setting up and
breaking down of stages, tents and other permitted temporary structures.
(3)   The permittee shall not permit any contiguous area of more than 1,000
square feet of the grounds to be partitioned, fenced, roped, or cordoned off or
otherwise demarcated for purposes of charging a fee to persons entering the
partitioned, fenced, roped, cordoned, or otherwise demarcated area.
(b)   The holder of a lease or permit for a major or minor event and any person
holding an exempt event shall abide by any applicable administrative rules of
any city agency pertaining to the use or lease of the grounds of City Hall and
the Mayor Frank F. Fasi Municipal Building, or any portion thereof.
(c)   The holder of a lease or permit for a major or minor event shall be
subject to the following conditions.
(1)   The lessee or permittee shall provide adequate security personnel and
sanitation facilities during the event, and adequate cleanup following the
event, and shall pay the cost of any soil aeration or grassing necessitated by
the use of the grounds by the lessee or permittee and any patrons, volunteers,
or employees of the lessee or permittee.
(2)   The use of the grounds shall conform to the diagram and statements
contained in the lessee’s or permittee’s application.
(3)   At least one of the persons designated by the lessee or permittee to be
in charge of the grounds shall be present on the grounds at all times during
their active use.
(4)   The lessee or permittee shall have such insurance naming the city as an
additional insured, or post such bond with the city, as shall protect the city
from any reasonably foreseeable injury to persons or property resulting from
the lessee’s or permittee’s use of the grounds, including the acts and
omissions of the lessee or permittee, any sublessee or subpermittee, any
officer, director, employee, or agent of the lessee or permittee or of any
sublessee or subpermittee, relating to the event, including acts and omissions
during the event, while setting up for the event, while breaking down temporary
structures after the event, or while cleaning up after the event. The coverage
and terms of such insurance or bond shall be subject to the approval of the
director. This requirement may be waived for a minor event if the director
determines that the risk of injury to persons or property reasonably
foreseeable to result from the event is negligible.
(5)   The lessee shall pay a fee of $200 to cover the city’s costs of
processing and administering the lease for a major event and the permittee
shall pay a fee of $100 to cover the city’s cost of processing and
administering the permit for a minor event.
(6)   For no event shall the active use of the grounds extend beyond three
consecutive days.
(d)   Any lease or permit to which this article applies may include conditions,
in addition to those enumerated in subsections (a) through (c), prescribed by
the director approving the lease or permit.
(e)   Any lessee holding a major event shall be subject to the following
additional condition:
The lessee shall comply with the same conditions applicable to the holder of a
permit for a minor event under subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2); provided that the
lessee may require persons seeking access to any facility described in
subsection (a)(1) or crossing the grounds for the purposes described in
subsection (a)(2) to move actively toward their destination or actively across
the grounds.
(f)   The violation of any condition of a lease or permit to which this article
applies shall be grounds for termination of the lease or permit, nonissuance of
a lease or permit in the future to the lessee or permittee or the imposition of
such other penalty as may be prescribed in the lease or permit.
(1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 11, § 28-11.3) (Added by Ord. 99-05; Am. Ord. 01-21)
§ 38-11.4 Permitted private uses of grounds.
(a)   Notwithstanding
Article 2, the city shall not enter into any lease or permit for the use of all
or any portion of the grounds of City Hall and the Mayor Frank F. Fasi
Municipal Building for any event to which this article applies, or otherwise
grant any license or permit for the exclusive use of the grounds of City Hall
and the Mayor Frank F. Fasi Municipal Building, or any portion thereof for any
event to which this article applies, except as provided in subsections (b) and
(c). No person may hold a major or minor event without obtaining a lease or
permit pursuant to this article.
(b)   The director of customer services may, upon review of an application
submitted pursuant to §
38-11.5, issue a permit, on the terms and conditions applicable to minor events
under §
38-11.3, to any person to hold a minor event.
(c)   The director may award a lease on the terms, conditions, and rentals
applicable to major events under §
38-11.3 and approved by the corporation counsel as to form and legality, for a
private organization holding a major event on the grounds and meeting all of
the following criteria:
(1)   The private organization is a not-for-profit corporation or association
chartered or otherwise authorized to do business in the State of Hawaii for
charitable purposes;
(2)   The purposes for which the private not-for-profit corporation or
association is organized provide direct benefits to the people of the city; and
(3)   The purposes for which the not-for-profit corporation or association is
organized fall into at least one of the following categories:
(A)   Social services for the poor, the aged, or the youth of the city;
(B)   Health services, including services for those with any one or more of the
following: physical or emotional/mental disabilities;
(C)   Any one or more of the following: educational, manpower, or training
services; or
(D)   Services to meet a definitive cultural, social, or economic need within
the city not being met by any other private organization.
(d)   Any lease for a major event entered into under, or permit for a minor
event issued under, this article shall not be subject to the public bidding
requirements of
Articles 2 and
3.
(e)   In determining whether to enter into a lease or grant a permit under this
section, and in conditioning such a lease or permit, the director or the
director of customer services, as the case may be, shall consider the potential
effects of the proposed event on normal city functions.
(1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 11, § 28-11.4) (Added by Ord. 99-05)
§ 38-11.5 Application procedure.
(a)   Any person desiring to enter into a lease to hold a major event on the
grounds of City Hall and the Mayor Frank F. Fasi Municipal Building shall
submit an application to the director at least 30 days in advance of the
proposed event. Any person desiring a permit to hold a minor event on the
grounds shall submit an application to the director of customer services at
least 15 days in advance of the minor event. The application shall be
accompanied by the applicable fee and shall include the following:
(1)   If the application is for a major event, a statement of the person’s
qualifications to enter into a lease under this article and such documentation
thereof as may be required by the director;
(2)   A statement of the portion of the grounds of City Hall and the Mayor
Frank F. Fasi Municipal Building that will be used for the major or minor
event;
(3)   A statement of the duration of the proposed lease or permit and the dates
and hours during which the grounds will be actively used and during which
setting up and breaking down of temporary structures will be taking place;
(4)   A diagram showing the proposed location of any temporary structures, as
well as any areas proposed to be partitioned, fenced, roped, cordoned, or
otherwise demarcated for the purpose of charging a fee, or partitioned, fenced,
roped, or cordoned for any other purpose, including the name of any sublessee
or subpermittee that will be using any temporary structure;
(5)   A statement of the anticipated patronage of the event and the media that
will be used to attract patronage;
(6)   A statement as to proposed security, sanitation, and cleanup measures and
personnel for the event;
(7)   A general statement of the forms of entertainment to be provided, if any,
and whether sound amplification will be used;
(8)   A statement of all fees to be charged by the lessee or permittee or any
sublessee or subpermittee, including any entry fees, and of what is to be
received by event patrons in exchange for payment of the fees;
(9)   A statement of whether any of the net proceeds from the fees charged will
be turned over to any person or persons other than the lessee or permittee and
a statement as to the tax-exempt or charitable status of such person or
persons;
(10)   A designation of a natural person or persons who will be in charge of
the grounds during the event;
(11)   The address of the applicant, and the name and address of the natural
person preparing the application;
(12)   A statement by the applicant as to whether it shall meet the requirement
of §
38-11.3(c)(4) by providing liability insurance or by posting a bond and
providing such proof of insurance or bond as may be required by the director
for a major event, or by the director of customer services in consultation with
the director for a minor event. If an applicant for a minor event permit seeks
a waiver of the requirement, the applicant shall so state and shall state the
basis for the waiver;
(13)   A statement as to any insurance that will be provided by any sublessee
or subpermittee; and
(14)   Any additional information deemed necessary by the director and the
director of customer services.
(b)   The director and the director of customer services shall prescribe the
form of the applications made to each of them, respectively, pursuant to
subsection (a).
(c)   The director to whom the application is submitted shall notify the
applicant within 10 working days of receipt of a completed application as to
whether the application is granted, granted with conditions, or denied. The
decision of the director shall be final.
(1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 11, § 28-11.5) (Added by Ord. 99-05)
§ 38-11.6 Copies of permit and lease applications to be provided to
council—Notice of approval.
   Within three working days of receipt of an application to enter into a lease
or for the issuance of a permit under §
38-11.5, the director or the director of customer services, whichever received
the application, shall provide a copy of the application to the council. Within
three working days of final approval of an application, the appropriate
director giving the final approval shall give notice of the approval to the
council and shall include in the notice any special conditions imposed under
the lease or permit.
(1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 11, § 28-11.6) (Added by Ord. 99-05)
ARTICLE 12: TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Sections
   
38-12.1   Definitions
   
38-12.2   Leases for telecommunications facilities on city property
   
38-12.3   Telecommunication license fees
   
38-12.4   Colocation of certain wireless communication facilities
§ 38-12.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Antenna. Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs, dishes, or similar
devices used for the transmission or reception of wireless communications
services signals.
Aggregate Footprint. The area of space occupied by the telecommunications
facilities, measured in square feet, including areas of exclusive use by the
telecommunications carrier, but excluding areas for coaxial cable runs, conduit
paths, utility, and access easements.
City Property. All real property owned by the City and County of Honolulu,
whether in fee ownership or other interest.
Department. The department of information technology.
Telecommunications Facilities. The plant, equipment, and property, including
but not limited to pedestals, antennas, electronics, and other appurtenances
used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide, or offer telecommunications.
Telecommunications Service. The providing or offering for rent, sale, or lease,
or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data,
image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by
wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar
facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium.
Type I Telecommunications Facility. Any telecommunications facility where the
entire telecommunications facility is attached to or supported by any permanent
building or other structure of the city located on the property on which the
telecommunications facility is also located.
Type II Telecommunications Facility. Any telecommunications facility that does
not meet the definition of Type I Telecommunications Facility.
Wireless Communications Services Facility. A privately owned cellular, paging,
or broadband personal communications services facility that includes an
antenna.
(1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 12, § 28-12.1) (Added by Ord. 05-020; Am. Ord. 06-22)
§ 38-12.2 Leases for telecommunications facilities on city property.
(a)   After July 1, 2005,* any private person or entity desiring to locate a
telecommunications facility on city property shall submit an application for a
lease to the department on a form prescribed by the department. The application
shall include conceptual plans and specifications for the proposed facility,
specifically setting forth:
(1)   The proposed height and area of the various components of the facility,
including the proposed location of any cables, wires, and conduits to serve the
facility; and
(2)   The proposed methods and treatments to be used to minimize the visual
impacts of the proposed telecommunications facility to the greatest practicable
extent.
(b)   The department shall consult with the city department or agency currently
using the property to determine whether the proposed telecommunications
facility would unduly interfere with the current use of the property. The
department shall also consult with the department of the corporation counsel to
determine whether there exist any legal restrictions that would preclude the
use of the city property for the proposed facility and whether there exist
significant liability concerns relating to the proposed facility.
(c)   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, and without the necessity
of competitive bidding, if the department determines, after conducting the
consultations prescribed in subsection (b), that it would be in the best
interests of the city to lease the city property to the applicant, it may
negotiate the terms of a lease with the applicant and submit the lease to the
council for its approval, approval with modifications or conditions, or
disapproval, by resolution. The department shall not authorize the use of any
city property if the use of the property will compromise public safety.
(d)   Unless otherwise authorized by the council, the monthly rental for the
use of city real property for a telecommunications facility shall be as
follows:
Type I Telecommunications Facilities
Aggregate Footprint Monthly Rental Amount
Type I Telecommunications Facilities
Aggregate Footprint                                       Monthly Rental Amount
75 square feet or less                                    $1,000
Greater than 75 but less than or equal to 125 square feet $1,200
Greater than 125 but less than or equal to 175 square     $1,425
feet
Greater than 175 but less than or equal to 225 square     $1,650
feet
Greater than 225 but less than or equal to 275 square     $1,875
feet
Greater than 275 but less than 325 square feet            $2,100
325 square feet or more                                   $2,325
 
Type II Telecommunications Facilities
Aggregate Footprint Monthly Rental Amount
Type II Telecommunications Facilities
Aggregate Footprint                                   Monthly Rental Amount
475 square feet or less                               $1,000
Greater than 475 but less than or equal to 525 square $1,200
feet
Greater than 525 but less than or equal to 575 square $1,425
feet
Greater than 575 but less than or equal to 625 square $1,650
feet
Greater than 625 but less than or equal to 675 square $1,875
feet
Greater than 675 but less than 725 square feet        $2,100
725 square feet or more                               $2,325
 
The department may recommend and the council may authorize a different monthly
rental amount when:
(1)   The city will be required to take measures to mitigate negative aesthetic
aspects of the facility or minimize the potential threat of the facility to
public safety;
(2)   In instances where the department determines that the monthly rental
amount is not feasible or equitable; or
(3)   In instances where the department accepts property or services in lieu of
payment if approved by the city department or agency currently using the
property.
(e)   For purposes of this section an entity is not a “private” entity if it is
an agency or department of the city, the State, or the United States, or if the
telecommunications facility to be situated on city real property is to be owned
by or used exclusively for the benefit of the city, the State, or the United
States.
(f)   This section shall not apply to a telecommunications facility to be
situated on land of the board of water supply or any semiautonomous agency of
the city.
(g)   The term of the lease shall be subject to
Article 4.
(h)   The lease shall provide for the applicant to post bond in a sum
sufficient to ensure that the proposed telecommunications facility will be
completed as planned and may require a reasonable deposit to insure that the
facility is adequately maintained.
(i)   The council may impose such other reasonable conditions relating to
safety or aesthetics, as it may deem appropriate.
(j)   Approval of the lease by the council shall not constitute a waiver of any
zoning, subdivision, State land use, special management area, building code, or
other legal requirements applicable to the telecommunications facility. The
lease shall allow the lessee to terminate the lease if any permit or approval
necessary for the construction or operation of the facility is denied or
revoked. Following council approval of the lease terms, the director may award
the lease subject to those terms.
(k)   The department may adopt rules having the force and effect of law,
pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, for the implementation of this article.
(l)   This section shall not apply to any license, easement, concession, or
other right of occupancy for the following:
(1)   Telecommunications cables, wires, conduits, ducts, poles, anchors, or
wire line telecommunications equipment cabinets and associated appliances and
equipment on city real property, provided that no related telecommunications
facilities are situated on the property;
(2)   The temporary use of city property as a staging area for the construction
of telecommunications facilities on real property not under the ownership or
control of the city;
(3)   The placement of a pay telephone, as defined in Hawaii Administrative
Rules § 6-82-3, and related cables, wires, conduits, ducts, or other equipment
on city property; or
(4)   The placement of telecommunications facilities on city property where the
deed or other use restrictions preclude the city from entering into a lease
agreement for the property.
(1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 12, § 28-12.2) (Added by Ord. 05-020; Am. Ord. 09-23)
Editor’s note:
   * “July 1, 2005” is substituted for “the effective date of this ordinance.”
§ 38-12.3 Telecommunication license fees.
   Unless otherwise authorized by the council, the monthly license fee for the
use of city real property for a telecommunications facility shall be as
follows:
Type I Telecommunications Facilities
Aggregate Footprint Monthly Rental Amount
Type I Telecommunications Facilities
Aggregate Footprint                                       Monthly Rental Amount
75 square feet or less                                    $900
Greater than 75 but less than or equal to 125 square feet $1,080
Greater than 125 but less than or equal to 175 square     $1,282.50
feet
Greater than 175 but less than or equal to 225 square     $1,485
feet
Greater than 225 but less than or equal to 275 square     $1,687.50
feet
Greater than 275 but less than 325 square feet            $1,890
325 square feet or more                                   $2,092.50
 
Type II Telecommunications Facilities
Aggregate Footprint Monthly Rental Amount
Type II Telecommunications Facilities
Aggregate Footprint                                   Monthly Rental Amount
475 square feet or less                               $900
Greater than 475 but less than or equal to 525 square $1,080
feet
Greater than 525 but less than or equal to 575 square $1,282.50
feet
Greater than 575 but less than or equal to 625 square $1,485
feet
Greater than 625 but less than or equal to 675 square $1,687.50
feet
Greater than 675 but less than 725 square feet        $1,890
725 square feet or more                               $2,092.50
 
The department may recommend and the council may authorize a different monthly
rental amount when:
(1)   The city will be required to take measures to mitigate negative aesthetic
aspects of the facility or minimize the potential threat of the facility to
public safety;
(2)   In instances where the department determines that the monthly rental
amount is not feasible or equitable; or
(3)   In instances where the department accepts property or services in lieu of
payment if approved by the city department or agency currently using the
property.
(1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 12, § 28-12.3) (Added by Ord. 09-23)
§ 38-12.4 Colocation of certain wireless communication facilities.
   All leases or licenses to private persons or entities for the purposes of
situating a privately owned wireless communications services facility on city
property shall include appropriate provisions to ensure that the facility shall
be, to the extent practicable, capable of supporting one or more antennas owned
or used by private persons or entities other than the lessee or licensee.
(1990 Code, Ch. 28, Art. 12, § 28-12.4) (Added by Ord. 05-020; Am. Ord. 09-23)
CHAPTER 39: MAXIMUM ANNUAL RENEGOTIATED LEASE RENT
Article
   
1.   Maximum Annual Renegotiated Lease Rent
ARTICLE 1: MAXIMUM ANNUAL RENEGOTIATED LEASE RENT*
Sections
   
39-1.1   Definitions
   
39-1.2   Apartment owner-occupant defined
   
39-1.3   Applicability—Purpose of provisions
   
39-1.4   Renegotiation provisions
   
39-1.5   Maximum annual renegotiated lease rent
   
39-1.6   Biennial adjustment of renegotiated lease rent
   
39-1.7   Administrative adjustment of annual renegotiated lease rent to exceed
maximum
   
39-1.8   Interest in lease rent payments
   
39-1.9   Certification of renegotiated lease rents after renegotiation
   
39-1.10   Assignment of renegotiated lease rent to another apartment owner-
occupant
   
39-1.11   Renegotiated lease rent exceeding maximum for new apartment owner-
occupant
   
39-1.12   Renegotiated lease rent of apartment owner who is no longer owner-
occupant
   
39-1.13   Renegotiated lease rent of new apartment owner who is not owner-
occupant
   
39-1.14   Enforcement
Editor’s note:
   * Ord. 91-96, § 2, which was codified as this article, was held to violate
the Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution in Richardson v. City and County
of Honolulu, 124 F.3d 1150 (9th Cir. 1997), cert. den. 119 S.Ct. 168 (1998),
119 S.Ct. 275 (1998), and 119 S.Ct. 544 (1998).
§ 39-1.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Apartment, Association of Apartment Owners, Condominium, Declaration of
Horizontal Property Regime, and Declaration of Condominium Property Regime.
Have the same meaning as defined in HRS Chapter 514B.
Apartment Lease. An apartment owner-occupant’s lease for the owner-occupant’s
apartment and includes any lease to an apartment owner-occupant for the land
upon which the owner-occupant’s apartment is situated, including but not
limited to a ground lease or a condominium conveyance document, or both.
Apartment Owner. A person holding, or the persons jointly or in common holding,
a leasehold interest in a residential apartment.
Apartment Owner-Occupant. Has the same meaning as defined in §
39-1.2.
Condominium Project. A building containing at least one residential apartment.
Consumer Price Index. The Consumer Price Index For All Urban Consumers (CPI-U)
for Honolulu published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States
Department of Labor.
Declaration. A declaration of horizontal property regime or declaration of
condominium property regime.
Department. The department of community services.
Fixed Rent Period. The period of a lease during which the lease rent for a
residential apartment is stated in the lease, even if the rent is not held
constant for the entire period.
Initial Lease Rent. The beginning lease rent specified in an apartment lease or
the reasonable market value rent prevailing at the effective date of the
apartment lease determined as specified in §
39-1.4, whichever is greater. This term specifically excludes any lease rents
that reflect reduced rent at the beginning of the lease due to construction of
the project or due to special negotiations between the developer and the land
owner.
Land Owner. The person holding the leased fee interest in the land on which a
condominium project is situated.
Lease. A lease or master lease, including any sandwich interest, affecting a
residential apartment. A sandwich interest means any lease or sublease in the
chain of title between the land owner’s interest in the land and the apartment
lease.
Lease Rent. The rent payable by a lessee to a lessor for the leasehold interest
for a residential apartment under an apartment lease.
Lessee. Any person to whom land on which a condominium project is situated is
leased or subleased.
Lessor. Any person who leases or subleases land on which a condominium project
is situated.
Maximum Annual Renegotiated Lease Rent, Maximum Lease Rent, or Maximum. The
maximum annual renegotiated lease rent applicable to an apartment owner-
occupant, as determined under §
39-1.5 or biennially adjusted under §
39-1.6.
Renegotiated Lease Rent. The lease rent determined in accordance with this
chapter on the renegotiation dates specified in the lease.
Renegotiated Rent Period. Any period of a lease following the expiration of the
fixed rent period.
Renegotiation Date. The date on which a renegotiated lease rent is to take
effect.
Residential Apartment. A condominium apartment that is used for residential
purposes. The term does not include the following:
(1)   An apartment used for commercial purposes;
(2)   An apartment used as a timeshare unit or transient vacation unit, as
defined under
Chapter 21, Article 10; or
(3)   Any parking, recreational, or other nonresidential condominium apartment.
(1990 Code, Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.1) (Added by Ord. 91-96) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 39-1.2 Apartment owner-occupant defined.
(a)   For the purpose of this chapter, an “apartment owner-occupant” or “owner-
occupant” means an owner of a residential apartment who on the renegotiation
date of the lease of the residential apartment occupies the residential
apartment as the owner’s principal residence.
(b)   An apartment owner shall be deemed to occupy a residential apartment if,
on the renegotiation date of the lease, the residential apartment serves as the
principal place of residence of the apartment owner and the apartment owner has
possessory control of the premises at that time. An apartment owner shall not
be deemed to have possessory control of the premises if the residential
apartment is rented, leased, or otherwise assigned to another person or entity
for any period of time. Proof of residency and possessory control shall be
established by rules adopted by the department.
(1990 Code, Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.2) (Added by Ord. 91-96)
§ 39-1.3 Applicability—Purpose of provisions.
(a)   This chapter:
(1)   Applies to all leases that contain provisions for renegotiation of lease
rents for the residential apartment of an apartment owner-occupant. This
chapter shall apply whether the leases were executed before December 16, 1991
or are executed from December 16, 1991. This chapter also shall apply to lease
rent renegotiations that are concluded after December 16, 1991;
(2)   Sets a maximum annual renegotiated lease rent for the apartment of an
owner-occupant;
(3)   Allows biennial adjustment of renegotiated lease rent during the
renegotiated rent period;
(4)   Allows the administrative adjustment of renegotiated lease rent for a
residential apartment to an amount higher than the applicable maximum.
Administrative adjustment is allowed when the lessor pays operating expenses
for the apartment; and
(5)   Establishes a process for certification that a renegotiated lease rent
for the residential apartment of an apartment owner-occupant is within the
maximum.
(b)   This chapter does not and shall not be construed as setting a maximum
lease rent or adjustment or certification process for lease rent payable during
a fixed rent period or for a residential apartment that is not owned by an
owner-occupant.
(1990 Code, Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.3) (Added by Ord. 91-96)
Editor’s note:
   * “December 16, 1991” is substituted for “the effective date of this
chapter.”
§ 39-1.4 Renegotiation provisions.
(a)   Every lease shall include or be deemed to include the following
provisions:
(1)   Renegotiation of lease rent shall occur no more frequently than every 10
years from and after the rent renegotiation date; provided that the first
renegotiation shall not be scheduled before the 15th year following the initial
date of the lease;
(2)   After any renegotiation, the renegotiated lease rent for the residential
apartment of an apartment owner-occupant shall not exceed the maximum under §
39-1.5;
(3)   During a renegotiated rent period, the renegotiated lease rent for a
residential apartment may be further adjusted biennially in accordance with §
39-1.6; and
(4)   The renegotiated lease rent for a residential apartment may exceed the
applicable maximum if administratively adjusted pursuant to §
39-1.7.
(b)   In the event the parties to an apartment lease are unable to reach
agreement under any reopening provision, the department or its designee shall
arbitrate, and the maximum lease rent as determined by arbitration shall be
certified by the department as provided for in §
39-1.9; provided that where HRS § 516D-12 applies, the arbitration shall
proceed pursuant to HRS Chapter 516D. Arbitration proceedings under this
subsection will be subject to the following requirements:
(1)   An advance deposit, which amount shall be determined by the department,
equal to projected expenses and fees of the department or its designees for
arbitration proceedings shall be required and shall be paid equally by lessors
and lessees. All additional expenses and fees incurred by the department or its
designee while acting as the arbitrator shall be borne equally by the lessees
and the lessors. These additional expenses and fees shall be subject to monthly
billings or other arrangements, which may be specified by contract. If more
than one lessee is involved in an arbitration proceeding, all lessess shall
share equally in one-half of the arbitration costs. The same division of costs
shall apply if more than one lessor is involved in a proceeding.
(2)   Failure on the part of any lessee to comply with this subsection,
including failure to make advance deposits on payments, shall result in
forfeiture of any rights or remedies under this chapter for arbitration, and
the lessee’s sole rights and remedies shall be as provided in the lease.
(3)   If any lessor fails to comply with this subsection, including failure to
make advance deposits or payments, then arbitration proceedings under this
chapter will cease and lease rent shall be set at the most recent fixed lease
rent. Upon compliance with the provisions set forth in this section, the
arbitration may proceed, with the determination of the new lease rent effective
from the date of compliance by the lessor.
(1990 Code, Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.4) (Added by Ord. 91-96)
§ 39-1.5 Maximum annual renegotiated lease rent.
(a)   Except as otherwise specified under this subsection, the annual
renegotiated lease rent payable from any renegotiation date by an owner-
occupant for a residential apartment shall not exceed the maximum annual
renegotiated lease rent established in accordance with this section. Only when
administratively adjusted pursuant to §
39-1.7 may the annual renegotiated lease rent exceed the maximum.
(b)   The maximum annual renegotiated lease rent for a residential apartment
shall be the initial lease rent multiplied by a rent factor. The rent factor
shall be determined by dividing:
(1)   The average consumer price index for the six-month period in which the
rent renegotiation occurs; by
(2)   The average consumer price index for the six-month period in effect at
the time of the effective date of the initial lease rent.
(c)   For purposes of determining the maximum annual renegotiated lease rent,
the applicable consumer price index shall be the index in effect on the
renegotiation date. The council is aware that the consumer price index is an
average figure that is published every six months and may not accurately
reflect the change in consumer prices as it applies to Honolulu on the
renegotiation date. Accordingly, the maximum renegotiated lease rent may be
adjusted within a six-month period to reflect the actual change, if any, and
the adjusted amount shall be the maximum renegotiated lease rent for that
period.
(1990 Code, Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.5) (Added by Ord. 91-96)
§ 39-1.6 Biennial adjustment of renegotiated lease rent.
(a)   During a renegotiated rent period, the renegotiated lease rent for the
residential apartment of an owner-occupant may be adjusted biennially by the
lessor in accordance with this section. A lessor may, but is not required to
biennially adjust the lease rent for the residential apartment. If biennially
adjusting the lease rent, the lessor may do so only with the approval of the
department.
A renegotiated lease rent for a residential apartment, as adjusted in
accordance with this section, shall be deemed within the applicable maximum.
(b)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Biennially Adjusted Lease Rent. The annual renegotiated lease rent, as
biennially adjusted.
Current Lease Rent. The annual renegotiated lease rent in effect before a
biennial adjustment.
Effective Date of Biennially Adjusted Lease Rent. The date on which a
biennially adjusted lease rent takes effect. As provided under subsection (c),
that date is two years after the effective date of the current lease rent.
(c)   During a renegotiated rent period, the renegotiated lease rent for the
residential apartment of an owner-occupant may be adjusted biennially. The
biennially adjusted lease rent shall be determined by multiplying the current
lease rent by a rent factor. The rent factor shall be determined by dividing:
(1)   The average consumer price index for the six-month period encompassing
the effective date of the biennially adjusted lease rent; by
(2)   The average consumer price index for the six-month period encompassing
the effective date of the current lease rent.
The biennially adjusted lease rent shall be effective from the date which is
two years after the effective date of the current lease rent.
(d)   When there is less than two years between the effective date of the
current lease rent and the commencement of a new renegotiated rent period, the
current lease rent shall not be biennially adjusted under this section.
(e)   The council is aware that the consumer price index is an average figure
that is published every six months and may not accurately reflect the change in
consumer prices as it applies to Honolulu on the biennial adjustment date.
Accordingly, the biennially adjusted lease rent may be revised with a six-month
period after the official reporting of the applicable consumer price index. The
revision shall reflect the actual, official change, if any, in the consumer
price index. The revised amount shall be the biennially adjusted lease rent in
effect.
(1990 Code, Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.6) (Added by Ord. 91-96)
§ 39-1.7 Administrative adjustment of annual renegotiated lease rent to exceed
maximum.
(a)   The annual renegotiated lease rent for the residential apartment of an
owner-occupant may be adjusted by the department to an amount higher than the
maximum applicable to that apartment. An administrative adjustment shall be
made in accordance with this section and only for the circumstances of
subsection (c) or (d).
(b)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Administratively Adjusted Lease Rent. The annual renegotiated lease rent, as
administratively adjusted.
Base Year. The last year of the fixed rent period.
Base Year Net Operating Income. The lessor’s net operating income from the
apartment during the base year. If the lessor shows that the net operating
income from the apartment during the base year was lower than normal because of
extraordinary or unusual expenses, the department may adjust the base year net
operating income to reflect an appropriate amount.
Fair Net Operating Income. Net operating income from the apartment, as adjusted
for inflation, which is the same as the base year net operating income.
Inflation shall be measured by the change in the consumer price index from the
base year to the years for which the administrative adjustment is proposed.
Operating Expenses. Any one or more of the following:
(1)   Common expenses assumed by the lessor and unpaid by apartment owners or
other lessees of the condominium project;
(2)   Expenses for services provided by the lessor which primarily benefit the
apartment owners of the condominium project;
(3)   Expenses for maintenance by the lessor of apartments or facilities of the
condominium project;
(4)   Real property taxes;
(5)   Special or improvement district assessments imposed:
(A)   By the State or city for the funding of public projects; and
(B)   On the owner of the condominium project or land on which the condominium
project is situated.
(6)   Expenses for telephone, electricity, gas, water, sewer, or cable
television services used by apartment owners;
(7)   Expenses for rehabilitation or repair of apartments or other facilities
of the condominium project; or
(8)   Payments of debt service incurred for the construction of on-site or off-
site improvements.
(A)   “Off-site improvements” mean all physical improvements:
(i)   Constructed or placed off the land on which the condominium project is
situated; and
(ii)   Which are to be used in common by occupants of all lands adjoining the
improvements or by occupants of all lands for whose benefit the improvements
have been constructed or placed; and
(B)   “On-site improvements” mean all physical improvements:
(i)   Constructed or placed on the land on which the condominium project is
situated; and
(ii)   Which are for the benefit of apartment owners and other lessees in the
condominium project.
On-Site Improvements. Include but are not limited to dwelling units, garages,
stairs, walkways, driveways, walls, trees, shrubs, landscaping, and pools.
Operating Expenses for the Apartment. Operating expenses which:
(1)   Are paid directly for the residential apartment; or
(2)   Represent the proportionate share of the operating expenses attributable
to the residential apartment, when the operating expenses are not paid directly
for the apartment.
Operating Income for the Apartment. Lease rent paid for the residential
apartment.
Net Operating Income. Operating income from the apartment less operating
expenses for the apartment.
(c)   The annual renegotiated lease rent for the residential apartment of an
owner-occupant may be administratively adjusted to an amount higher than the
maximum applicable to that apartment if:
(1)   The lessor paid operating expenses for the apartment during the base
year;
(2)   The lessor paid those operating expenses exclusively from lease rent
proceeds and not from separate charges;
(3)   In the years for which the adjustment is proposed, the lessor will
continue to pay those operating expenses exclusively from lease rent proceeds;
and
(4)   The lessor’s net operating income from the apartment in the years for
which the adjustment is proposed will be less than the lessor’s base year net
operating income.
The administratively adjusted lease rent for the residential apartment shall be
set to maintain a fair net operating income to the lessor. The administratively
adjusted lease rent shall be valid for as long as the lessor continues to pay
the operating expenses for the residential apartment. When the lessor
discontinues payment of all or a portion of the operating expenses, the
administratively adjusted lease rent shall be readjusted by the lessor to
reflect the discontinuation.
An administratively adjusted lease rent under this subsection may be biennially
adjusted pursuant to §
39-1.6. The department shall establish a method of calculating the biennial
adjustment to maintain the lessor’s fair net operating income.
(d)   The annual renegotiated lease rent for the residential apartment of an
owner-occupant may be administratively adjusted to an amount higher than the
maximum applicable to that apartment if:
(1)   The lessor paid no operating expenses for the apartment during the last
year of the fixed rent period;
(2)   In the years for which the adjustment is proposed, the lessor will pay
operating expenses for the apartment; and
(3)   The lessor will pay those operating expenses exclusively from lease rent
proceeds and not from separate charges.
The administratively adjusted lease rent for the residential apartment shall be
set to allow the lessor to pass on the operating expenses to the apartment
owner-occupant. The administratively adjusted lease rent shall be valid for as
long as the lessor continues to pay the operating expenses for the residential
apartment. When the lessor discontinues payment of all or a portion of the
operating expenses, the administratively adjusted lease rent shall be
readjusted by the lessor to reflect the discontinuation.
An administratively adjusted lease rent under this subsection may be biennially
adjusted pursuant to §
39-1.6. The department shall establish a method of calculating the biennial
adjustment to maintain the pass-on of the operating expenses.
(e)   The lessor desiring an administrative adjustment of the annual
renegotiated lease rent for a residential apartment shall petition the
department. The petition shall specify the proposed adjusted lease rent and be
accompanied by supporting data.
   Upon receipt of a petition, the department:
(1)   Shall review the proposed adjusted lease rent and supporting data;
(2)   Shall give the lessor an opportunity to be heard;
(3)   May conduct its own study of the lessor’s operating income and operating
expenses or appraisal of the residential apartment or condominium project; and
(4)   May request the lessor to provide additional data.
Within 90 days of the submission of the petition, the department shall approve,
disapprove, or modify the proposed adjusted lease rent. Upon approval,
disapproval, or modification, the department shall notify the lessor and owner-
occupant of the residential apartment. From the effective date of the
adjustment, the lessor may charge the administratively adjusted lease rent for
the residential apartment.
If the department disapproves a proposed adjusted lease rent for the
residential apartment, the lessor shall not charge a lease rent higher than the
maximum lease rent applicable to that apartment.
If the department does not take action within the 90-day period, the proposed
adjusted lease rent shall be deemed approved and effective on the 91st day
following submission. The department shall notify the lessor and owner-occupant
of the residential apartment.
(f)   The department shall determine the cost incurred for each proceeding to
adjust a lease rent. The lessor shall be charged for the cost incurred by the
department for the proceeding; except that the lessor shall not be charged:
(1)   For the cost of any study or appraisal undertaken by the department
without the lessor’s permission;
(2)   If the department took no action on the proposed adjustment within the
90-day period under subsection (e); or
(3)   If the department waives the charge to prevent undue financial hardship
on the lessor.
The department shall require the lessor to reimburse the department for the
chargeable incurred costs, whether the proposed adjusted lease rent is
approved, disapproved, or modified. All reimbursements received by the
department shall be deposited into the general fund.
(g)   The approval, disapproval, or modification or a proposed adjusted lease
rent may be appealed by the lessor or apartment owner-occupant. An appeal shall
be made in writing to the department within 30 days of the approval,
disapproval, or modification.
   An appeal shall not stay the administratively adjusted lease rent, as
approved or modified by the department.
Upon the receipt of an appeal, the department shall refer the appeal to a
hearing officer. The hearing officer shall:
(1)   Hold an agency hearing in accordance with the contested case procedures
of HRS Chapter 91; and
(2)   Issue a decision and order confirming, modifying, or disapproving the
department’s action.
The department may institute a civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the enforcement of a decision and order pursuant to this
section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.7) (Added by Ord. 91-96)
§ 39-1.8 Interest in lease rent payments.
   The lessor, including the master lessor and any sandwich position, shall
share in the receipt of lease rentals paid by the owner-occupants and other
lessees, as adjusted by this section, in accordance with their respective
interests. Notwithstanding any contrary provision in any contract or lease, a
developer or other person entitled to share in the lease rent payments shall
share in such lease rent payments by the owner-occupants and other lessees to
the extent of the developer’s or other person’s interest as may be determined
by agreement of those entitled to share in the payment of lease rentals by
owner-occupants and other lessees, or in the absence of such agreement,
pursuant to HRS Chapter 658A.
(1990 Code, Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.8) (Added by Ord. 91-96)
§ 39-1.9 Certification of renegotiated lease rents after renegotiation.
(a)   In the lease rent renegotiation process, the renegotiated lease rent for
an apartment owner-occupant may be set by arbitration as provided in §
39-1.4(b) or by voluntary agreement without arbitration.
(b)   Each renegotiated lease rent set by an arbitrator or by voluntary
agreement without arbitration shall not exceed the applicable maximum.
(c)   After being set by an arbitrator or voluntary agreement, but before
taking effect, each renegotiated lease rent shall be submitted to the
department. The purpose of the submission to the department is for
certification that the renegotiated lease rent is within the applicable
maximum. The apartment owner-occupant and lessor shall jointly submit the
renegotiated lease rent. Upon submission, the department:
(1)   May hold an agency hearing on the renegotiated lease rent;
(2)   May require the apartment owner-occupant and lessor to submit relevant
information; and
(3)   May conduct its own study and investigation.
(d)   The renegotiated lease rent shall be deemed within the maximum if:
(1)   The department so certifies within 30 days of the submission of the
renegotiated lease rent; or
(2)   The department fails to issue a certification by the 30th day following
the submission of the renegotiated lease rent.
If, within 30 days of submission, the department certifies that the
renegotiated lease rent is not within the maximum, the renegotiated lease rent
shall be invalid and shall not take effect. The department shall order the
apartment owner-occupant and lessor to renegotiate again.
(e)   A party aggrieved by the department’s action or inaction under this
section may appeal to the department. Upon receipt of an appeal, the department
shall:
(1)   Hold an agency hearing in accordance with the contested case procedures
of HRS Chapter 91; and
(2)   Issue an appropriate decision and order.
(f)   If a court of competent jurisdiction rules or the State attorney general
or corporation counsel opines that a renegotiated lease rent set by an
arbitrator may be vacated, modified, or corrected only pursuant to HRS Chapter
658A, and not by action of the department, an action to vacate, modify, or
correct the renegotiated lease rent set by an arbitrator shall be subject to
HRS Chapter 658A, and no appeal of the renegotiated lease rent set by an
arbitrator shall be made to the department.
(1990 Code, Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.9) (Added by Ord. 91-96)
§ 39-1.10 Assignment of renegotiated lease rent to another apartment owner-
occupant.
   If, during a renegotiated rent period, an apartment owner-occupant conveys
or transfers the leasehold interest in a residential apartment to another
person intending to be an owner-occupant, the renegotiated lease rent for the
residential apartment shall be assigned and applied to the new owner-occupant.
For the renegotiated lease rent to be so assignable, the new owner-occupant
shall execute an affidavit stating that the new owner-occupant intends to
occupy the apartment so long as owning the residential apartment.
(1990 Code, Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.10) (Added by Ord. 91-96)
§ 39-1.11 Renegotiated lease rent exceeding maximum for new apartment owner-
occupant.
   When an apartment owner conveys or transfers the leasehold interest in a
residential apartment to another person intending to be an owner-occupant and:
(1)   The apartment is under lease during a renegotiated rent period; and
(2)   The renegotiated lease rent for the apartment is greater than the
applicable maximum.
The renegotiated lease rent for the apartment shall be reduced by the lessor to
the maximum rent chargeable under this chapter and such reduction shall be
effective as of the date of occupancy by the new owner-occupant. For the
renegotiated lease rent to be so reduced, the new owner-occupant shall execute
an affidavit stating that the new owner-occupant intends to occupy the
apartment as long as owning the apartment.
(1990 Code, Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.11) (Added by Ord. 91-96)
§ 39-1.12 Renegotiated lease rent of apartment owner who is no longer owner-
occupant.
   A lessor may reopen the renegotiated lease rent for the residential
apartment of an apartment owner who:
(1)   Was an owner-occupant of a residential apartment at the time of lease
rent renegotiation; but
(2)   No longer qualifies as an apartment owner-occupant.
If reopened, the renegotiated lease rent for the residential apartment shall be
set in accordance with the lease agreement for persons who are not owner-
occupants and shall be effective as of the date of disqualification as provided
by this chapter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.12) (Added by Ord. 91-96)
§ 39-1.13 Renegotiated lease rent of new apartment owner who is not owner-
occupant.
   A lessor may reopen the renegotiated lease rent for the residential
apartment of an apartment owner when:
(1)   The apartment owner has purchased or otherwise received the leasehold
interest in a residential apartment from a former owner-occupant; and
(2)   The apartment owner does not occupy the residential apartment.
If reopened, the renegotiated lease rent for the residential apartment shall be
set in accordance with the lease agreement for persons who are not owner-
occupants and shall be effective as of the date of conveyance to the new
apartment owner.
(1990 Code, Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.13) (Added by Ord. 91-96)
§ 39-1.14 Enforcement.
(a)   Any person violating this chapter shall be subject to a civil fine not
exceeding $500 for each violation.
(b)   The department shall enforce this chapter. Any person may request that
the department investigate any alleged violation of any part of this chapter,
or the department on its own initiative may investigate any alleged violation.
(c)   Upon receipt of a written request by a person to investigate an alleged
violation of this chapter, or upon its own initiative, the department shall
conduct an investigation. If finding that a violation has occurred, the
department shall attempt an informal correction of the violation. If the
violation cannot be informally corrected or if the person requesting the
investigation or the alleged violator requests an agency hearing, the
department shall:
(1)   Hold an agency hearing in accordance with the contested case procedures
of HRS Chapter 91; and
(2)   Issue an appropriate decision and order. If finding that a violation has
occurred, the department may order the violator to do any or all of the
following:
(A)   Cease and desist from the violation;
(B)   Correct the violation;
(C)   Pay to a lessor or lessee any amount due and owing as specified in this
chapter. An “amount due and owing” includes excessive lease rent paid by an
apartment owner-occupant or insufficient lease rent paid to a lessor; or
(D)   Pay the civil fine imposed under subsection (a).
(d)   The department may institute a civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the enforcement of any decision and order issued pursuant to
this section. If finding that a violation has not occurred, whether before or
after an agency hearing, the department shall so notify the alleged violator
and, if any, the person who requested the investigation. The notification shall
be in writing.
(1990 Code, Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.14) (Added by Ord. 91-96)
CHAPTER 40: OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY
Articles
   
1.   Damage to Public Property
   
2.   Maintenance of Channels, Streambeds, Streambanks, and Drainageways
   
3.   City-Owned Streams
   
4.   Watersheds—Reservoirs
   
5.   Regulation of Distribution, Acquisition, Possession, and Use of Graffiti
Implements
   
6.   Graffiti Damage to Public Property
   
7.   Disposal of Weeds, Garbage, Trash, and Waste from Property
   
8.   Protective Regulations for Exceptional Trees
   
9.   Alarm Systems
   
10.   Historic Preservation
   
11.   Underground Storage Tanks
ARTICLE 1: DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY
Sections
   
40-1.1   Definitions
   
40-1.2   Damage to public property
   
40-1.3   Cost of repairs or replacement
   
40-1.4   Violation—Penalty
   
40-1.5   Procedure
   
40-1.6   Rules
§ 40-1.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Damage. Physical injury to public property, both real and personal, that
results in the loss or substantial diminishment of use of the property because
of physical danger, inconvenience, or distress caused by noise, smoke, dust,
vibration, odors, rubbish, refuse, garbage, fuel or other oils, or any other
unhealthful or unclean substance.
Director. The director of budget and fiscal services.
Person. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or other
entity.
Public Property. Includes but is not limited to any building, park, roadway,
field, beach, other recreational area or facility, or any other property under
the control and management of the city, including public property leased by the
city to another person but used for the benefit of the public.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 25, § 41-25.1) (Added by Ord. 89-47; Am. Ords. 91-27,
97-02, 18-18)
§ 40-1.2 Damage to public property.
   Damage to public property which results in the loss of use of the property,
as defined more fully in this article, is a public nuisance and subject to the
provisions of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 25, § 41-25.2) (Added by Ord. 89-47)
§ 40-1.3 Cost of repairs or replacement.
(a)    Any person who is responsible for damage to public property constituting
a public nuisance, including damage that causes the partial or complete closure
or other loss of use or value, or loss of public property, shall be responsible
for repairing or otherwise remedying such damage, including but not limited to
payment of costs of repairing, cleaning, or replacing the damaged property.
(b)   Issuance of the bill for the costs shall be authorized by the director
and shall contain the amount to be charged by the city.
(c)   The costs billed shall be the actual or estimated costs associated with
the repair, cleaning, or replacement of the damaged property plus any
administrative expenses.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 25, § 41-25.3) (Added by Ord. 89-47; Am. Ord. 18-18)
§ 40-1.4 Violation—Penalty.
   In addition to any other penalties or remedies provided in this article, any
person who is responsible for damage to public property which results in the
public being denied customary and usual access to or use of the property for
more than 24 hours, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 per day,
for every day in which the public is denied partial or complete use of the
property.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 25, § 41-25.4) (Added by Ord. 89-47)
§ 40-1.5 Procedure.
(a)   The director is authorized to exercise all administrative or other powers
available in carrying out the purposes of this article, including maintaining
an action for an injunction to restrain the activity which is causing or has
caused damage to public property.
(b)   All remedies and penalties under this article shall be enforced in civil
proceedings by the corporation counsel.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 25, § 41-25.5) (Added by Ord. 89-47)
§ 40-1.6 Rules.
   The director is authorized to adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, as are
necessary to implement, administer, and enforce this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 25, § 41-25.6) (Added by Ord. 89-47)
ARTICLE 2: MAINTENANCE OF CHANNELS, STREAMBEDS, STREAMBANKS,
AND DRAINAGEWAYS
Sections
   
40-2.1   Purpose and intent
   
40-2.2   Definitions
   
40-2.3   Maintenance of streams
   
40-2.4   Right of entry and inspection
   
40-2.5   Notice of violation—Order to maintain, clear, and remove
   
40-2.6   City authorized to clear and maintain
   
40-2.7   Charge to owner
   
40-2.8   Chief engineer to keep record
   
40-2.9   Statement of chief engineer
   
40-2.10   Lien procedure
   
40-2.11   Civil fine
   
40-2.12   Issuance of notice of violation and order
   
40-2.13   Request for extension of time to complete maintenance and clearing
   
40-2.14   Effect of order—Right to hearing
   
40-2.15   Judicial enforcement of order
   
40-2.16   Judicial enforcement of article
   
40-2.17   Nonexclusiveness of remedies
   
40-2.18   Appeal in accordance with statute
   
40-2.19   Severability
§ 40-2.1 Purpose and intent.
(a)   The provisions which are set forth hereinafter are authorized pursuant to
HRS § 46-11.5, relating to the maintenance of channels, streambeds,
streambanks, and drainageways.
(b)   The provisions set forth hereinafter are intended to provide the
necessary power and authority to the department of facility maintenance, an
executive agency of the city, to provide for and enforce the maintenance of
channels, streambeds, streambanks, and drainageways, including their exits to
the ocean, in suitable condition to carry off stormwaters, prevent flooding and
to ensure that the natural flow of water runs unimpaired; and for the removal
from the channels, streambeds, streambanks, and drainageways, any debris,
vegetation, silt, or other items or material of any nature, which is likely to
create an unsanitary condition, blockage, or otherwise become a public nuisance
to the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city; provided that
to the extent any of the foregoing work is a private responsibility, the
responsibility may be enforced by the city in lieu of the work being done at
city expense, and any private entity or person refusing to comply with any
final order issued by the city shall be in violation of this article and HRS §
46-11.5.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.1) (Added by Ord. 89-59; Am. Ord. 17-38)
§ 40-2.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Chief Engineer. The director and chief engineer of facility maintenance or the
chief engineer’s authorized representative.
City-Owned. Has the same meaning as defined in §
40-3.1.
Department. The department of facility maintenance of the City and County of
Honolulu.
Owner. The fee simple owner of record, lessee of record, administrator,
administratrix, executor, executrix, personal representative, receiver,
trustee, property management agent, or any other individual corporation, or
unincorporated association, who has the use, control, or occupation of a stream
in its entirety, or portion thereof, including its channels, streambeds,
streambanks, and drainageways, or the mouth of a stream at the ocean, with
claim of ownership, whether such person’s interest be in absolute fee or a
lesser estate.
Person. A human being, a corporation, an unincorporated association, or other
entity.
Streams. Natural, altered, or improved channels that have seasonal or
continuous water flows as a result of either surface stormwater runoff or
groundwater influx, or both. Streams include channels, streambeds, streambanks,
drainageways, and stream mouths. Streams do not include ditches, flumes,
reservoirs, lagoons, holding and silting basins, lakes, ponds and their
associated ditches, underground drain lines or systems, and any portions of
irrigation systems.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.2) (Added by Ord. 89-59; Am. Ords. 17-38,
18-40)
§ 40-2.3 Maintenance of streams.
(a)   The owner of any stream has the duty to maintain, dredge, and clear such
stream, or applicable portion thereof, so that the natural flow of water runs
unimpaired. The owner shall also be responsible for the removal of any debris,
vegetation, silt or other items or material of any kind that may interfere with
the natural flow of water or is likely to create an unsanitary condition or
otherwise become a public nuisance.
(b)   The chief engineer shall conduct an inspection of all city-owned streams
that are lined with concrete or other impervious material no less than annually
and all other city-owned streams no less than semi-annually, and shall remove
or cause to be removed any debris, vegetation, silt, or other item or material
of any kind that may interfere with the natural flow of water or is likely to
create an unsanitary condition or otherwise become a public nuisance. In
determining the scheduling of the annual or semi-annual inspections and removal
of debris, vegetation, silt, or other items or materials, as applicable, the
chief engineer shall consider seasonal patterns of elevated flood risk, such as
that associated with hurricane activity, and approved, applicable permits.
(c)   The chief engineer shall annually post on the website of the department a
written report on the status of the inspection of each city-owned stream. The
report must, at a minimum, contain the following information:
(1)   The date on which, or period during which, the stream was inspected; and
(2)   The types and quantities of debris, vegetation, rock, silt, or other
items or materials of any kind that were removed from the stream to protect
public safety.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.3) (Added by Ord. 89-59; Am. Ords. 17-38,
18-40, 21-2)
§ 40-2.4 Right of entry and inspection.
   The chief engineer or any authorized employee of the department may, during
reasonable hours and upon notification to the person or entity with a right of
possession or control over any stream, enter any premises or real property in
the discharge of official duties to inspect, investigate, and to ensure such
stream is maintained as required in this article. During the maintenance and
clearing of any stream and the removal of any debris, vegetation, silt, or
other material, the department shall have access thereto for inspection
purposes during reasonable hours.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.4) (Added by Ord. 89-59)
§ 40-2.5 Notice of violation—Order to maintain, clear, and remove.
   The chief engineer is authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any
stream to maintain and clear any stream, and to remove any debris, vegetation,
silt, or other items or material of any nature, as is necessary for the proper
maintenance of such stream. Such notice shall be as provided for in §
40-2.12.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.5) (Added by Ord. 89-59)
§ 40-2.6 City authorized to clear and maintain.
   Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner or agent so notified to
complete maintenance and clearing of any stream; and to remove any debris,
vegetation, silt, or other material from such stream within 30 days after
notice has been given as provided for in §
40-2.12, or within 30 days after the date of mailing of such notice or when
service of notice cannot be made, provided that the same was properly addressed
to the last known address, of such owner or agent, the chief engineer is
authorized and empowered to pay for such maintenance and clearing and removal
of debris and vegetation out of city funds or to order the same to be done by
city employees or by contract. The chief engineer or authorized employees of
the department, including any contractor or the contractor’s agent with whom
the chief engineer contracts under this section, are authorized to enter upon
the property for the purposes of maintenance and clearing of such streams and
the removal of any debris or vegetation described in the notice. Before work is
commenced by the chief engineer or authorized employees of the department, or
contractor, any owner may perform the necessary maintenance and clearing of the
stream and the removal of debris or vegetation at the owner’s own expense.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.6) (Added by Ord. 89-59)
§ 40-2.7 Charge to owner.
   When the city has performed the necessary maintenance and clearing of a
stream and removal of debris or has paid for such work, the costs thereof,
including overhead costs, plus accrued interest at the rate of 7 percent per
year, shall be charged to the owner of such stream and the owner shall be
billed therefor by mail. The bill shall apprise the owner that failure to pay
the bill will result in a lien. Interest at the rate of 7 percent per year
shall accrue from the 31st calendar day after the bill has been mailed to the
owner for payment in the event the same has not been paid prior thereto.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.7) (Added by Ord. 89-59)
§ 40-2.8 Chief engineer to keep record.
   The chief engineer shall cause to be kept in the department a permanent
record containing:
(1)   A description of each parcel of property containing a stream for which a
notice to maintain, clear, and remove has been given;
(2)   The name of the owner of record or agent;
(3)   The date on which such notice was mailed and posted or given to the owner
or agent;
(4)   The charges incurred by the city for maintenance and clearing of the
stream and removal of debris and all incidental expenses in connection
therewith; and
(5)   A brief summary of the work performed. Each entry shall be made as soon
as practicable after completion of such work.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.8) (Added by Ord. 89-59)
§ 40-2.9 Statement of chief engineer.
   Where the full amount due the city is not paid by such owner within 30
calendar days after the bill has been mailed for payment, the chief engineer
shall cause to be recorded with the director of budget and fiscal services a
statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work
was done, and the location of the property on which the work was done, and file
the same with the director of budget and fiscal services, who shall refer the
collection thereof to the corporation counsel.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.9) (Added by Ord. 89-59)
§ 40-2.10 Lien procedure.
   Any work done by the city under this section is deemed to be done pursuant
to quasi-contract or constructive contract between the city and the owner.
Based on the foregoing contractual relationship, if the owner fails to pay the
amount duly noted on the statement filed by the chief engineer, the corporation
counsel may proceed to file a lien pursuant to HRS § 636-3, or any other
appropriate lien procedures.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.10) (Added by Ord. 89-59)
§ 40-2.11 Civil fine.
   Any person who violates this article shall, upon notice issued pursuant to §
40-2.12, be deemed to have committed a civil violation and shall be liable for
a civil fine not to exceed $500 a day for each day in which such violation
persists.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.11) (Added by Ord. 89-59)
§ 40-2.12 Issuance of notice of violation and order.
   If the chief engineer determines that any person is violating this article
or any rule adopted thereunder, the chief engineer may have the person served,
by certified mail or delivery, with a notice of violation and order.
(a)   Contents of the notice of violation.
(1)   The notice shall include at least the following information:
(A)   Date of the notice;
(B)   The name and address of the person noticed;
(C)   The section number of the ordinance which has been violated;
(D)   The nature of the violation; and
(E)   The location and date of the violation.
(2)   The notice shall describe the work to be done and shall state that if the
work is not completed within 30 calendar days after receipt of the notice of
violation, or notice as provided in §
40-2.6, the chief engineer may enter upon the property and perform the
maintenance and clearing of such stream and remove any debris, vegetation, or
other material necessary for the proper maintenance of such stream, and the
cost thereof shall be a lien on the property. The lien shall be in addition to
any other remedies provided for enforcement of this article.
(3)   The notice shall inform the person that failure, neglect or refusal to
correct the violation or to complete the work described in the notice of
violation and order within 30 calendar days will result in a civil fine not to
exceed $500 a day for each day the violation persists, to be assessed by the
city commencing 31 calendar days after receipt of the notice of violation and
order, or notice as provided in §
40-2.6. The civil fine shall be in addition to any other remedies as provided
for in this article.
(b)   Contents of the order.
(1)   The order may require the person to do any or all of the following:
(A)   Cease and desist from the violation;
(B)   Correct the violation at the person’s own expense before a date specified
in the order; and
(C)   Pay a civil fine not to exceed $500 per day for each day in which the
violation persists, in the manner and at the time and place specified in the
order.
(2)   The order shall advise the person of the finality of the order 30 days
after the date of its mailing or delivery, unless written request for a hearing
is mailed or delivered to the chief engineer within those 30 days.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.12) (Added by Ord. 89-59)
§ 40-2.13 Request for extension of time to complete maintenance and clearing.
   Any person served with a notice of violation and order may request in
writing to the chief engineer for an extension of time to complete the
maintenance and clearing of any stream.
(a)   The written request for an extension of time shall be delivered or mailed
and postmark dated to the chief engineer within 15 calendar days of the
delivery of the notice of violation and order.
(b)   An extension of the 30-day time limit in the order may be granted in
writing by the chief engineer only for good cause and shall be only for a
reasonable period of time necessary to complete the work required, as
determined by the chief engineer.
(c)   A person aggrieved by a decision of the chief engineer under this section
shall have a right to a hearing as provided for in §
40-2.14, provided the person submits a written request for a hearing to the
chief engineer within 10 calendar days after delivery of the chief engineer’s
decision.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.13) (Added by Ord. 89-59)
§ 40-2.14 Effect of order—Right to hearing.
(a)   The order issued by the chief engineer under §
40-2.12 shall become final 30 days after the date of the mailing or delivery of
the order, unless within those 30 days, the person subject to the order
requests in writing a hearing before the chief engineer. The request for
hearing shall be considered timely if the written request is delivered or
mailed and postmark dated to the chief engineer within those 30 days.
(b)   Upon receipt of the written request for hearing, the chief engineer shall
specify a time and place for the person subject to the order to appear and be
heard. The hearing shall be conducted by the chief engineer in accordance with
HRS Chapter 91. Following the hearing, the chief engineer may affirm, modify,
or rescind the order as in the opinion of the chief engineer may be
appropriate.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.14) (Added by Ord. 89-59)
§ 40-2.15 Judicial enforcement of order.
   The chief engineer may institute a civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction for enforcement of any order issued pursuant to §§
40-2.12,
40-2.13, and
40-2.14. Where the civil action has been instituted to enforce the civil fine
imposed by the order, the chief engineer need only show that notice of
violation and order was served, a hearing was held or the time granted for
requesting a hearing had expired without such a request, the civil fine imposed
and that the fine imposed has not been paid.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.15) (Added by Ord. 89-59)
§ 40-2.16 Judicial enforcement of article.
   The chief engineer may institute a civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction for injunctive relief to prevent violation of this article, or any
rule adopted pursuant thereto, in addition to any other remedy provided for
under this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.16) (Added by Ord. 89-59)
§ 40-2.17 Nonexclusiveness of remedies.
   The remedies provided in this article for enforcement of this article or any
rule adopted pursuant thereto shall be in addition to any other remedy as may
be provided by law.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.17) (Added by Ord. 89-59)
§ 40-2.18 Appeal in accordance with statute.
   If any person is aggrieved by the order issued by the chief engineer
pursuant to §§
40-2.12,
40-2.13, or
40-2.14, the person may appeal the order in the manner provided in HRS Chapter
91; provided that no provision of such order shall be stayed on appeal, unless
specifically ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.18) (Added by Ord. 89-59)
§ 40-2.19 Severability.
   If this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is
held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications
of conditions of this article which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are
severable.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.19) (Added by Ord. 89-59)
ARTICLE 3: CITY-OWNED STREAMS
Sections
   
40-3.1   Definitions
   
40-3.2   Regulation of city-owned streams
   
40-3.3   Penalty
§ 40-3.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Camp or Camping. The use and occupation of a city-owned stream or city-owned
stream riparian zone as a temporary or permanent dwelling place or sleeping
place. Camp or camping includes the laying down of a sleeping bag or other
bedding material for use, or the use of a vehicle or watercraft as a temporary
or permanent dwelling place or sleeping place on a city-owned stream or city-
owned stream riparian zone.
City-Owned. The city has the use, control, or occupation of a stream in its
entirety, or portion thereof including its channels, streambeds, streambanks,
and drainageways, or the mouth of a stream at the ocean, or the stream riparian
zone, with claim of ownership, whether the city’s interest is in absolute fee
or a lesser estate.
Director. The director of facility maintenance.
Dwelling Place. A place used for human habitation as an overnight
accommodation, lodging, or shelter on either a temporary or permanent basis.
Human Habitation. The act of using, occupying, or inhabiting a place of lodging
or shelter on a permanent or temporary basis as a place of residence or
sojourn.
Sleeping Place. A place used by a person for the purpose of sleeping, where the
person is asleep inside a tent, sleeping bag, or some form of temporary
shelter, or is asleep atop of or covered by materials such as a cot, mat,
bedroll, bedding, sheet, blanket, pillow, bag, cardboard, or newspapers.
Stream. Natural, altered, or improved channels that have seasonal or continuous
water flows as a result of either surface stormwater runoff or groundwater
influx, or both. Streams include channels, canals, streambeds, streambanks,
drainageways, and stream mouths. Streams do not include ditches, flumes,
reservoirs, lagoons, holding and silting basins, lakes, ponds, and their
associated ditches, underground drain lines or systems, and any portions of
irrigation systems.
Stream Riparian Zone. The public land area that extends 100 feet away from the
edge of the streambank.
Structure. Anything above existing grade constructed or erected with a fixed
location on the ground, or requiring a fixed location on the ground, or
attached to something having or requiring a fixed location on the ground.
Tent. A collapsible structure consisting of sheets of canvas, fabric, or other
material attached to or draped over a frame of poles or a supporting rope that
has more than one wall.
Wall. An upright, vertical, or slanted structure, partition, or divider serving
to enclose, divide, support, or protect.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 43, § 41-43.1) (Added by Ord. 15-39; Am. Ord. 17-60)
§ 40-3.2 Regulation of city-owned streams.
(a)   It is unlawful for any person to do the following on any portion of a
city-owned stream or city-owned stream riparian zone:
(1)   Camp without a permit;
(2)   Erect a tent or structure without a permit;
(3)   Enter into or upon the stream or stream riparian zone if public access
has been prohibited by the director and signs indicating the prohibition have
been posted; and
(4)   Engage in any other activities prohibited by the director, if signs
indicating the prohibited activities have been posted.
(b)   The director may, by rules adopted pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, prohibit
access to specified city-owned streams or city-owned stream riparian zones, or
prohibit activities on specified city-owned streams or city-owned stream
riparian zones if the director finds it necessary to protect public health,
safety, and welfare. When adopting rules, the director shall base decisions on
a careful and thorough analysis that balances public safety, stream
preservation and management, and rights of the public to access streams.
(c)   No person shall be cited for a violation of this section, unless the
person engages in conduct prohibited by this section after having been notified
by a law enforcement officer that the conduct violates this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 43, § 41-43.2) (Added by Ord. 15-39)
§ 40-3.3 Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with HRS §§ 706-640
and 706-663, as amended.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 43, § 41-43.3) (Added by Ord. 15-39)
ARTICLE 4: WATERSHEDS—RESERVOIRS
Sections
   
40-4.1   Unlawful to trespass
   
40-4.2   Unlawful to damage reservoirs
   
40-4.3   Power to arrest
   
40-4.4   Violation—Penalty
§ 40-4.1 Unlawful to trespass.
   It is unlawful for any person to be upon or about any public property used
as a water reservoir site or watershed for collecting waters for public
consumption, or as an accessway to such a water reservoir site or watershed, or
upon or about any waterhead, water ditch-intake, or water springs used for any
public water system, or upon or about any water, reservoir, waterhead, water
ditch-intake, or water springs, without a written permit from the manager of
the board of water supply; provided that this section does not apply to any
public highway running through the watersheds.
(Sec. 13-21.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 3, § 40-3.1) (Am.
Ord. 19-27)
§ 40-4.2 Unlawful to damage reservoirs.
   It is unlawful for any person to damage, destroy, or interfere, in any
manner, with the public water reservoirs, pipe lines leading thereto or
therefrom, ditches leading thereto or therefrom, ditch-intakes or other works
for the collecting and disposing of water in or for the public water systems of
the city.
(Sec. 13-21.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 3, § 40-3.2)
§ 40-4.3 Power to arrest.
   Any officer or employee of the board of water supply may enforce §§
40-4.1 and
40-4.2, by arresting or causing to be arrested offenders thereunder.
(Sec. 13-21.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 3, § 40-3.3)
§ 40-4.4 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a
fine not less than $500 nor more than $2,000 or by imprisonment for not less
than 10 days nor more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Sec. 13-21.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 3, § 40-3.4) (Am.
Ord. 19-27)
ARTICLE 5: REGULATION OF DISTRIBUTION, ACQUISITION, POSSESSION,
AND USE OF GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS
Sections
   
40-5.1   Definitions
   
40-5.2   Restrictions on sale and use
   
40-5.3   Violation—Penalty
§ 40-5.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Adult. A natural person other than a minor.
Glass Cutter. A metal tool or instrument equipped with a blade or a sharp edge
to cut, score, or grind glass.
Graffiti Implement. Any of the following implements capable of marking or
scarring or being used to mark or scar a glass, metal, concrete, wood, plastic,
or other solid surface to create graffiti, as that term is defined in §
40-6.1: spray paint, wide-tipped markers, glass cutters, paint sticks, or spray
actuators.
Minor. A natural person below the age of 18 years.
Paint Stick. Any device containing a solid form of paint capable of being
applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application leaving a mark at least
1/16 of an inch in width.
Person. Has the same meaning as defined in §
40-1.1.
Spray Actuator (also known as a “Spray Tip,” “Nozzle,” or “Button”). An object
which is capable of being attached to an aerosol paint container for the
purpose of spraying the substance contained therein.
Spray Paint. Paint contained in an aerosol container.
Wide-Tipped Marker. Any marker, pen, or similar implement which contains a
fluid which cannot be removed with water after it dries and which has a tip,
point, brush, applicator or other writing surface which, at its broadest, is
0.25 inch or greater in width.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 11, § 40-11.1) (Added by Ord. 95-46; Am. Ord. 97-67)
§ 40-5.2 Restrictions on sale and use.
(a)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, give away, or in any way furnish
any graffiti implement to any minor; provided that any graffiti implement may
be sold, given away, or furnished to a minor by an adult parent, legal
guardian, employer, or teacher of the minor, or another adult authorized by a
parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor.
(b)   It is unlawful for a minor to purchase or otherwise acquire any graffiti
implement; provided that the acquisition, whether by purchase or other means,
of any graffiti implement shall not be prohibited when it is acquired from an
adult parent, legal guardian, employer, or teacher of the minor, or by another
adult authorized by a parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor.
(c)   It is unlawful for a minor to possess, have under the minor’s control, or
use any graffiti implement while on public or private property without the
express permission of the owner, lessee, or manager of the property; provided
that a minor may possess, have under the minor’s control or use any graffiti
implement in the immediate presence and under the supervision of an adult
parent, legal guardian, employer, or teacher of the minor or of another adult
authorized by a parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 11, § 40-11.2) (Added by Ord. 95-46; Am. Ord. 97-67)
§ 40-5.3 Violation—Penalty.
   Notwithstanding the civil penalties of §
40-6.2 for violations of the prohibitions against placing graffiti on public
property, any person convicted of violating any provision of §
40-5.2 shall be punished for each violation by a fine of not less than $500 nor
more than $2,000, by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both,
without possibility of probation or suspension of sentence. Each sale, gift, or
furnishing of a group of graffiti implements to a minor in a single transaction
shall constitute a single violation of §
40-5.2. Each purchase or acquisition by other means of a group of graffiti
implements in a single transaction by a minor shall constitute a single
violation of §
40-5.2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 11, § 40-11.3) (Added by Ord. 95-46; Am. Ords. 97-67,
05-036)
ARTICLE 6: GRAFFITI DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY
Sections
   
40-6.1   Definitions
   
40-6.2   Violation—Penalty—Liability of parent or guardian
   
40-6.3   Enforcement
   
40-6.4   Rules
   
40-6.5   Collection of unpaid civil fines by addition to taxes, fees, and
charges—Rules
§ 40-6.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Director. The director of planning and permitting of the city, with respect to
public property under the management of the city.
Graffiti. Any unauthorized drawing, inscription, figure, or mark of any type
intentionally created by paint, ink, chalk, dye, or similar substances.
Public Property. Any real or personal property owned, managed, or maintained by
the city.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 12, § 40-12.1) (Added by Ord. 96-12; Am. Ord. 97-02)
§ 40-6.2 Violation—Penalty—Liability of parent or guardian.
(a)   Any person who places graffiti on public property shall be deemed to have
committed a civil violation and shall be subject to the following:
(1)   When the cost of repairing, cleaning, or replacing the damaged property
is $250 or less, a civil fine of not less than $250 and not more than $1,000;
(2)   When the cost of repairing, cleaning, or replacing the damaged property
is more than $250, a civil fine of not less than the cost of repairing,
cleaning, or replacing the damaged property and not more than $1,000; or
(3)   When the cost of repairing, cleaning, or replacing the damaged property
is $1,000 or more, a civil fine equal to the cost of repairing, cleaning, or
replacing the damaged property.
(b)   Any parent or guardian having custody of a minor who violates subsection
(a) shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for any civil fine
imposed under this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 12, § 40-12.2) (Added by Ord. 96-12)
§ 40-6.3 Enforcement.
(a)   Issuance of notice of violation and order. If the director determines
that any person has violated §
40-6.2, the director may have the person served, by registered or certified
mail, delivery, or publication in a daily newspaper of general circulation in
the city, with a written notice of violation and order. If a minor has
committed the violation, the director also shall serve the parents or guardians
having custody of the minor.
(1)   Contents of the notice of violation. The notice shall include at least
the following information:
(A)   Date of the notice;
(B)   The name and address of the person given notice;
(C)   The section number of the ordinance which has been violated;
(D)   The nature of the violation; and
(E)   The location of the violation and the date that the violation was
discovered.
(2)   Contents of the order. The order shall require the person to pay a civil
fine in a stated amount, determined by the director in accordance with §
40-6.2(a), in the manner, at the place, and before the date specified in the
order. The order shall advise the person that the order shall become final 30
days after the date of its mailing, delivery, or publication, unless written
request for a hearing is mailed or delivered to the director within those 30
days. The order shall further advise that any parent or guardian having custody
of a minor who has committed the violation is jointly and severally liable for
the fine.
(b)   Effect of order—right to hearing. The order issued by the director under
this section shall become final 30 days after the date of mailing, delivery, or
publication of the order, unless within those 30 days, the person subject to
the order requests in writing a hearing before the director. The request for a
hearing shall be considered timely if the written request is delivered or
mailed and postmark dated to the director within those 30 days.
Upon receipt of the written request for a hearing, the director shall specify a
time and place for the person subject to the order to appear and be heard. The
hearing shall be conducted by the director or the director’s designee in
accordance with HRS Chapter 91. Following the hearing, the director may affirm,
modify, or rescind the order as in the opinion of the director may be
appropriate.
(c)   Judicial enforcement of order. The director may institute a civil action
in any court of competent jurisdiction for the enforcement of any civil fine
imposed by order issued pursuant to this section. Where such civil action has
been instituted, the director need only show that a notice of violation and
order was served, a hearing was held or the time allowed for requesting a
hearing expired without such a request, that a civil fine was imposed and that
the fine imposed has not been paid.
(d)   Nonexclusiveness of remedies. The remedies provided in this article for
enforcement of this article, or any rule adopted under this section, shall be
in addition to any other remedy as may be provided by law.
(e)   Appeal in accordance with statute. If any person is aggrieved by the
order issued by the director pursuant to this section, the person may appeal
the order in the manner provided in HRS Chapter 91, provided that no provision
of such order shall be stayed on appeal, unless specifically ordered by a court
of competent jurisdiction.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 12, § 40-12.3) (Added by Ord. 96-12)
§ 40-6.4 Rules.
   The director is authorized to adopt rules in accordance with HRS Chapter 91
that the director may deem necessary for the implementation, administration,
and enforcement of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 12, § 40-12.4) (Added by Ord. 96-12)
§ 40-6.5 Collection of unpaid civil fines by addition to taxes, fees, and
charges—Rules.
   TThe director and the director of budget and fiscal services may adopt rules
in accordance with HRS Chapter 91 to enable the director and the director of
budget and fiscal services to administratively add, pursuant to
Chapter 6, Article 1, any unpaid civil fines imposed under this article to
taxes, fees, or charges collected by the city. The adoption of any of the
foregoing rules is not a prerequisite to liability under §
40-6.2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 12, § 40-12.5) (Added by Ord. 96-12)
ARTICLE 7: DISPOSAL OF WEEDS, GARBAGE, TRASH, AND WASTE FROM PROPERTY
Sections
   
40-7.1   Declaration of legislative intent
   
40-7.2   Definitions
   
40-7.3   Regulations for premises
   
40-7.4   Clearing of weeds, garbage, trash, and waste from property
   
40-7.5   Administrative enforcement
§ 40-7.1 Declaration of legislative intent.
   The following is the declaration of legislative intent of the council.
(a)   The provisions which are set forth hereinafter are authorized pursuant to
HRS § 46-1.5.
(b)   Any weeds, garbage, trash, or waste which are more specifically defined
hereinafter are declared to be public nuisances to the health, safety, and
welfare of the residents of the city and, therefore, cutting and removal
thereof shall be accomplished pursuant to the provisions set forth hereinafter.
(c)   The provisions set forth hereinafter are intended to remove and control
such weeds, garbage, trash, and waste and to provide the necessary power and
authority to an administrative agency of the city to effectuate the purpose.
(Sec. 13-29.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 10, § 41-10.1)
(Am. Ord. 96-58)
§ 40-7.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Building Superintendent. The director of planning and permitting.
Cut. To clear, trim, shape, separate, divide, sever, shorten, reduce, curtail,
slash, or to otherwise control and dispose of weeds on property; provided that
weeds may be disposed of by incineration in accordance with the fire code.
Garbage. All animal and vegetable matter, such as waste material and refuse
from kitchens, residences, grocery stores, butcher shops, restaurants, cafes,
drugstores, hotels, and rooming and boarding houses, and other deleterious
substances.
Owner. The fee simple owner, lessee of record, administrator, administratrix,
executor, executrix, receiver, trustee, property management agent, or any other
individual who has control or possession of privately owned real property.
Property. Real property and applies to:
(1)   Any privately owned or government-owned lot abutting either side of a
privately owned or government-owned street that is open to the public; provided
that this article does not apply to real property located within the
agricultural, country, or preservation zoning districts; and
(2)   Privately owned lots located within a residential zoning district and
situated within 200 feet of a developed residential zoning lot.
Remove. To move, displace, shift, take away, haul, or otherwise transfer
garbage, trash, and waste from property; provided that trash may be disposed of
by incineration in accordance with the Fire Code.
Trash. Rubbish such as feathers, ashes, tin cans, paper, rags, boxes, and
glass.
Waste. Any object, substance, or thing, of whatever kind of character, which
for any reason, may be or may have been thrown away, discarded, or abandoned
such as, but not limiting the generality of the foregoing:
(1)   Refrigerators, ranges, furniture, fixtures, and other similar household
items;
(2)   Vehicles, machinery, farm equipment, construction equipment, scrap iron
of all kinds, or any other similar item;
(3)   Debris from demolished structures or buildings;
(4)   Bulky wastes discharged by mercantile, industrial, and other
establishments; and
(5)   All garbage and trash other than defined above.
Weeds. Vegetation of that has reached such a stage of growth, and that is
present in such quantity, that it constitutes a substantial risk of one or more
of the following hazards:
(1)   The vegetation, when dry, is or will be a fire hazard;
(2)   The vegetation is, or is naturally suited as, a sheltering or breeding
place for rats, mice, mosquitoes, or other vermin or noxious pests;
(3)   The vegetation overgrows or spreads upon or over any privately owned or
government-owned road, alley, path, sidewalk, beach, or park that is open to
the public to the extent that the vegetation obstructs, impedes, or interferes
with the safe or convenient use or maintenance thereof;
(4)   The vegetation has grown or spread, or has fallen or may fall, into any
privately owned or controlled stream, ditch, sewer, canal, or other waterway,
resulting in the obstruction or narrowing of the channel or impeding the flow
of water;
(5)   The vegetation attracts or obscures illegal activity, such as
trespassing; or
(6)   The vegetation has grown or spread, or has fallen or may fall, into any
adjacent privately owned or government-owned property to the extent that the
vegetation obstructs, impedes, or interferes with the safe or convenient use or
maintenance thereof.
(Sec. 13-29.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 10, § 41-10.2)
(Am. Ords. 91-60, 96-58, 07-10, 18-7, 22-5)
§ 40-7.3 Regulations for premises.
   The owner of property shall at all times maintain the premises free of
weeds, garbage, trash, and waste.
(Sec. 13-29.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 10, § 41-10.3)
(Am. Ord. 22-5)
§ 40-7.4 Clearing of weeds, garbage, trash, and waste from property.
(a)   Notice to remove. The director of planning and permitting is authorized
and empowered to notify the owner of property within the city to properly cut
and remove weeds, garbage, trash, and waste located on such owner’s property.
Such notice shall be served upon the owner of the property by certified mail,
addressed to the owner at the owner’s last known address, by publication in a
daily or weekly publication in the city pursuant to HRS § 1-28.5, or by posting
a copy of the notice upon the property.
(b)   Period during which owner shall commence cutting and removing weeds,
garbage, trash, or waste. The owner of such property shall be given 30 calendar
days within which to commence the cutting and removal of weeds, garbage, trash,
or waste as described in the notice.
(c)   Form of notice. The notice shall describe the work to be done and shall
state that if the work is not commenced within 30 calendar days after notice is
given and diligently prosecuted to completion without interruption, the
director of planning and permitting may cut and remove the weeds, garbage,
trash, or waste and the cost thereof shall be a lien on the property.
(d)   Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any
owner so notified to commence cutting and removing the weeds, garbage, trash,
or waste within 30 days after notice has been given as hereinbefore provided,
or within 30 days after the date of mailing such notice in the event the post
office department is unable to make delivery thereof; provided that same was
properly addressed to the last known address, of such owner, the director of
planning and permitting is authorized and empowered to pay for cutting and
removing such weeds, garbage, trash, or waste out of city funds or to order its
disposal by city employees. The director of planning and permitting and the
director of planning and permitting’s authorized representatives, including any
contractor with whom the director of planning and permitting contracts under
this section, and assistants, employees, or agents of such contractor, are
authorized to enter upon the property for the purposes of cutting and removing
the weeds, garbage, trash, or waste described in the notice. Before the
director of planning and permitting or the director of planning and
permitting’s authorized representative or contractor arrives, any property
owner may cut and remove the weeds, garbage, trash, or waste at the property
owner’s own expense.
(e)   Charge to owner. When the city has cut and removed such weeds, garbage,
trash, or waste or has paid for their removal, the cost thereof, including
overhead costs, plus accrued interest at the rate of 7 percent per year shall
be charged to the owner of such property and the owner shall be billed therefor
by mail. The bill shall apprise the owner that failure to pay the bill will
result in a lien. Interest at the rate of 7 percent per year shall accrue from
the 31st calendar day after the bill has been mailed to the owner for payment
in the event the same has not been paid prior thereto.
(f)   Statement of director of planning and permitting. Where the full amount
due the city is not paid by such owner within 30 calendar days after the bill
has been mailed for payment, the director of planning and permitting shall
cause to be recorded with the director of budget and fiscal services a
statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work
was done, and the location of the property on which the work was done, and file
the same with the director of budget and fiscal services, who shall refer the
collection thereof to the corporation counsel.
(g)   Mechanic’s and materialman’s lien procedure. Any work done by the city
under this section is deemed to be done pursuant to quasi contract or
constructive contract between the city and the owner. Based on the foregoing
contractual relationship, if the owner fails to pay the amount duly noted on
the statement filed by the director of planning and permitting, the corporation
counsel may proceed to file a mechanic’s and materialman’s lien pursuant to HRS
Chapter 507, Part II, or any other appropriate lien procedures.
(Sec. 13-29.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 10, § 41-10.4)
(Am. Ords. 13-9, 15-21)
§ 40-7.5 Administrative enforcement.
   In lieu of or in addition to enforcement pursuant to §
40-7.4(e), if the director of planning and permitting determines that any
person, firm, or corporation is not complying with the notice, the director of
planning and permitting may have the party responsible served, by mail or
delivery, with an order pursuant to this section.
(a)   Contents of order.
(1)   The order may require the party responsible for the violation to do any
or all of the following:
(A)   Correct the violation within the time specified in the order;
(B)   Pay a civil fine not to exceed $5,000 in the manner, at the place, and
before the date specified in the order, after an opportunity for a hearing
before the building board of appeals as provided for in subsection (b); and
(C)   Pay a civil fine not to exceed $5,000 per day for each day in which the
violation persists, in the manner and at the time and place specified in the
order, after an opportunity for a hearing before the building board of appeals
as provided for in subsection (b).
(2)   The order shall advise the party responsible for the violation that the
order shall become final 30 calendar days after the date of its delivery. The
order shall also advise that the director of planning and permitting’s action
may be appealed to the building board of appeals.
(b)   Service of notice of order. A notice of order must be served upon
responsible persons either personally or by certified mail. However, if the
whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by
the director of planning and permitting in the exercise of reasonable diligence
and the director of planning and permitting provides an affidavit to that
effect, then a notice of order may be served by publishing the same once each
week for two consecutive weeks in a daily or weekly publication in the city
pursuant to HRS § 1-28.5.
(c)   Effect of order—right to appeal. The order issued by the director of
planning and permitting under this section shall become final 30 calendar days
after the date of the delivery of the order. The party responsible for the
violation may appeal the order to the building board of appeals as provided in
Chapter 16. The appeal must be received in writing on or before the date the
order becomes final.
(d)   Judicial enforcement of order. The director of planning and permitting
may institute a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction for the
enforcement of any order issued pursuant to this section. Where the civil
action has been instituted to enforce the civil fine imposed by the order, the
director of planning and permitting need only show that the notices of
violation and order were served, that a civil fine was imposed, the amount of
the civil fine imposed and that the fine imposed has not been paid.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 10, § 41-10.5) (Added by Ord. 90-92; Am. Ords. 13-9,
15-21)
ARTICLE 8: PROTECTIVE REGULATIONS FOR EXCEPTIONAL TREES
Sections
   
40-8.1   Declaration of legislative intent
   
40-8.2   Definition
   
40-8.3   Arborist advisory committee
   
40-8.4   Powers and duties
   
40-8.5   Procedures
   
40-8.6   Enforcing authority
   
40-8.7   Register of exceptional trees
   
40-8.8   Regulations
   
40-8.9   Emergency situation
   
40-8.10   Violation—Penalty—Injunctive enforcement
   
40-8.11   Severability
   
40-8.12   Appeals
§ 40-8.1 Declaration of legislative intent.
(a)   The council desires to provide for better environmental control to
improve the quality of life of its citizens by enacting protective regulations
to safeguard exceptional trees within the city. The council finds that not only
are trees of value for their beauty, but that they perform an important
ecological function in that they prevent soil erosion, purify the air, as well
as retard flooding. The council also finds that inasmuch as trees contribute to
the beauty of the island, they are an important element in achieving the
objectives of the new general plan “to protect and preserve the natural
environment of Oahu” and “to maintain the viability of Oahu’s resort industry.”
(b)   While the council recognizes the limitations inherent in the enforcement
of this article on federal and State property, exceptional trees located on
such property are included herein, as a statement of this council’s firm
resolve to protect those unique assets to our environment, wherever they might
be located on Oahu. Further, the council hopes that this statement of resolve
will encourage these federal and State officials entrusted with the care of
designated exceptional trees, to take appropriate steps for their protection.
(c)   In the belief that protective regulations to safeguard exceptional trees
will promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the
city, the council enacts this article as a means of preserving the
environmental character of the city within Act 105, Session Laws of Hawaii,
1975. The terms of this article shall be liberally construed to effectuate the
purpose stated herein.
(Sec. 13-36.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.1)
§ 40-8.2 Definition.
   “Exceptional trees,” for the purposes of this article, means a tree or grove
of trees with historic or cultural value, or which by reason of its age,
rarity, location, size, esthetic quality, or endemic status has been designated
by the council as worthy of preservation.
(Sec. 13-36.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.2)
§ 40-8.3 Arborist advisory committee.
   There shall be an arborist advisory committee consisting of nine members who
shall be appointed by the mayor. The committee shall include the director of
planning and permitting, or the director’s designee. At least one member shall
be actively employed in the practice of landscape architecture, at least one
member shall be actively employed as a certified arborist, and six other
members shall be selected on the basis of their active participation in
programs of community beautification, or research or organization in the
ecological sciences, including ethnobotany or Hawaiiana. The committee shall be
attached to the department of parks and recreation for administrative purposes
and the director shall cause employees of the director’s office to furnish
technical, administrative, or clerical services as may be needed by the
committee.
(Sec. 13-36.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.3)
(Am. Ord. 00-54)
§ 40-8.4 Powers and duties.
   The arborist advisory committee shall have the following powers and duties:
(1)   To research, prepare, and recommend to the council exceptional trees to
be protected by city ordinance or regulation;
(2)   To advise property owners relative to the preservation and enhancement of
exceptional trees by providing educational resources and information to
property owners about proper tree care and maintenance;
(3)   To recommend to the council appropriate protective ordinances,
regulations, and procedures; and
(4)   To review all actions deemed by the council to endanger exceptional
trees.
(Sec. 13-36.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.4)
(Am. Ord. 10-23)
§ 40-8.5 Procedures.
(a)   Any citizen or citizen group may petition the arborist advisory committee
to examine a particular tree or grove of trees for the purpose of having it
recommended to the council for designation as an exceptional tree.
(b)   In the event an exceptional tree is found to no longer meet the
exceptional tree criteria, the council, upon recommendation from the arborist
advisory committee, may delist such tree from the register.
(c)   Upon designation by the council of an exceptional tree, the city clerk
shall notify the property owner or the occupant of the property, or both, by
certified mail that such a designation has been made.
(Sec. 13-36.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.5)
(Am. Ords. 10-23, 19-28)
§ 40-8.6 Enforcing authority.
   The department of parks and recreation shall be charged with the enforcement
of this article and shall be clothed with police power to do all acts necessary
to ensure that this article is not violated including but not limited to the
issuance of citations for the violation of this article. This article shall not
be superseded by any permit issued by any county agency under any other
ordinance.
(Sec. 13-36.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.6)
(Am. Ord. 96-58)
§ 40-8.7 Register of exceptional trees.
   The trees listed in this section are designated “exceptional trees” of the
city.
(a)   The following trees begin with the letters “a” through “b”:
Name of Tree or Scientific Name, or Description of Location (If TMK
both                                Available)                  (If Available)
Name of Tree                                                                                   TMK
or Scientific  Description of Location (If Available)                                          (If
Name, or both                                                                                  Available)
Acrocarpus
fraxinifolius, Schofield Barracks, Ulrich Street, west of Building S2107                       N/A
Pink Cedar
Tree
               Queen’s Medical Center, 1301 Punchbowl Street*                                2-1-035:
                                                                                               003
Adansonia      Grove of 11 trees – Ala Moana Regional Park                                   2-3-037:
digitata,                                                                                      001
Baobab Tree    Foster Botanical Garden, 180 North Vineyard Boulevard                           1-7-007:
                                                                                               002
               University of Hawaii at Manoa, adjacent to the Art Building, 2444 Dole Street   2-8-023:
                                                                                               003
Agathis
robusta,       Harold L. Lyon Arboretum, 3860 Manoa Road                                       2-9-055:
Queensland                                                                                     006
Kauri Tree
Albizia
guachapele,    3 trees – Wheeler Army Airfield, on the median strip of Wright Avenue between N/A
Guachapele     Elleman Road and Foote Avenue
Trees
Albizia        Schofield Barracks, Sargent Road, between Buildings T-695 and 699A              N/A
niopoides
Albizia        4 trees – Wheeler Army Airfield, Wright Avenue, two trees north of building at
procera,       147 Langley Loop, one tree north of building at 766 Santos Dumont, one tree in  N/A
Albizia        front of quarters at 1078 Wright Avenue
Albizia saman, 2 trees – Waimea Valley, at the Visitor Center                                6-1-002:
Monkeypod Tree                                                                                 002
              420 Wyllie Street                                                               1-8-006:
                                                                                               007
              Central Union Church – courtyard Atherton Chapel, 1660 South Beretania Street 2-8-011:
                                                                                               028
Albizia saman, Both sides of Paki Avenue from Kapahulu to Monsarrat and 4 trees at Waikiki     3-1-043:
Monkeypod Tree Fire Station                                                                    002
(cont.)
              2 trees – Moanalua Gardens, 2850 Moanalua Road                                1-1-009:
                                                                                               004
              1070 Aalapapa Drive, Lanikai                                                    4-3-006:
                                                                                               102
              11 trees – along Koa Kahiku Street, Windward City Shopping Center             4-5-060:
                                                                                               061
              Wheeler Army Airfield, 258 Haley Avenue, Apartment 102                          N/A
              5 trees – along perimeter of Windward City Shopping Center on Aumoku Street   4-5-060:
                                                                                               061
              3 Trees – left and right of driveway entrance of Women’s Community Correctio4-2-003:
               Center, Kailua                                                                  004
                                                                                               1-8-003:
                                                                                               002; 1-8-
              16 Trees – 52 Robinson Lane                                                   003:003;
                                                                                               1-8-003:
                                                                                               005
              “Hitachi Tree”, Moanalua Gardens, 2850 Moanalua Road, Honolulu, Hawaii 968191-1-009:
                                                                                               004
              3 trees – Cooke Estate, 2859 Manoa Road                                       2-9-019:
                                                                                               035
              2 trees – Cooke Estate, 2829 Manoa Road                                       2-9-019:
                                                                                               025
              Both sides of Kapiolani Boulevard from Atkinson Drive to South Street           N/A
              1932 Awapuhi Street                                                             2-9-016:
                                                                                               013
              189 Niuiki Circle                                                               3-7-002:
                                                                                               060
Araucaria
bidwillii,     Castle Ranch, 1385 Maunawili Road                                               4-2-009:
Bunya-bunya                                                                                    001
Tree
Araucaria                                                                                      2-9-055:
cunninghamii,  Harold L. Lyon Arboretum, 3860 Manoa Road                                       006
Hoop-Pine Tree
Araucaria
heterophylla,  Castle Ranch, 1385 Maunawili Road                                               4-2-009:
Norfolk Island                                                                                 001
Pine Tree
Araucaria
spp., Norfolk  33 trees – Schofield Barracks, both sides of General Loop                     N/A
Island Pines
Artocarpus
altilis,       Castle Ranch, 1385 Maunawili Road                                               4-2-009:
Breadfruit                                                                                     001
Tree
Attalea
cohune,        Grove of 8 palms – 3282 Paty Drive                                            2-9-041:
Mexican Cohune                                                                                 068
Nut Palms
Barringtonia                                                                                   2-8-023:
asiatica, Hutu University of Hawaii at Manoa, mauka side of Bilger Hall at McCarthy Mall area  003
Tree
Bertholletia
excelsa,       2616 Pali Highway                                                               1-8-008:
Brazil Nut                                                                                     001
Tree
Bucida         Ala Moana Regional Park                                                         2-3-037:
buceras,                                                                                       001
Geometry Tree  Schofield Barracks, Sargent Road, north of Building T-695                       N/A
* “Champion Trees of Hawaii,” in American Forests, May 1974.
 
(b)   The following trees begin with the letters “c” through “e”:
Name of Tree or Scientific Name, or Description of Location (If TMK
both                                Available)                  (If Available)
                                                                                                                                       TMK
Name of Tree or Scientific Name, or both                Description of Location (If Available)                                         (If
                                                                                                                                       Available)
                                                        2 trees – Kualoa Regional Park – corner near fishpond, makai of Kamehameha 4-9-004:
                                                        Highway                                                                        001
Calophyllum inophyllum, Kamani Trees                    25 trees – Wheeler Army Airfield, both sides of Haley Avenue between Elleman N/A
                                                        and Chanute Roads
                                                        52 Robinson Lane                                                               1-8-003:
                                                                                                                                       002
                                                        Foster Botanical Garden, 1438 Nuuanu Avenue*                                   1-7-008:
                                                                                                                                       002
Canarium vulgare, Pili Nut Tree                         Northwest corner of J.R. Judd property, Hakipuu, 49-074-C Kamehameha Highway   4-9-001:
                                                                                                                                       005
                                                        Washington Place                                                               2-1-018:
                                                                                                                                       001
Capparis mollicella                                     Schofield Barracks, located on the south side of Building 2105, Ulrich Street  N/A
Cassia roxburghii, Red Cassia Tree                      45-647 Anoi Road                                                               4-5-081:
                                                                                                                                       015
                                                        Foster Botanical Garden, 180 North Vineyard Boulevard                          1-7-007:
Cassia x nealiae, ‘Wilhelmina Tenny’/Rainbow Shower                                                                                002
Tree                                                    2 trees–Kapiolani Regional Park; Kalakaua Avenue near Paki Avenue intersectio3-1-043:
                                                                                                                                       001
                                                        Along Kalakaua Avenue from Kapahulu Avenue to Poni Moi Road                    3-1-043:
                                                                                                                                       001
Casuarina equisetifolia, Ironwood Trees                 Grove of double row – parallel to the Kapiolani Park Bandstand, at Monsarrat 3-1-043:
                                                        Avenue’s Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell parking lot makai entrance                001
                                                        52 Robinson Lane                                                               1-8-003:
                                                                                                                                       002
Cavanillesia plantanifolia, Quipo Tree                  Foster Botanical Garden, 1438 Nuuanu Avenue*                                   1-7-008:
                                                                                                                                       002
                                                        Grounds of State department of agriculture, 1428 South King Street             2-4-005:
Ceiba pentandra, Kapok Tree                                                                                                            018
                                                        2 trees – Foster Botanical Garden, 1438 Nuuanu Avenue                        1-7-008:
                                                                                                                                       002
                                                        Foster Botanical Garden, 1438 Nuuanu Avenue                                    1-7-008:
Couroupita guianensis, Cannonball Tree                                                                                                 002
                                                        University of Hawaii/Manoa Campus, next to parking lot, makai side of Sinclair 2-8-023:
                                                        Library                                                                        003
Cyrtostachys renda, Sealing Wax Palm                    Harold L. Lyon Arboretum                                                       2-9-055:
                                                                                                                                       006
Elaeodendron orientale, False Olive Tree                Foster Botanical Garden, 1438 Nuuanu Avenue                                    1-7-008:
                                                                                                                                       002
                                                        Board of Water Supply – Makiki Pumping Station                               2-5-020:
                                                                                                                                       001
Enterolobium cyclocarpum, Earpod Tree                   Waialua Library, 67-068 Kealohanui Street                                      6-7-016:
                                                                                                                                       002
                                                        2020 Kamehameha Avenue                                                         2-9-007:
                                                                                                                                       015
                                                        23 trees – Schofield Barracks, north side of Leilehua Avenue, from Baldwin   N/A
                                                        Road to Morris Road
                                                        Schofield Barracks, Bragg Street, 100 feet from Ayres Avenue intersection      N/A
                                                        2 trees – 2823 Oahu Avenue                                                   2-9-014:
                                                                                                                                       069
                                                        Grove of 57 trees – Koko Crater Botanical Garden                             3-9-012:
Erythrina sandwicensis, Wiliwili Trees                                                                                                 001
                                                        Grove of 18 trees – Waimea Valley                                            6-1-001:
                                                                                                                                       002
Eucalyptus camaldulensis, River Red Gum Trees           56 trees – Schofield Barracks, south side of Kolekole Avenue, extending from N/A
                                                        Fournier Avenue to Hewitt Street
Eucalyptus deglupta, Mindanao Gum Tree                  Wahiawa Botanical Garden, 1396 California Avenue*                              7-4-017:
                                                                                                                                       001
Eucalyptus robusta, Swamp-Mahogany Trees                Schofield Barracks, row of 110 trees along Wilikina Drive in the Mendonca Park N/A
                                                        Family Housing area
* “Champion Trees of Hawaii,” in American Forests, May 1974.
 
(c)   The following trees begin with the letter “f”:
Name of Tree or Scientific Name, or Description of Location (If TMK
both                                Available)                  (If Available)
Name of Tree                                                                                  TMK
or Scientific Description of Location (If Available)                                          (If
Name, or both                                                                                 Available)
Ficus spp.,   45 trees that comprise 4 groves and 6 single trees at Ala Moana Regional Park;  2-3-037:
Banyan Trees  1 Ficus religiosa near the McCoy Pavilion roundabout, 4 Ficus spp. within McCoy 001
              Pavilion Courtyard, and 1 large Ficus benghalensis near the Ewa lagoon
Ficus spp.,   Two rows of Ficus benjamina trees along the Ewa side of the Ala Wai Canal and a
Banyan Trees  single row of Ficus microcarpa trees on the Waikiki side of the Ala Wai Canal,  N/A
(cont.)       all three rows running between Kalakaua Avenue and Ala Moana Boulevard
             2616 Pali Highway                                                               1-8-008:
                                                                                              001
Ficus sp.,    Washington Place, 320 South Beretania Street, front lawn Diamond Head side      2-1-018:
Fig Tree                                                                                      001
Ficus
benghalensis, Honolulu Zoo, 151 Kapahulu Avenue                                               3-1-043:
Indian Banyan                                                                                 001
Tree
             Makai tree – in front of Honolulu Zoo entrance; corner of Kalakaua Avenue and 3-1-043:
              Kapahulu Avenue                                                                 001
             Mauka tree – in front of Honolulu Zoo entrance; corner of Kalakaua Avenue and 3-1-043:
              Kapahulu Avenue                                                                 001
             Directly across the street from the Zoo entrance, makai side of Kalakaua Avenue 3-1-043:
                                                                                              001
             Ewa side of Queen’s Surf Beach Center, makai of Kalakaua Avenue               3-1-030:
                                                                                              003
             Ewa side of Waikiki Aquarium, makai of Kalakaua Avenue                          3-1-030:
                                                                                              003
             Makai tree – in front of the Waikiki War Memorial Natatorium, Diamond Head of 3-1-031:
              the Waikiki Aquarium                                                            003
             Mauka tree – in front of the Waikiki War Memorial Natatorium, Diamond Head of 3-1-031:
              the Waikiki Aquarium                                                            003
             Diamond Head tree – across the street from the Donald A. Andrews Diamond Head 3-1-043:
              Tennis Center, along the makai side of Paki Avenue                              001
             Ewa tree – across the street from the Donald A. Andrews Diamond Head Tennis   3-1-043:
              Center, along the makai side of Paki Avenue                                     001
             Diamond Head corner of archery range, along Poni Moi Road near entrance to La   3-1-043:
              Pietra                                                                          007
             Makai tree – across the street from the Diamond Head side of the Honolulu Zoo,3-1-043:
              makai side of the Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell parking lot entrance                001
             Mauka tree – across the street from the Diamond Head side of the Honolulu Zoo,3-1-043:
              makai side of Waikiki Shell parking lot entrance                                001
             Grounds of Kaiulani School, 783 North King Street                               1-5-005:
                                                                                              016
Ficus
benghalensis, Iolani Palace grounds                                                           2-1-025:
Indian Banyan                                                                                 002
Tree (cont.)
             Moana Hotel Courtyard, 2365 Kalakaua Avenue                                     2-6-001:
                                                                                              012
             2 trees – beside the Judiciary Building, Aliiolani Hale, 417 South King Street2-1-025:
                                                                                              003
             Parking lot, Walina Street, The Food Pantry Ltd., 2370 Kuhio Avenue             2-6-021:
                                                                                              100
             Kuhio Beach Park                                                                2-6-001:
                                                                                              004
             Center of International Market Place, 2330 Kalakaua Avenue                      2-6-022:
                                                                                              038
             End of Magic Island                                                             2-3-037:
                                                                                              025
             1212 Punahou Street                                                             2-4-007:
                                                                                              002
             Thomas Square, 925 South Beretania Street, 4 trees surrounding fountain         2-4-001:
                                                                                              001
Ficus
benjamina,    Entry circle to left of front lawn of Roosevelt High School                     2-4-032:
Benjamin Fig                                                                                  001
Tree
Ficus
drupacea,     Schofield Barracks, tree located on the north side of Grant Hall, intersection  N/A
Mysore Fig    of Waianae and McCornack Roads
Tree
Ficus
elastica,     University of Hawaii/Manoa Campus, next to Campus Way, mauka side of Sinclair   2-8-023:
Indian Rubber Library                                                                         003
Tree
Ficus
macrophylla,  Schofield Barracks, tree located at the southwest corner of Building 747, Quad  N/A
Moreton Bay   I
Fig Tree
             Kailua Road “Triangle Park”, center of Kailua                               4-2-018:
                                                                                              014
Ficus
microcarpa,   239 Kulamanu Place                                                              3-1-040:
Chinese                                                                                       061
Banyan Tree
             3 Trees – Kailua Road “Triangle Park”, center of Kailua                   4-2-018:
                                                                                              014
             1699 Walea Street                                                               7-5-001:
                                                                                              001
Ficus
petiolaris,   1941 Ualakaa Street                                                             2-5-001:
Blue Mexican                                                                                  033
Fig Tree
Ficus                                                                                         1-1-009:
religiosa, Bo Moanalua Gardens, 2850 Moanalua Road*                                           004
Tree
             2616 Pali Highway                                                               1-8-008:
                                                                                              001
             Foster Botanical Garden, 1438 Nuuanu Avenue                                     1-7-008:
                                                                                              002
* “Champion Trees of Hawaii,” in American Forests, May 1974.
 
(d)   The following trees begin with the letters “g” through “l”:
Name of Tree or Scientific Name, or Description of Location (If TMK
both                                Available)                  (If Available)
Name of Tree or Scientific Name, or     Description of Location  TMK
both                                    (If Available)           (If Available)
Garcinia mangostana, Mangosteen Tree    Castle Ranch, 1385       4-2-009:001
                                        Maunawili Road
                                        Foster Botanical Garden,
Gigasiphon macrosiphon                  180 North Vineyard       1-7-007:002
                                        Boulevard
                                        State department of
Guazuma ulmifolia, West Indian Elm Tree agriculture, 1428 South  2-4-005:018
                                        King Street*
Hernandia nymphaeifolia, Jack-in-the-   University of Hawaii/
box Tree                                Manoa Campus, mauka Ewa  2-8-023:003
                                        side of Sinclair Library
Hibiscus tiliaceus, Hau Tree            3314 Halelani Drive      2-9-035:103
                                       4534 Kahala Avenue       3-5-013:008
Hura crepitans, Sandbox Tree            2365 Oahu Avenue         2-9-005:056
Hydnocarpus anthelminthicus,            Foster Botanical Garden,
Chaulmoogra Oil Tree                    180 North Vineyard       1-7-007:002
                                        Boulevard
Hyphaene thebaica, Doum Palm,           Foster Botanical Garden,
Gingerbread Palm                        180 North Vineyard       1-7-007:002
                                        Boulevard*
Kigelia africana, Sausage Tree          115 Kuukama Street,      4-3-014:007
                                        Kailua
                                        Coast Guard Station on
                                       Kalanianaole Highway,    3-5-046:013
                                        Aina Haina
Lagerstroemia speciosa, Queen’s Crape Foster Botanical Garden, 1-7-008:002
Myrtle                                  1438 Nuuanu Avenue*
                                       Cooke Estate, 2859 Manoa 2-9-019:035
                                        Road
                                        Schofield Barracks,
Lagunaria patersonia, White Wood Tree   Glennan Avenue, between  N/A
                                        Buildings 687 and 688,
                                        Health Clinic
Litchi chinensis, Litchi Tree           2616 Pali Highway        1-8-008:001
                                       1699 Walea Street,       7-5-001:001
                                        Wahiawa
                                       Castle Ranch, 1385       4-2-009:001
                                        Maunawili Road
Lonchocarpus domingensis, Guama Tree    Foster Botanical Garden, 1-7-008:002
                                        1438 Nuuanu Avenue*
* “Champion Trees of Hawaii,” in American Forests, May 1974.
 
(e)   The following trees begin with the letters “m” through “r”:
Name of Tree or Scientific Name, or Description of Location (If TMK
both                                Available)                  (If Available)
Name of Tree or Scientific Name, or                                                                                 TMK
both                                Description of Location (If Available)                                          (If
                                                                                                                    Available)
Macadamia integrifolia, Macadamia   52 Robinson Lane                                                                1-8-003:
Nut Tree                                                                                                            002
Mammea americana, Mammee Apple Tree State department of agriculture, 1428 South King Street*                        2-4-005:
                                                                                                                    018
Mangifera indica ‘Pirie’, Mango 2616 Pali Highway                                                               1-8-008:
Tree                                                                                                                001
Mangifera indica, Mango Tree        Center of Nuuanu Valley Park                                                    2-2-034:
                                                                                                                    028
                                    52 Robinson Lane                                                                1-8-003:
                                                                                                                    002
Manilkara zapota, Chicle Tree       2616 Pali Highway                                                               1-8-008:
                                                                                                                    001
                                    Foster Botanical Garden, 1438 Nuuanu Avenue*                                    1-7-008:
                                                                                                                    002
Metroxylon amicarum, Caroline Ivory Castle Ranch, 1385 Maunawili Road                                               4-2-009:
Nut Palm                                                                                                            001
Michelia x alba, Pak Lan Tree       Washington Place, 320 South Beretania Street, rear Diamond Head side near lanai 2-1-018:
                                                                                                                    001
Mimusops elengi, Pogada Tree        Foster Botanical Garden, 1438 Nuuanu Avenue*                                    1-7-008:
                                                                                                                    002
                                    41 trees – Wheeler Army Airfield, 148 Curtis Loop, 16 trees line Curtis Loop,
                                    Wright Avenue and Warhawk Road; 25 trees line Curtis Loop and Vought and Wright N/A
                                    Avenues framing the parking lot
Olea europaea, Olive Tree           2621 Anuenue Street                                                             2-9-014:
                                                                                                                    070
Phoenix canariensis, Date Palm      Wheeler Army Airfield, row of palm trees on both sides of Wright Avenue, from   N/A
Trees                               Frutchey Road to Lilienthal Road
Phyllanthus emblica, Indian         2616 Pali Highway                                                               1-8-008:
Gooseberry Tree                                                                                                     001
Pithecellobium dulce, Opiuma Tree   Fernhurst YWCA – 1566 Wilder Avenue                                           2-4-023:
                                                                                                                    087
Pittosporum hosmeri, Hoawa Tree     Cooke Estate, 2859 Manoa Road                                                   2-9-019:
                                                                                                                    035
Plumeria obtusa, Singapore Plumeria 902-B Prospect Street                                                           2-2-004:
Tree                                                                                                                048
Pritchardia lowreyana, Loulu Palm   Foster Botanical Garden, 1438 Nuuanu Avenue                                     1-7-008:
                                                                                                                    002
Prosopis pallida, Kiawe Tree        2418 Oahu Avenue                                                                2-9-011:
                                                                                                                    010
Pseudobombax ellipticum, Pink       Queen’s Medical Center, front lawn                                            2-1-035:
Bombax Tree                                                                                                         003
                                    612 Ahakea Street                                                               3-5-014:
                                                                                                                    036
Pterocarpus indicus, Narra Tree     Tantalus Drive – on curve near #3665                                          2-5-012:
                                                                                                                    006
Pterocarpus indicus, Narra Tree     6 trees – Wheeler Army Airfield, Eastman Road, 2 trees approximately 100 feet
(cont.)                             north of Wright Avenue intersection, 2 trees 500 feet north of Wright Avenue    N/A
                                    intersection and 2 trees east of quarters at 459 Eastman Road
Pterygota alata, Tattele Tree       Foster Botanical Garden, 180 North Vineyard Boulevard                           1-7-007:
                                                                                                                    002
Reynoldsia sandwicensis, Ohe Makai  2 trees – Waimea Valley                                                       6-1-001:
Trees                                                                                                               002
Roseodendron donnell-smithii, Gold  2119 Kaloa Way                                                                  2-8-020:
Tree                                                                                                                040
                                    Cooke Estate, 2829 Manoa Road                                                   2-9-019:
                                                                                                                    025
Roystonea oleracea, Cabbage Palm    Harold L. Lyon Arboretum                                                        2-9-055:
                                                                                                                    006
                                    Foster Botanical Garden, 1438 Nuuanu Avenue*                                    1-7-008:
                                                                                                                    002
                                    2 palms – Schofield Barracks, 227 General Loop                                N/A
Roystonea oleracea and Roystonea
regia, Cabbage Palms and Royal      Total of 11 palms – Schofield Barracks, west side of Building 360, Flagler RoaN/A
Palms
Roystonea regia, Royal Palms        Both sides of Royal Palm Drive from Glen Avenue to Uuku Street, Wahiawa         N/A
                                    30 line old carriage road – Castle Ranch, 1385 Maunawili Road                 4-2-009:
                                                                                                                    001
                                    Palm Circle Drive, Fort Shafter, palms encircling parade field                  1-1-008:
                                                                                                                    005
Roystonea regia and Fraxinus        91 Royal Palms and 79 White Ash Trees – Wheeler Army Airfield, planted
americana, Royal Palms and White    alternately on both sides of Sperry and Langley Loops north of Wright Avenue    N/A
Ash Trees
* “Champion Trees of Hawaii,” in American Forests, May 1974.
 
(f)   The following trees begin with the letter “s” through “w”:
Name of Tree or Scientific Name, or Description of Location (If TMK
both                                Available)                  (If Available)
Name of Tree or                                                                              TMK
Scientific      Description of Location (If Available)                                       (If
Name, or both                                                                                Available)
Schotia                                                                                      2-2-003:
brachypetala,   203 Prospect Street                                                          098
Tree Fuchsia
Spondias                                                                                     1-7-008:
mombin, Hog     Foster Botanical Garden, 1438 Nuuanu Avenue*                                 002
Plum Tree
Sterculia                                                                                    2-3-037:
apetala, Panama 4 trees – Ala Moana Regional Park                                          001
Trees
                Thomas Square, 925 South Beretania Street                                    2-4-001:
                                                                                             001
Sterculia                                                                                    2-8-023:
foetida, Skunk  University of Hawaii/Manoa Campus, Ewa-makai corner of George Hall           003
Tree
                Schofield Barracks, 225 General Loop                                         N/A
                203 Prospect Street                                                          2-2-003:
                                                                                             098
Swietenia       2 trees – Schofield Barracks, Lewis Street, immediately north of the Foote
macrophylla,    Avenue intersection                                                          N/A
Mahogany Trees
                Schofield Barracks, Glennan Avenue, between Buildings 672 and 688, Health    N/A
                Clinic
Swietenia
mahagoni,       Along Kalakaua Avenue between Beretania Street and Ena Road                  N/A
Mahogany Trees
                2616 Pali Highway                                                            1-8-008:
                                                                                             001
Syzygium
malaccense,     Castle Ranch, 1385 Maunawili Road                                            4-2-009:
Mountain Apple                                                                               001
Tree
Tamarindus                                                                                   2-1-025:
indica,         Judiciary Building, Aliiolani Hale, Ewa Courtyard, 417 South King Street     003
Tamarind Tree
                52 Robinson Lane                                                             1-8-003:
                                                                                             002
                Washington Place, 320 South Beretania Street, front lawn Ewa side            2-1-018:
                                                                                             001
                Washington Place, 320 South Beretania Street, rear of property on Ewa side   2-1-018:
                near driveway                                                                001
Terminalia
catappa,        Foster Botanical Garden, 1438 Nuuanu Avenue                                  1-7-008:
Tropical Almond                                                                              002
Tree
Wallaceodendron University of Hawaii, along Campus Road near Sinclair Library, across from   2-8-023:
celebicum,      Gartley Hall, 2444 Dole Street                                               003
Banuyo Tree
Washingtonia
robusta,        19 palms – Schofield Barracks, located on the west side of Dickman Road    N/A
Mexican Fan
Palms
                14 palms – Schofield Barracks, both sides of Glennan Street between Foote  N/A
                Avenue and Sargent Road
* “Champion Trees of Hawaii,” in American Forests, May 1974.
 
(Sec. 13-36.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 13,
§ 41-13.7) (Am. Ords. 88-109, 91-38, 92-123, 00-54, 06-51, 10-23, 15-12, 16-34,
19-28, 24-2)
§ 40-8.8 Regulations.
(a)   Tree removal or destruction. It is unlawful for any person, corporation,
public agency, or other entity to remove or otherwise destroy any tree in the
city that has been designated “exceptional” without approval from the council,
except as provided in §
40-8.9. Any person who violates this section shall be fined not more than
$1,000.
(b)   Tree maintenance.
(1)   It is unlawful for any person, corporation, public agency, or other
entity to alter the characteristic shape of any “exceptional” tree or remove
any branch without first obtaining a permit issued by the department of parks
and recreation.
(2)   The department of parks and recreation shall have the necessary powers to
make rules, pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, to establish the criteria, standards,
and conditions under which a permit may be issued.
(Sec. 13-36.8, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 13,
§ 41-13.8)
§ 40-8.9 Emergency situation.
   In an emergency situation, where there is imminent danger to life or
property, the owner of the exceptional tree shall petition for removal of the
exceptional tree to the director of parks and recreation or the director’s
authorized representative. The director of parks and recreation or the
director’s authorized representative may grant the removal of an exceptional
tree upon a finding that such an emergency exists. The director of parks and
recreation shall give notice of the action taken to the arborist advisory
committee and to the council.
(Sec. 13-36.9, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 13,
§ 41-13.9) (Am. Ord. 15-12)
§ 40-8.10 Violation—Penalty—Injunctive enforcement.
(a)   Any person who violates §
40-8.8 shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.
(b)   In addition, any threatened violation of this article, or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant to §
40-8.8(b) is declared to be a public nuisance and the corporation counsel shall
institute such proceedings for injunctive or other civil relief as may be
necessary to carry out the intent of this article.
(Sec. 13-36.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.); Sec. 13-36.10, R.O. 1987 Supp.) (1990
Code, Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.10)
§ 40-8.11 Severability.
   If any section, paragraph, subsection, clause, or phrase of this article is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article.
(Sec. 13-36.10, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.); Sec. 13-36.11, R.O. 1987 Supp.) (1990
Code, Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.11)
§ 40-8.12 Appeals.
   Any person or persons aggrieved by an action of the council may, within 30
days of such action, file an appeal to the circuit court.
(Sec. 13-36.11, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.); Sec. 13-36.12, R.O. 1987 Supp.) (1990
Code, Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.12)
ARTICLE 9: ALARM SYSTEMS
Sections
   
40-9.1   Definitions
   
40-9.2   Alarm user permits required
   
40-9.3   Multiple alarm systems
   
40-9.4   Response to alarm—Determination of false alarm
   
40-9.5   Review of false alarm determinations
   
40-9.6   Service charge assessment for false alarms
   
40-9.7   Failure to obtain permit for alarm system—Violation
   
40-9.8   Deposit of fees, charges, and fines in special account
   
40-9.9   Annual report
   
40-9.10   Failure to provide written notification—Violation
§ 40-9.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Activation of an Alarm System. The emission of an audible or silent alarm or
signal generated by an alarm system, including the transmission of a message by
means of an automatic telephone dialer.
Alarm Company. The business of any individual, partnership, corporation, or
other entity engaged in selling, leasing, or installing any alarm system or in
causing any alarm system to be sold, leased, or installed in or on any
building, structure, facility, or premises.
Alarm System. Any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the
occurrence of an emergency, including illegal entry or other activity requiring
immediate attention, to which the police department is expected to respond or
does respond, and that emits an audible alarm or transmits a signal or message,
including a telephonic message, when activated. The term does not include
alarms installed in motor vehicles or fire alarms.
Alarm System Coordinator. A subordinate, person, or vendor designated by the
chief of police to administer this article.
Alarm User. Any person owning or leasing an alarm system, or on whose premises
an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises.
Audible Alarm. Any alarm system that emits a sound when activated.
Automatic Telephone Dialer. Any alarm system that, when activated, dials a
programmed telephone number, and when the telephone is answered, plays a
recorded message informing the listener of an unauthorized entry or unlawful
act.
Chief of Police. The chief of police of the city, or the chief’s authorized
subordinates.
Common Cause. A common technical difficulty or malfunction which causes an
alarm system to generate a series of false alarms.
Emergency. Includes:
(1)   An unauthorized entry or attempted unauthorized entry into a building,
place, or premises, excluding any motor vehicle; or
(2)   The commission of a crime.
Emergency Service. Any law enforcement, fire, or medical service.
False Alarm. Any alarm activation that is communicated to an emergency service
but that is not in response to an actual or threatened emergency. False alarms
include alarm activations caused by mechanical or electronic failure,
malfunction, improper installation or maintenance of alarm system equipment, or
the negligence of the alarm user, employees, and agents of the alarm user.
False alarm shall also include efforts to use an alarm system to summon an
emergency service for a purpose other than an emergency. A false alarm shall
not include an alarm activation when there is evidence that the activation was
the result of a power outage exceeding four hours in length or the result of
hurricane, fire, earthquake, or other unusually violent condition of nature or
an alarm that is canceled by the alarm user before the police department is
dispatched to or arrives at the premises.
Notice. Written notice, served personally or mailed, addressed to the person to
be notified at the person’s last known address. Service of such notice shall be
deemed effected upon completion of personal service or upon deposit of such
notice in the United States mail.
Permittee. The holder of a permit issued under §
40-9.2.
Person. An individual, corporation, partnership, trust, limited liability
company, association, organization, or similar entity, but excludes any agency
of the federal government or the State.
Police Department. The Honolulu police department.
Service Charge. A charge assessed a permittee to offset the city’s cost of
responding to a false alarm, and may include the administrative costs of
mailing and processing an assessment notice for a false alarm and the prorated
share of the city’s cost of administering this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 42, § 41-42.1) (Added by Ord. 01-63; Am. Ords. 12-40,
14-3)
§ 40-9.2 Alarm user permits required.
(a)   Permit required. No person shall use an alarm system which is designed to
elicit, either directly or indirectly, a police response without first
obtaining a permit for such alarm system from the alarm system coordinator. An
alarm company shall provide each person purchasing or leasing an alarm system
from the alarm company with written notification of the permit required
pursuant to this section at the time of sale or not later than 24 hours before
the installation of the alarm system.
(b)   Permit issuance. The permit shall be requested on an application form
prescribed by the chief of police. An alarm user shall obtain the application
form from the alarm system coordinator, provide the information requested on
the form, and file the form with the alarm system coordinator. Upon receipt of
a completed application form and the fee prescribed in subsection (e), the
alarm system coordinator shall issue a permit to the applicant. Permits shall
be valid for one year and shall be renewable on an annual basis.
(c)   Transfer of possession. When the possession of the premises at which an
alarm system is maintained is transferred, the person obtaining possession of
the premises shall file an application for an alarm user permit within 30 days
of obtaining possession of the premises. Alarm user permits are not
transferable.
(d)   Reporting updated information. Whenever the information provided on the
alarm user permit application changes, the correct information shall be
provided by the permittee to the alarm system coordinator within 30 days of the
change. Each year after the initial issuance of the permit, the alarm system
coordinator shall provide each permit holder with a form requesting updated
information. The permit holder shall complete and return this form to the alarm
system coordinator and pay the renewal fee prescribed in subsection (e).
(e)   Fees. The initial fee for a permit shall be $15. The fee for renewal of
an annual permit shall be $5.
(f)   Confidentiality. Completed application forms and permits shall be
confidential and shall not be made public, except to that extent necessary to
enforce this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 42, § 41-42.2) (Added by Ord. 01-63; Am. Ord. 14-3)
§ 40-9.3 Multiple alarm systems.
   If an alarm user has one or more alarm systems protecting two or more
separate structures having different addresses, a separate permit will be
required for each such structure.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 42, § 41-42.3) (Added by Ord. 01-63)
§ 40-9.4 Response to alarm—Determination of false alarm.
(a)   Police response. Whenever an alarm system is activated which results in a
response by the police department, the responding police officer shall inspect
the area and determine whether an actual or threatened emergency existed at the
time of the system’s activation, or whether the alarm was a false alarm.
(b)   Notification. If the police officer at the scene of the activated alarm
system determines the alarm to be false, the police officer shall make a report
of the false alarm. The permittee or, if there is no permittee, an alarm user,
shall be notified in writing of each false alarm determination.
(c)   Inspection. At the time of the response, the chief of police shall have
the right to inspect any alarm system to which the police department has
responded to determine whether the system is being used in conformity with this
article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 42, § 41-42.4) (Added by Ord. 01-63)
§ 40-9.5 Review of false alarm determinations.
(a)   The alarm system coordinator shall, when requested by a permittee, review
the determination by a responding police officer that an alarm was false. The
review shall be conducted by the alarm system coordinator only if the permittee
requests the review in writing within 10 days of the date on which the false
alarm determination was mailed or delivered to the permittee. The written
request for review of a false alarm determination shall include the following
information:
(1)   The permittee’s name and mailing address;
(2)   Address of the premises at which the alarm system is installed;
(3)   The date of the alarm being contested;
(4)   The permit number for the alarm system; and
(5)   The basis for the permittee’s belief that the alarm being contested was
not a false alarm.
(b)   The alarm system coordinator shall make a determination on the
permittee’s request for review within 14 days of receiving the request for
review and shall, within seven days thereafter, mail written notice of the
coordinator’s determination to the permittee at the address supplied in the
request for review.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 42, § 41-42.5) (Added by Ord. 01-63)
§ 40-9.6 Service charge assessment for false alarms.
(a)   Any service charge assessed pursuant to this section shall be considered
an obligation owed by the permittee to the city and shall be paid within 30
days from the date of receipt of the assessment notice.
(b)   (1)   A permittee who installs a new alarm system or reinstalls an alarm
system shall not be subject to a false alarm determination for a period of 30
days from the date the alarm system becomes operational. This subdivision shall
apply only if the alarm user provides written notice to the alarm system
coordinator within 10 days of completion of an alarm system installation or
reinstallation. The written notice shall specify the date the installation or
reinstallation was completed and, if a reinstallation, shall contain a
description of the reinstallation. For the purposes of this subsection, an
alarm system is considered to have been reinstalled when a new control panel is
installed for the system.
(2)   An alarm user who obtains an initial permit for an alarm system already
in operation on April 27, 2002* shall not be subject to a false alarm
determination for the 30-day period immediately following issuance of the
permit.
(3)   This subsection shall not apply to any permittee or other alarm user who
is delinquent in payment of any service charges assessed or fines imposed
pursuant to this article.
(c)   A series of false alarms generated by an alarm system, for which a permit
has been issued under this article, as a result of a common cause within any
72-hour period shall be considered a single occurrence of a false alarm for
purposes of subsections (d) and (e), provided that:
(1)   Repairs to the alarm system to eliminate the common cause are made before
the alarm system generates additional false alarms after the 72-hour period;
(2)   The alarm user provides documentation of the repairs to the alarm system
coordinator; and
(3)   No additional false alarms are generated as a result of the common cause
within the 30-day period immediately following the completion of repairs.
(d)   A service charge shall not be assessed for the first, second, and third
false alarms activated from any premises within a 12-month period. The fourth
false alarm and all false alarms thereafter activated from any premises within
a 12-month period shall cause the permittee to be assessed a $50 service charge
per occurrence, provided that an initial fourth false alarm activation within a
12-month period shall be deemed not to have occurred if the alarm user
successfully completes an alarm systems operation and maintenance educational
program approved by the chief of police.
(e)   Except as provided in subsection (d), the assessment notice for the
fourth false alarm and all false alarms thereafter activated from any premises
within a 12-month period shall specify that the police department shall be
under no duty to respond, and may discontinue responding, to alarms activated
from the premises until all unpaid service charges assessed pursuant to this
section are paid. Upon receipt of all service charges assessed, police
department response to alarm activations at the premises may recommence. In
addition, the chief of police, before determining to recommence police response
to the premises, may require that a permittee or alarm user submit written
proof that its alarm system has been inspected by a licensed contractor after
the most recent false alarm determination. This section shall not apply to
panic, duress, or holdup alarms.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 42, § 41-42.6) (Added by Ord. 01-63)
§ 40-9.7 Failure to obtain permit for alarm system—Violation.
   Failure by an alarm user to obtain a permit when required by §
40-9.2 shall constitute a violation punishable by a fine of not more than $100.
If, after being cited for a violation of this section, an alarm user fails to
obtain a permit under this article within 30 days of the citation, each
activation of the alarm system shall be deemed a false alarm and a violation
and the alarm user cited shall be liable to pay a service charge of $50 for
each false alarm and $250 for each violation until a permit is obtained.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 42, § 41-42.7) (Added by Ord. 01-63)
§ 40-9.8 Deposit of fees, charges, and fines in special account.
   All moneys collected from fees, charges, and fines required by this article
shall be deposited in a special account in the general fund and shall be used
for the administration and enforcement of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 42, § 41-42.8) (Added by Ord. 01-63)
§ 40-9.9 Annual report.
   No later than 30 days following the first and second anniversary of April
27, 2002,* the chief of police shall submit to the council and the city clerk a
comprehensive report of the police department’s activities under this article,
which report shall include at least the following:
(1)   A breakdown of general fund and special account resources assigned to or
expended on the administration of this article;
(2)   An accounting of the number of permits issued;
(3)   An accounting of the number of false alarms by category (first, second,
third, etc.; residential or commercial, etc.);
(4)   An accounting of the number of false alarm determinations appealed and
reviewed, and the disposition of those reviews;
(5)   An accounting of the permit fees received;
(6)   An accounting of the service charges assessed and paid; and
(7)   An accounting of the number of violations/citations for failure to obtain
a required permit.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 42, § 41-42.9) (Added by Ord. 01-63)
Editor’s note:
   * “April 27, 2002” is substituted for “the effective date of this
ordinance.”
§ 40-9.10 Failure to provide written notification—Violation.
   An alarm company that fails to provide written notification of the required
permit to the alarm user under §
40-9.2(a) shall be responsible for the payment of all fines and charges
assessed to the alarm user under §
40-9.7, provided that the citation or notice of violation is provided to the
alarm company by the alarm user within 30 days of the notice or citation’s
issuance.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 42, § 41-42.10) (Added by Ord. 14-3)
ARTICLE 10: HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Sections
   
40-10.1   Findings and policy
   
40-10.2   On-site curation
   
40-10.3   Removal, transfer prohibited
§ 40-10.1 Findings and policy.
(a)   Findings.
(1)   The council finds that HRS § 6E-15 provides in part that “In addition to
any power or authority of a political subdivision to regulate by planning or
zoning laws and regulations or by local laws and regulations, the governing
body of any political subdivision may provide by regulations, special
conditions, or restrictions for the protection, enhancement, preservation, and
use of historic properties....”
(2)   Significant archaeological findings, including major artifacts and
ancient burials, vital to the understanding, preservation, and interpretation
of the Hawaiian history and culture, have been discovered on public lands owned
and controlled by the city, including Kualoa Regional Park. Kualoa Regional
Park is located within the ahupua‘a of Kualoa which is entered into the
National Register of Historic Places as the Kualoa Ahupua‘a Historical
District, and in the State register of historic places, on the basis of its
mythological and legendary importance to the Hawaiian people.
(3)   Extensive archaeological site survey and research activities have
revealed the historic and cultural value of Kualoa, where much archaeological
work remains to be done. Archaeological data and many thousands of artifacts
disclose unusual prehistoric Hawaiian use of the area, dating back to at least
the 13th century A.D., and ancient remains of human burials are frequently
being uncovered because of rapid beach erosion, necessitating close
archaeological monitoring.
(4)   Despite the oftentimes enormous significance of archaeological findings
discovered on city-owned or controlled lands which have been placed on the
National Register of Historic Places and State register of historic places,
such as Kualoa Regional Park, or which meet the criteria and would therefore be
eligible for placement on the national register or State register, there is
lacking a cohesive city policy providing for the deposition and curation, in
conformance with generally accepted scientific methods, of field notes,
photographs, negatives, maps, artifacts, ancient burial remains or other
materials generated, or likely to be generated, following initial stages of
identification, survey, and discovery of artifacts and remains. At Kualoa
Regional Park, for example, there is a backlog of recovered archaeological
materials, field records, maps, and photographs which need to be fully
documented, analyzed, and accessioned as a prerequisite to deposition and
curation.
(b)   Policy. In recognition of the significance and unique historical and
cultural resources known to or reasonably believed to be associated with city-
owned or controlled lands which have been placed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the State register of historic places, or those which meet
the criteria and would therefore be eligible for placement on the national
register or State register, it is declared to be the policy of the city that:
(1)   The development of all such lands shall be sensitive to, and consistent
with, the specific historical and cultural characteristics of the lands;
(2)   The development of all such lands shall include the implementation of
programs, including but not necessarily limited to educational and interpretive
programs to provide an understanding of the abundant and unique features of
Hawaiian culture through reference to archaeological sites and artifacts
located at, or removed from, the developed lands; and
(3)   Interested individuals and groups, including the office of Hawaiian
affairs, shall be consulted in the decision making process on the development
of all such lands.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 30, § 41-30.1) (Added by Ord. 90-24)
§ 40-10.2 On-site curation.
   To the extent practicable, and not inconsistent with law, assemblages of
prehistoric and historic artifacts recovered from a site on land owned or
controlled by the city which has been placed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the State register of historic places, or which meets the
criteria and would therefore be eligible for placement on the national register
or State register, shall be properly curated at the site.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 30, § 41-30.2) (Added by Ord. 90-24)
§ 40-10.3 Removal, transfer prohibited.
(a)   Any removal, transfer, loan, sale, destruction, or alienation of any
assemblage of prehistoric and historic artifacts recovered from a site on land
owned or controlled by the city which has been placed on the National Register
of Historic Places or the State register of historic places, or which meets the
criteria and would therefore be eligible for placement on the national register
or State register, shall be prohibited, except in accordance with a specific
plan approved by the council, which plan shall include detailed justification
and specific methods to ensure the preservation, integrity, and continued
accessibility to the artifacts in furtherance of the policies set forth in this
article.
(b)   Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished by
a fine not more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 30, § 41-30.3) (Added by Ord. 90-24)
ARTICLE 11: UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS
Sections
   
40-11.1   Definitions
   
40-11.2   Underground storage tank permit required
   
40-11.3   Underground storage tank permit procedures
   
40-11.4   Inspections
   
40-11.5   Notification and reporting
   
40-11.6   Administration and enforcement
Editor’s note:
   In accordance with Ord. 22-1, the Board of Water Supply has been designated
by the Mayor as the entity responsible for discharging the duties relating to
the underground storage tanks.
§ 40-11.1 Definitions.
   All terms used in this article are to be interpreted in a manner consistent
with HRS § 342L-1 and HAR § 11-280.1-12, and:
Department. The city department or agency designated by the mayor.
Director of Health. The director of the State department of health.
(Added by Ord. 22-1)
§ 40-11.2 Underground storage tank permit required.
(a)   No person shall operate an underground storage tank or tank system that
has a capacity to store more than 100,000 gallons of any regulated substance
without first obtaining a permit from the department. The owner or operator of
such an underground storage tank or tank system that is operating upon March 1,
2022 shall, if it desires to continue the operation of the tank or tank system,
apply for a permit within 60 days of March 1, 2022, and may continue to operate
until a decision on the application is made. If the permit is denied and the
applicant requests a contested case hearing, the underground storage tank or
tank system shall cease to operate unless and until that decision is reversed.
(b)   The department shall not issue a permit unless the applicant demonstrates
that the tank or tank system will not leak any regulated substance into the
environment during its operating life.
A permit shall specify its duration, but in no case shall a permit remain in
effect for more than five years. The permit may be subject to conditions
established by the department. The department shall not deny an application for
the issuance or renewal of a permit without affording the applicant an
opportunity for a hearing in accordance with HRS Chapter 91.
(c)   The department, upon its own motion or upon the application of any
person, may modify, suspend, or revoke any permit if, after affording the
permittee an opportunity for a hearing in accordance with HRS Chapter 91, the
department determines that:
(1)   There is a violation of any condition of the permit;
(2)   The permit was obtained by misrepresentation, or failure to disclose
fully all relevant facts; or
(3)   There is a release or threatened release of regulated substances.
(Added by Ord. 22-1)
§ 40-11.3 Underground storage tank permit procedures.
(a)   Upon filing an application for a permit under HRS § 342L-4, a person
seeking a permit under this article must submit an identical filing to the
department within 30 days of filing the application with the Director of
Health. The application shall be accompanied by all plans, specifications, and
such other information as required by the department or the Director of Health.
If a permit has been issued by the Director of Health pursuant to HRS § 342L-
4 prior to March 1, 2022, and the permit is active as of March 1, 2022, the
permittee shall submit the application to the department within 30 days of
March 1, 2022, and the department shall grant a permit for the remaining term
of the State permit according to the standards set forth in §
40-11.2(b).
(b)   A permit application review fee of $15,000 shall accompany a permit
application and each subsequent permit renewal application.
(Added by Ord. 22-1)
§ 40-11.4 Inspections.
   For purposes of conducting any study; investigating any actual or suspected
release; monitoring for compliance or noncompliance with this article, any rule
or standard adopted pursuant to this article, or any permit or variance issued
pursuant to this article; taking release response action; or enforcing this
chapter, any duly authorized representative of the department may:
(1)   Enter at reasonable times any establishment or place;
(2)   Inspect and obtain samples from any person of any regulated substances
contained in any underground storage tank or tank system; and
(3)   Conduct monitoring or testing of the tanks or tank systems, associated
equipment, contents, or soils, air, surface water, or groundwater.
   A permittee shall allow the department or an authorized representative of
the department access to the underground storage tank or tank system within a
reasonable amount of time.
(Added by Ord. 22-1)
§ 40-11.5 Notification and reporting.
   A permittee under this article shall report to the department within 24
hours when evidence is discovered by any person of a release of a regulated
substance from the underground storage tank or tank system.
(Added by Ord. 22-1)
§ 40-11.6 Administration and enforcement.
(a)   Any person who violates this article, any rule adopted pursuant to this
article, or any condition of a permit issued pursuant to this article shall be
fined by the department not more than $25,000 for each individual tank that is
in violation for each day of each violation. Each day of each violation shall
constitute a separate offense. In addition, any person who fails to comply with
an order issued under this article or under any rule adopted pursuant to this
article, within the time specified in the order or rule, shall be fined not
more than $25,000 for each day of noncompliance with the order.
(b)   Any person who:
(1)   Denies, obstructs, or hampers the entrance, inspection, or conduct of
release response activities by any duly authorized representative of the
department at any building, place, site, facility, vehicle, or structure that
the representative is authorized to enter or inspect, or at which the
representative is authorized to conduct release response activities; or
(2)   Fails to provide information requested by the representative as required
under §
40-11.3;
shall be fined by the department not more than $500 per day of denial,
obstruction, hindrance, or failure.
(c)   All fines collected under this article will be considered special
deposits pursuant to Charter § 7-114.
(d)   The director may adopt rules in accordance with Chapter 91 to aid in the
implementation and enforcement of this article.
(Added by Ord. 22-1)
TITLE IX: PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, AND SANITATION
   Chapters
      
41.   PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
      
42.   COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF REFUSE
      
43.   SEWERS, DRAINAGE, AND CESSPOOLS
CHAPTER 41: PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Editor’s note:
   *In accordance with Ordinance 23-28: Chapter 41, Article 32 takes effect 42
days after the day on which the State of Hawaii preemption of county ordinances
on the sale of tobacco products is officially repealed or suspended. If the
42nd day after the day of the repeal or suspension of the preemption occurs on
a weekend or holiday, then this article takes effect on the next business day
following the 42nd day. Upon the effective date of this article, the
Corporation Counsel is directed to notify the City Council, the Mayor, and the
Managing Director. Once such notification is received, the City Clerk is
directed to post the effective date of Ordinance 23-28 on the City and County
of Honolulu's official website and other public notice platforms.
Articles
   
1.   Use of Intoxicating Liquors in Certain Public Places
   
2.   Advertisement of Intoxicating Liquor and Liquor Products
   
3.   The Sale to, Possession of, or Use by Minors of Chemical Substances
Containing Volatile Organic Solvents
   
4.   Ephedrine-containing Products
   
5.   Products Containing Gamma Hydroxybutyrate
   
6.   Noise Control
   
7.   Noises in Vicinity of Hospitals
   
8.   Sound Levels for the Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell
   
9.   Use of Sound Amplifying Device in Public Buildings
   
10.   Air Guns
   
11.   Replica Guns
   
12.   Obnoxious Substances
   
13.   Advertisement and Distribution of Cigarettes and Tobacco Products
   
14.   Smoking
   
15.   Bidi Cigarette Prohibitions
   
16.   Herbal Cigarettes
   
17.   Prostitution-Related Public Nuisance Abatement
   
18.   Additional Areas of Significant Prostitution-Related Activity
   
19.   Laser Pointers and Harassment with Laser Beams
   
20.   Urinating or Defecating in Public Prohibited in the Waikiki Special
District
   
21.   Urinating or Defecating in Public Prohibited Outside of the Waikiki
Special District
   
22.   Iceboxes and Refrigerators
   
23.   Unofficial Age Identification Card
   
24.   Wearing of Masks or Disguises
   
25.   Loitering on Public School Premises
   
26.   Regulated Use of Uniforms by Private Security Personnel
   
27.   Possession, Use, and Sale of Pepper Sprays for Self-Defense
   
28.   Aerial Advertising
   
29.   Vehicular Advertising
   
30.   Domestic Violence Program
   
31.   Public Carry of Firearms
   
32.   Prohibition of Flavored Tobacco Products
   
33.   Gambling-Related Public Nuisances
   
34.   Agent’s Inspection of Private Real Property
ARTICLE 1: USE OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS IN CERTAIN PUBLIC PLACES
Sections
   
41-1.1   Declaration of legislative intent—Definitions
   
41-1.2   Prohibition in public areas—Exceptions
   
41-1.3   Criminal Penalties—Enforcement
§ 41-1.1 Declaration of legislative intent—Definitions.
   (a)   It is declared to be the legislative intent of the council to prohibit
the open and unrestricted use or consumption of intoxicating liquors on or
within certain municipally owned or controlled public areas and buildings and
on streets and sidewalks open to the public.
   (b)   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Intoxicating Liquor. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 281-1;
Sidewalk. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 291C-1; and
Street. Has the same meaning as “street or highway” as defined in §
15-2.23.
(Sec. 13-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 1, § 40-1.1) (Am.
Ord. 03-31)
§ 41-1.2 Prohibition in public areas—Exceptions.
(a)   No person shall possess, other than in a container in the manufacturer’s
sealed condition, intoxicating liquor on any street or sidewalk, or in any
public park, public playground, public school ground, public off-street parking
area, or any building located thereon.
(b)   The prohibitions contained in subsection (a) shall not apply to:
(1)   Intoxicating liquor procured from a vendor dispensing intoxicating liquor
pursuant to a permit or license issued by the city when the intoxicating liquor
is possessed or consumed in a manner and in a place consistent with the terms
and conditions of such permit or license;
(2)   The consumption or possession of an intoxicating liquor in a motor
vehicle upon any public street, road, or highway; or
(3)   The possession of a container of wine authorized to be removed from
liquor-licensed premises pursuant to HRS § 281-31(q); provided that the
container has been corked or resealed.
(c)   Subject to HRS Chapter 281, as amended, and if the sale and consumption
of intoxicating liquor is permitted by concession agreement, the prohibitions
contained in subsection (a) shall not apply within the licensed premises (as
described in a liquor license) of concessionaires of the city located:
(1)   On any public golf course;
(2)   At those facilities and properties under the jurisdiction and supervision
of the director of enterprise services; and
(3)   In public parks where private donations were used to construct a memorial
pavilion wherein restaurant operation is feasible.
(d)   Notwithstanding subsection (a), any director of an outdoor theater which
is enclosed by a fence and which is located within a public park may permit the
consumption of intoxicating liquor within the confines of such outdoor theater,
if so requested by a tenant of such outdoor theater for the term or period of
such tenancy and under such restrictions and conditions as may be imposed by
the director.
(e)   Notwithstanding subsection (a), the director of parks and recreation may
permit nonprofit organizations which sponsor and conduct festivals that promote
ethnic traditions, customs, and culture and foster the development of tourism,
to sell intoxicating liquors within Kapiolani Park by designating one day
during Aloha Week during which the sale of beer and wine is permitted between
the hours of 3:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m.; provided that such nonprofit organizations
have properly obtained the appropriate park permits and temporary licenses for
the sale of intoxicating liquor.
(Sec. 13-4.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 1, §
40-1.2) (Am. Ord. 03-31)
§ 41-1.3 Criminal penalties—Enforcement.
(a)   The penalties provided in this article are criminal penalties and the
article shall be enforced by the Honolulu police department as provided by law.
(b)   A police officer may arrest an alleged violator of this article or may
issue a citation in lieu of arrest as provided in HRS § 803-6.
(c)   Penalty. Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than
30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
(Sec. 13-4.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 1, § 40-1.3) (Am.
Ord. 00-43)
ARTICLE 2: ADVERTISEMENT OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR AND LIQUOR PRODUCTS
Sections
   
41-2.1   Definitions
   
41-2.2   Prohibition
   
41-2.3   Exceptions
   
41-2.4   Citation—Penalties
§ 41-2.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Advertisement. Any poster, banner, sticker, emblem, placard, graphic
illustration, or sign, including any neon, electronically charged, or portable
freestanding sign, used to publicize any intoxicating liquor or liquor product
to the general public or promote the sale of any intoxicating liquor or liquor
product to the general public.
Business. Any person or entity engaged in a retail operation that offers liquor
or any liquor product for sale to any member of the general public for
consumption or use.
Enforcement Officer. Any officer of the Honolulu police department or deputized
by the Honolulu police department to enforce this article.
Intoxicating Liquor. Has the same meaning as “liquor.”
Liquor. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 281-1, but does not include
those articles excepted under HRS § 281-2.
Liquor Product. A food product, including a confection, that contains alcohol
in excess of 5 percent by weight.
Public Property. Includes any street, sidewalk, public mall, any public or
private park, any public or private school ground, and any property that is
owned or controlled by the federal, State, or city government or any agency
thereof.
Publicly Visible Location. A place inside or outside of a commercial building,
including the exterior walls of the building and the exterior and interior of a
display window of the building that is visible to the general public from
public property.
School Zone. Every street and all other property within 500 feet of the
boundaries of any public or private primary or secondary school and any
preschool licensed by the State department of human services.
Street. Has the same meaning as defined in §
13-1.1.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 19, § 40-19.1) (Added by Ord. 00-50)
§ 41-2.2 Prohibition.
   Except as provided in §
41-2.3, it is unlawful for any person to display a liquor or liquor product
advertisement in a publicly visible location within a school zone.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 19, § 40-19.2) (Added by Ord. 00-50)
§ 41-2.3 Exceptions.
   The following shall be exceptions to §
41-2.2:
(1)   The placement of an advertisement for liquor or a liquor product inside
of a retail business establishment where the product is offered for sale to the
general public; provided that the advertisement is not in a publicly visible
location;
(2)   The operation or legal parking within a school zone of a vehicle that has
permanently painted on or affixed to the vehicle any sign, graphics, or
lettering relating to the name, trade insignia, or trademark of a liquor or
liquor product, to the extent permitted in §
41-29.3;
(3)   The placement of any advertisement for liquor or liquor product in or
upon a federal or State building or facility located within a school zone;
(4)   The placement of any advertisement in or on the premises of a licensed
liquor establishment to the extent expressly permitted pursuant to duly adopted
rules of the liquor commission or expressly stated under a license issued by
the liquor commission; and
(5)   The placement of any material in a newspaper or magazine of general
circulation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 19, § 40-19.3) (Added by Ord. 00-50; Am. Ord. 01-08)
§ 41-2.4 Citation—Penalties.
(a)   Upon finding probable cause to believe that there has been a violation of
this article, an enforcement officer may either arrest the person believed to
be in violation or may issue to that person a summons and citation for the
violation. The citation shall be consistent with the requirements of HRS § 803-
6(b).
(b)   Any person who violates this article shall be fined not more than $500.
Following a person’s conviction of a violation of this article, each day an
advertisement is displayed in violation of this article shall be deemed a
separate violation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 19, § 40-19.4) (Added by Ord. 00-50)
ARTICLE 3: THE SALE TO, POSSESSION OF, OR USE BY MINORS OF CHEMICAL SUBSTANCES
CONTAINING VOLATILE ORGANIC SOLVENTS
Sections
   
41-3.1   Definitions
   
41-3.2   Use as an inhalant prohibited
   
41-3.3   Possession or transfer for unlawful purpose prohibited
   
41-3.4   Use by minors—Regulated
   
41-3.5   Record of sales required
   
41-3.6   Violation—Penalty
§ 41-3.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Minor. Any person below the age of 18 years.
Spray Paint. Has the same meaning as defined in §
40-5.1.
Toxic Chemical Substance. Any substance, not a “food” as defined in HRS § 328-1
(3), which substance includes in its composition volatile organic solvents
including amyl acetate, trichlorethylene, or acetone, or any other chemical
substance, capable of producing upon inhalation any degree of intoxication. The
term “toxic chemical substance” shall not, however, include any spray paint or
wide-tipped marker regulated pursuant to
Chapter 40, Article 5.
(Sec. 13-25.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 5, § 40-5.1) (Am.
Ord. 95-46)
§ 41-3.2 Use as an inhalant prohibited.
   No person shall use any toxic chemical substance or any spray paint as an
inhalant at any time; provided that this section shall not apply to any person
using as an inhalant any such toxic chemical substance pursuant to the
direction of a physician.
(Sec. 13-25.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 5, § 40-5.2) (Am.
Ord. 95-46)
§ 41-3.3 Possession or transfer for unlawful purpose prohibited.
   No person shall for the purpose of violating or aiding another to violate
any provision of this article, intentionally possess, buy, sell, transfer
possession, or receive possession of any toxic chemical substance.
(Sec. 13-25.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 5, § 40-5.3)
§ 41-3.4 Use by minors—Regulated.
(a)   Except as provided in subsection (c) and §
41-3.5, no minor shall possess or buy any toxic chemical substance.
(b)   Except as provided in subsection (c) and §
41-3.5, no person shall sell, give, lend, or transfer possession of any toxic
chemical substance to a minor.
(c)   Provided a person may sell, give, lend, or transfer possession of a toxic
chemical substance to a minor for model building or other lawful use where the
minor has in the minor’s possession and exhibits the written consent of the
minor’s parent or guardian.
(Sec. 13-25.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 5, § 40-5.4)
§ 41-3.5 Record of sales required.
   A person making a sale of toxic chemical substances to a minor who exhibits
the written consent of the minor’s parent or guardian shall record the name,
address, sex, and age of the minor and the name and address of the consenting
parent or guardian. All data required by this section shall be kept in a
permanent type register available for inspection by the chief of police or the
chief of police’s authorized representative for a period of at least six
months.
(Sec. 13-25.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 5, § 40-5.5)
§ 41-3.6 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by
a fine not exceeding $100 or by imprisonment not exceeding three months, or by
both.
(Sec. 13-25.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 5, § 40-5.6)
ARTICLE 4: EPHEDRINE-CONTAINING PRODUCTS
Sections
   
41-4.1   Definitions
   
41-4.2   Restrictions on possession, sale, purchase, distribution, and labeling
   
41-4.3   Violation—Penalties
§ 41-4.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Acupuncture Practitioner. A person licensed to practice acupuncture under HRS
Chapter 436E.
Dentist. A person licensed to practice dentistry under HRS Chapter 448.
Dietary Supplement and Drug. Have the same meaning respectively, as dietary
supplement and drug as defined in 21 USC § 321.
Distribution. Includes any gift, donation, trade, or barter.
Ephedrine. Ephedrine and any natural, botanical, or synthetic form of
ephedrine, including but not limited to ephedra, ephedra sinica, ma huang, and
epitonin, or any extract thereof.
FDA. The United States Food and Drug Administration.
Herbalist. An individual who personally engages in the preparation and
distribution of an herbal product for a medicinal or nutritional purpose.
Medical Physician. A person licensed to practice medicine or surgery under HRS
Chapter 453.
Naturopathic Physician. A person licensed to practice naturopathy under HRS
Chapter 455.
Osteopathic Physician. A person licensed to practice osteopathic medicine and
surgery under HRS Chapter 453.
Person. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or other
entity.
Podiatrist. A person licensed to practice podiatric medicine under HRS Chapter
463E.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 13, § 40-13.1) (Added by Ord. 96-59)
§ 41-4.2 Restrictions on possession, sale, purchase, distribution, and
labeling.
(a)   Except as provided in subsection (b), no person shall possess, sell, or
cause to be sold, any product containing ephedrine.
(b)   The following ephedrine-containing products may be lawfully possessed,
sold, or caused to be sold:
(1)   A drug approved for sale by the FDA;
(2)   An over-the-counter drug in compliance with a proposed monograph,
tentative final monograph, or final monograph issued by the FDA;
(3)   A dietary supplement which is not deemed adulterated or misbranded by the
FDA and which is:
(A)   Intended and labeled for use as a weight loss aid or sports nutrition
product; and
(B)   Labeled for sale only to, and for use only by, persons 21 years of age or
older.
(4)   A fresh, dried, or ground stem, leaf, root, or other part of a plant of
the genus ephedra.
(c)   Notwithstanding subsection (b), no person shall sell or cause to be sold
any ephedrine-containing product to any person under 21 years of age, except:
(1)   Pursuant to a written prescription from a medical physician, osteopathic
physician, podiatrist, or dentist or the written approval of an acupuncture
practitioner or naturopathic physician; or
(2)   An herbalist may personally sell the fresh, dried, or ground stem, leaf,
root, or other part of a plant of the genus ephedra to a person under 21 years
of age.
(d)   No person shall possess, sell, or cause to be sold, purchase for resale
or cause to be purchased for resale, distribute or cause to be distributed any
ephedrine-containing product with a label that claims or implies that
consumption of the product will produce effects such as ecstacy, euphoria,
increased sexual sensations, heightened awareness, increased energy, legal
“highs”, and other similar effects.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 13, § 40-13.2) (Added by Ord. 96-59)
§ 41-4.3 Violation—Penalties.
   Any person convicted of violating any provision of §
41-4.2 shall be punished for each violation by a fine of not less than $500 nor
more than $1,000, by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both.
Possession of one or more tablets, bottles, or other units of any product
containing ephedrine in violation of §
41-4.2(a) or (d) at one time shall constitute a single violation. If any person
takes possession, sells, or causes to be sold, purchases for resale or causes
to be purchased for resale, distributes, or causes to be distributed more than
one tablet, bottle, or other unit of any product containing ephedrine in a
single transaction, the person shall be deemed to have committed a single
violation of §
41-4.2(a), (c), or (d), whichever provision applies. If any person violates
more than one subsection of §
41-4.2 in a single transaction, the person shall be deemed to have committed a
single violation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 13, § 40-13.3) (Added by Ord. 96-59)
ARTICLE 5: PRODUCTS CONTAINING GAMMA HYDROXYBUTYRATE
Sections
   
41-5.1   Definitions
   
41-5.2   Restrictions relating to gamma hydroxybutyrate
   
41-5.3   Violation—Penalties
§ 41-5.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Distribution. Includes any gift, donation, trade, or barter.
Drug. A drug as defined in 21 USC § 321.
Person. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or other
entity.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 14, § 40-14.1) (Added by Ord. 97-01)
§ 41-5.2 Restrictions relating to gamma hydroxybutyrate.
   No person shall manufacture, possess, distribute, sell, or cause to be sold
or distributed any product containing gamma hydroxybutyrate.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 14, § 40-14.2) (Added by Ord. 97-01)
§ 41-5.3 Violation—Penalties.
   Any person convicted of violating §
41-5.2 shall be punished for each violation by a fine of not less than $500 nor
more than $1,000, by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both.
Possession of one or more tablets, bottles, or other units of any product
containing gamma hydroxybutyrate in violation of §
41-5.2 at one time shall constitute a single violation. If any person sells, or
causes to be sold, or distributes, or causes to be distributed, more than one
tablet, bottle, or other unit of any product containing gamma hydroxybutyrate
in a single transaction, the person shall be deemed to have committed a single
violation of §
41-5.2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 14, § 40-14.3) (Added by Ord. 97-01; Am. Ord. 97-57)
ARTICLE 6: NOISE CONTROL
Sections
   
41-6.1   Prohibited noise
   
41-6.2   Enforcement
   
41-6.3   Violation—Penalty
   
41-6.4   Permits
   
41-6.5   Exemptions
§ 41-6.1 Prohibited noise.
(a)   It is unlawful for any person or persons to play, use, operate, or permit
to be played, used, or operated, any radio, tape recorder, cassette player, or
other machine or device for reproducing sound, if it is located in or on any of
the following:
(1)   Any public property, including any public street, highway, building,
sidewalk, park, or thoroughfare; or
(2)   Any motor vehicle on a public street, highway, or public space;
   and if the sound generated is audible at a distance of 30 feet from the
device producing the sound.
(b)   Possession by a person or persons of any of the machines or devices
enumerated in subsection (a) shall be prima facie evidence that that person
operates, or those persons operate, the machine or device.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 31, § 41-31.1) (Added by Ord. 90-26)
§ 41-6.2 Enforcement.
(a)   Powers of arrest or citation. Any authorized police officer shall issue a
citation for any violation under this article, except they may arrest for
instances when:
(1)   The alleged violator refuses to provide the officer with such person’s
name and address and any proof thereof as may be reasonably available to the
alleged violator; or
(2)   When the alleged violator refuses to cease such person’s illegal activity
after being issued a citation.
(b)   Citation.
(1)   There shall be provided for use by authorized police officers, a form of
citation for use in citing violators of this article which does not mandate
physical arrest of such violators. The form and content of such citation shall
be as adopted or prescribed by the administrative judge of the district court
and shall be printed on a form commensurate with the form of other citations
used in modern methods of arrest, so designed to include all necessary
information to make the same valid within the laws and regulations of the State
of Hawaii and the City and County of Honolulu.
(2)   In every case when a citation is issued, a copy of the same shall be
given to the violator.
(3)   Every citation shall be consecutively numbered and each carbon copy shall
bear the name of its respective original.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 31, § 41-31.2) (Added by Ord. 90-26)
§ 41-6.3 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished by a
fine of $100 for the first offense, $500 for the second offense within six
months of the first offense, and $1,000, or forfeiture of the sound system or
components of the sound system up to $1,000 in value, or a combination of
forfeiture and fine to total $1,000 for conviction of the third offense within
one year of the first offense.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 31, § 41-31.3) (Added by Ord. 90-26)
§ 41-6.4 Permits.
(a)   A permit for a temporary exemption from this article may be issued by the
director of budget and fiscal services to commercial, religious, political,
civic, charitable, athletic, and other organizations, or individuals, for
activities such as carnivals, parades, fund raisers, fairs, bazaars, public
speeches, and meetings.
(b)   The director of budget and fiscal services shall prescribe a form of
application for such a permit, which shall be completed by the applicant and
which, when completed, shall state the date, time of day, duration, and nature
of the proposed activity, the reason for the proposed activity, the name of the
person who shall be in charge of the proposed activity, and such other
pertinent information as the director shall desire.
(c)   In determining whether to grant or deny an application for a permit under
this section, the director shall consider the information provided in the
application together with the impact of the proposed noise on the health,
safety, and welfare of the residents of and visitors to the surrounding area.
If more information is needed in order for the director to make a determination
on the application, the director may request further information from the
applicant by means of a supplemental application.
(d)   The applicant shall submit the completed form, accompanied by a fee of
$5, to the director not later than five days before the proposed activity;
thereafter, the director shall notify the applicant of the decision to grant or
deny the permit within three days of the submission of the completed
application and fee and any required supplemental application.
(e)   The permit shall state the date, place, time, duration, and nature of the
proposed activity, shall be in the possession of the person in charge of the
activity, and shall be produced for inspection upon the request of any law
enforcement officer.
(f)   The director may issue a permit subject to conditions which shall be
stated upon the permit, including limitations upon the sound level, duration,
or time of day of the activity, or the requirement that breaks be taken in the
activity.
(g)   The director may adopt rules not inconsistent herewith for the
implementation of the permit system established in this section. Such rules may
include provisions for waiver of the application fee in appropriate situations
or for the granting of a permit when an application is received less than five
days before the proposed activity.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 31, § 41-31.4) (Added by Ord. 90-26)
§ 41-6.5 Exemptions.
   The following shall be exempt from the prohibitions set forth in this
article:
(1)   Activities of the city, the State, or the United States; and
(2)   Activities of private persons or entities acting within the permitted
uses of a permit issued by the city, the State, or the United States.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 31, § 41-31.5) (Added by Ord. 90-26)
ARTICLE 7: NOISES IN VICINITY OF HOSPITALS
Sections
   
41-7.1   Unlawful to make loud noises
   
41-7.2   Violation—Penalty
§ 41-7.1 Unlawful to make loud noises.
(a)   It is unlawful to discharge firearms or explosives or to make any loud
noises within 500 feet from the nearest point of any main hospital building
with a capacity for treating not less than 36 patients.
(b)   It is unlawful to conduct, operate, maintain, or carry on within 500 feet
from any such main hospital building any noisy or noisome workshop, factory,
trade, manufacture, industry, or business; provided that this provision shall
not apply to any such workshop, factory, trade, manufacture, industry, or
business in existence at the time of the erection of such hospital building or
of an extension to a hospital building.
(c)   It is unlawful for any person, in passing any hospital building of the
character and capacity described, to drive or operate any vehicle in such
manner as to make or create any unnecessary noise.
(Sec. 13-12.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 5, § 41-5.1)
§ 41-7.2 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a
fine not exceeding $100 or by imprisonment not exceeding 60 days, or by both.
(Sec. 13-12.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 5, § 41-5.2)
ARTICLE 8: SOUND LEVELS FOR THE TOM MOFFATT WAIKIKI SHELL
Sections
   
41-8.1   Findings and policy
   
41-8.2   Definitions
   
41-8.3   Sound level limits
   
41-8.4   Exemptions
   
41-8.5   Measurement of sound levels
   
41-8.6   Violation—Penalty
§ 41-8.1 Findings and policy.
   The Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell is a premier forum for outdoor concerts and
activities and since 1953, has provided an idyllic setting. The city is
concerned and desirous of ensuring that the peace and quiet enjoyed by nearby
residents is not unduly disturbed by the events held at the Shell, while at the
same time it wishes to continue to provide a venue for quality entertainment
and events in the uniquely beautiful setting that is the Shell.
   The city finds that in the absence of established sound levels for its
facilities, sound levels for the Shell have been established by the State
department of health in Title 11 of its Administrative Rules. Sound levels
established by the department of health’s rules fail to take into consideration
the unique characteristics and function of the Shell. Accordingly, it is the
intent of this article to establish sound level limits for the Shell.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 34, § 41-34.1) (Added by Ord. 91-88)
§ 41-8.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ‘A’ Level. The total sound level of all noises as measured with sound level
meter using the “A” weighting network. The unit of measurement is the dBA.
Decibel. One-tenth of a Bel, a unit of sound level.
(1)   dB. An abbreviation for decibels.
(2)   dBA. An abbreviation for A-weighted sound level expressed in decibels.
Shell. The Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell.
Sound. A fluctuation of air pressure which stimulates the human nervous systems
through the ear, eardrums, and connecting nerves.
Sound Level Meter. An instrument or combination of instruments, which meets or
exceeds the requirements for a Type I or Type II sound level meter as specified
in ANSI specification for sound level meter S1.4-197, or IEC 179, or IEC 123.
Tenant. A person or entity executing a rental agreement for the Neal Blaisdell
Center and Shell and the agents, representatives, employees, and officers of
such person or entity, including an independent contractor, using the premises
with the permission of the tenant.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 34, § 41-34.2) (Added by Ord. 91-88)
§ 41-8.3 Sound level limits.
(a)   Sound levels for events at the Shell, whether amplified or not, shall not
exceed 68 dBA for more than 10 percent of the time within any 20-minute period
as measured at or near the New Otani Kaimana Beach Hotel at the makai side of
Kalakaua Avenue in areas zoned apartment/hotel/business and shall apply from
ground level to a perpendicular plane projected above the height of the high-
rise buildings.
(b)   Sound level limits established in subsection (a) shall be applicable
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m. of the same day.
(c)   Under no circumstances shall a tenant or performer allow events within
their control to continue after 10:00 p.m.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 34, § 41-34.3) (Added by Ord. 91-88; Am. Ord. 96-58)
§ 41-8.4 Exemptions.
   This article shall not apply to:
(1)   Occasional events of significant cultural benefit to residents of Oahu,
including but not limited to celebrations commemorating the beginning of a new
year or ethnic and cultural festivals; and
(2)   One-time events designed for the purpose of significantly enhancing the
economic well-being of the tourist industry including events scheduled for live
broadcast outside the State.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 34, § 41-34.4) (Added by Ord. 91-88)
§ 41-8.5 Measurement of sound levels.
(a)   Certification. Persons conducting sound measurements for the enforcement
of this article shall be personnel of the department of enterprise services who
shall have been trained in the techniques of sound measurement and the
operation of sound level meters or other sound measuring instruments and shall
have been certified as competent by the director of the State department of
health.
(b)   Sound level measurements shall be conducted using standard procedures
with sound level meters using the “A” weighting and “slow” meter response
unless otherwise stated.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 34, § 41-34.5) (Added by Ord. 91-88)
§ 41-8.6 Violation—Penalty.
   A tenant whose event exceeds the sound level limits established by this
article shall, after notice and hearing, be subject to a fine of not less than
1 percent of the gross receipts or $500, whichever is greater, for the event
that exceeds the sound level limits, or $500 for events for which no gross
receipts are collected.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 34, § 41-34.6) (Added by Ord. 91-88)
ARTICLE 9: USE OF SOUND AMPLIFYING DEVICE IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS
Sections
   
41-9.1   Definitions
   
41-9.2   Prohibition
   
41-9.3   Exceptions
   
41-9.4   Violation—Penalty
§ 41-9.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Department Head. The head of a department of the executive branch of the City
and County of Honolulu.
Public Building. Any building or structure owned or controlled by the City and
County of Honolulu.
Sound Amplifying Device. Any instrument or device for the production or
reproduction of music, spoken words, or other sounds, or any loudspeaker or
other sound amplifying device designed to enlarge the volume of sound produced
by any instrument or by the human voice, which instrument or device is used or
intended to be used for the purpose of advertising or calling attention to any
article, thing, or event, or for the purpose of addressing any person or group
of persons or the public or of attracting the attention of any person or group
of persons or the public.
(Sec. 13-35.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 7, § 40-7.1)
§ 41-9.2 Prohibition.
   No person shall use any sound amplifying device in a public building at any
time without the prior written approval of the department head or the
department head’s authorized subordinate who exercises jurisdiction over the
specific public building in which the sound amplifying device is to be used.
Such written approval shall be pursuant to a written request, on forms
furnished by the department head that shall be submitted to the department head
within five working days before the date of the use of the sound devices. The
department head shall respond to such request within five working days, either
approving or disapproving the request. Any person aggrieved by the action of
the department head may appeal same to the council.
(Sec. 13-35.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 7, § 40-7.2)
§ 41-9.3 Exceptions.
   The following shall be exceptions to §
41-9.2:
(1)   The use of sound amplifying devices for any program to be held in a
public building sponsored by the city; and
(2)   Any sound device which is wired into, built in, or made a part of a
public building, which is used for any program authorized therein for which the
public building has been specifically constructed or for which a specific type
of program therein has been authorized by the department head.
(Sec. 13-35.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 7, § 40-7.3)
§ 41-9.4 Violation—Penalty.
(a)   Denial of use of public building. Any person failing to obtain the prior
written approval shall be denied the use of a sound device within a public
building.
(b)   Ejectment. Any person who has been denied the use of a public building
because such person has failed to obtain prior written approval for the use of
a sound device, but actually and continually uses the sound device, may be
ejected from the public building by a police officer.
(c)   Fine. Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine not exceeding $50.
(Sec. 13-35.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 7, § 40-7.4)
ARTICLE 10: AIR GUNS
Sections
   
41-10.1   Definitions
   
41-10.2   Restrictions on sale, rental, gift, or other transfer
   
41-10.3   Restrictions on use
   
41-10.4   Exceptions
   
41-10.5   Seizure, forfeiture, and disposal
   
41-10.6   Violation—Penalty
§ 41-10.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Air Gun. Any gun, rifle, or pistol, by whatever name known, that is designed to
expel a pellet or BB shot by the action of compressed air or gas, or by the
action of a spring or elastic, but does not include any firearm.
Dealer. Any person engaged in the business of selling or renting air guns.
(Sec. 13-19.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 8, § 41-8.1)
§ 41-10.2 Restrictions on sale, rental, gift, or other transfer.
(a)   It is unlawful for any dealer to sell, lend, rent, give, or otherwise
transfer an air gun to any person under the age of 18 years where the dealer
knows or has reasonable cause to believe the person to be under 18 years of age
or where the dealer has failed to make reasonable inquiry relative to the age
of such person and such person is under 18 years of age.
(b)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, lend, rent, give, or otherwise
transfer any air gun to any person under 18 years of age, except where the
relationship of parent and child, guardian and ward, or adult instructor and
pupil exists between such person and the person under 18 years of age.
(Sec. 13-19.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 8, § 41-8.2)
§ 41-10.3 Restrictions on use.
(a)   It is unlawful for any person to carry or display an air gun on any
street, alley, public road, or on any public land, unless the air gun is
unloaded and in a suitable case or securely wrapped.
(b)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge any air gun from or across any
street, sidewalk, alley, or public land, or any public place, except on a
properly constructed target range.
(c)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge any air gun on any private
parcel of land or residence in such a manner that the pellet or BB shot may
reasonably be expected to traverse any ground or space outside the limits of
such parcel of land or residence or in such a manner that persons or property
may be endangered; provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed to
prevent any person who has obtained a hunting license pursuant to HRS Chapter
183D from engaging in hunting in accordance with law.
(d)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge any air gun in such a manner
or under such circumstances that persons or property may be endangered.
(Sec. 13-19.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 8, § 41-8.3) (Am.
Ords. 96-58, 03-23)
§ 41-10.4 Exceptions.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, it shall be
lawful for any person to possess an air gun if it is:
(1)   Kept within such person’s domicile;
(2)   Used by a person under 18 years of age, who is a duly enrolled member of
any club, team, or society organized for education or training purposes and
maintaining as a part of its facilities or having written permission to use an
indoor or outdoor target range, when the air gun is used at such target range
under the supervision, guidance, and instruction of a responsible adult;
(3)   Used by a person 18 years of age or older at a properly constructed
target range;
(4)   Used in or on any private parcel of land or residence under circumstances
in which the air gun can be fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as
not to endanger persons or property and in such a manner as to prevent the
pellet or BB shot from traversing any grounds or space outside the limits of
such parcel of land or residence;
(5)   Used in hunting or going to or from the place of hunting in accordance
with law by a person who has obtained a hunting license pursuant to HRS Chapter
183D or who, if such person is under 18 years of age, has obtained such a
hunting license and is accompanied by an adult who has obtained such hunting
license; or
(6)   Used by a person involved in a living history presentation or other
activity for historical interpretation or educational purposes, or by a person
participating in a parade if such activity or parade participant is associated
with an established historical organization, museum, military preservation
organization, or other group with a mission to educate the public at various
events through the use of historical artifacts, clothing, vehicles, aircraft,
maritime vessels, and firearms or replicas thereof.
(Sec. 13-19.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 8, § 41-8.4) (Am.
Ords. 96-58, 03-23, 03-35)
§ 41-10.5 Seizure, forfeiture, and disposal.
   Any police officer who arrests any person for possessing, using, lending,
renting, giving, or transferring an air gun in violation of this article shall
take custody of such air gun. Upon conviction of such person, the air gun so
seized shall be forfeited to the city. Any air gun so forfeited shall remain in
the custody of the police department for one year and thereafter destroyed;
provided that such air gun shall be retained for subsequent proceedings, both
civil or criminal, and until any such action is concluded, if any person
desiring the use of such forfeited air gun as evidence files with the chief of
police a written notice of an intention to so use the air gun before the
destruction date herein provided.
(Sec. 13-19.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 8, § 41-8.5)
§ 41-10.6 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a
fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding one year, or
both.
(Sec. 13-19.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 8, § 41-8.6)
ARTICLE 11: REPLICA GUNS
Sections
   
41-11.1   Definitions
   
41-11.2   Prohibitions
   
41-11.3   Violation—Penalty
§ 41-11.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Firearm. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 134-1.
Law Enforcement Officer. Any public servant, whether employed by the State, the
city, or the United States, vested by law with a duty to maintain public order
or to make arrests for offenses or to enforce the criminal laws, whether that
duty extends to all offenses or is limited to a specific class of offenses.
Replica Gun. Any toy or other object which bears such a resemblance to an
actual firearm that a reasonable person would have difficulty visually
distinguishing it from an actual firearm, and which lacks any feature or aspect
which would serve as a signal to allow a person to readily distinguish the
replica gun from an actual firearm by sight. The term shall not include an
actual firearm.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 23, § 40-23.1) (Added by Ord. 03-24)
§ 41-11.2 Prohibitions.
(a)   No person shall carry or display a replica gun on any street, alley,
public road, or on any public lands, unless such replica gun is in a suitable
case or securely wrapped.
(b)   No person shall draw or brandish a replica gun in the presence of a law
enforcement officer engaged in the performance of the law enforcement officer’s
duties.
(c)   Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent any person who has
obtained a hunting license pursuant to HRS Chapter 183D from engaging in
hunting in accordance with law.
(d)   In the event a replica gun is also an “air gun”, as defined in §
41-10.1, the exceptions in §
41-10.4 shall also be exceptions to the prohibitions in this article.
(e)   Nothing in this article shall prevent carrying or display of a replica
gun by a person involved in a living history presentation or other activity for
historical interpretation or educational purposes, or by a person participating
in a parade if such activity or parade participant is associated with an
established historical organization, museum, military preservation
organization, or other group with a mission to educate the public at various
events through the use of historical artifacts, clothing, vehicles, aircraft,
maritime vessels, and firearms or replicas thereof.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 23, § 40-23.2) (Added by Ord. 03-24; Am. Ord. 03-35)
§ 41-11.3 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating §
41-11.2(a) shall be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon conviction,
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500, or by imprisonment not
exceeding 30 days.
   Any person violating §
41-11.2(b) shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall
be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or by imprisonment not exceeding
one year.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 23, § 40-23.3) (Added by Ord. 03-24)
ARTICLE 12: OBNOXIOUS SUBSTANCES
Sections
   
41-12.1   Declaration of legislative intent
   
41-12.2   Definitions
   
41-12.3   Prohibitions
   
41-12.4   Exceptions
   
41-12.5   Permit to be obtained by agency
   
41-12.6   Conditions
   
41-12.7   Vendor to obtain license
   
41-12.8   Licenses—Permits renewability
   
41-12.9   Violation—Penalty
   
41-12.10   Severability
§ 41-12.1 Declaration of legislative intent.
   The council finds that the use and possession of devices capable of emitting
gases or obnoxious substances, as defined in §
41-12.2, by unauthorized persons creates a potential danger to the peace and
well-being of the community at large; but nevertheless, such devices, when
properly used, serve a useful purpose. Therefore, pursuant to the power granted
in Charter § 2-102 and HRS § 46-1.5, to protect health, life, and property and
to protect the general welfare and safety of the inhabitants of the city, this
article regulating the sale, purchase, possession, transportation, and use of
obnoxious substances and granting the chief of police of the city authority to
supervise the sale, purchase, possession, transportation, and use thereof
according to the standards hereinafter stated, is enacted to insure that the
dissemination of devices emitting obnoxious substances is limited to those
agencies and their employees who have a legitimate need thereof. The terms of
this article shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purpose stated
herein.
(Sec 13-16.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 2, § 40-2.1)
§ 41-12.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Agency. All such organizations, public and private, whose operations are
determined by the chief of police to require the use of one or more of the
devices enumerated in §
41-12.3 to accomplish a proper purpose.
Chief of Police. The chief of police of the City and County of Honolulu or the
chief of police’s authorized subordinate.
Devices. All shells, cartridges, bombs, guns, or aerosol capable of emitting
obnoxious substances in gas, vapor form, liquid, or solid form.
Employee. All officers, agents, and employees of an agency whether such
officer, agent, or employee has been issued a permit.
Gun. All revolvers, pistols, rifles, fountain pen guns, riot guns, shotguns,
and cannons portable or fixed, except those regularly manufactured and used
with firearm ammunition.
Obnoxious Substances. Those substances or the derivatives thereof enumerated in
§
41-12.3.
Shell, Cartridge, or Bomb. All shells, cartridges, or bombs capable of being
discharged or exploded by the use of percussion caps, fuses, electricity, or
other means to cause or permit the release or emission of the substance
enumerated in §
41-12.3.
(Sec. 13-16.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 2, § 40-2.2)
§ 41-12.3 Prohibitions.
(a)   No person shall use or possess with intent to use any shell, cartridge,
bomb, gun, or other device capable of emitting any liquid, gaseous, or solid
substance or any combination thereof that is injurious to person or property,
or that is nauseous, sickening, irritating, or offensive to any of the senses;
to injure, molest, discomfort, discommode, or coerce another in the use or
control of the individual’s person or property.
(b)   No person shall possess, discharge, use, transport, sell, or offer to
sell any shell, cartridge, bomb, gun, or other device capable of emitting
chloracetophenone (CN), o-chlorobenzalmalononitrile (CS) or any derivatives
thereof in any form.
(c)   No person shall possess, discharge, use, transport, sell, or offer to
sell any shell, cartridge, bomb, gun, or other device capable of emitting oleo
resin capsicum or any derivative thereof used to repel animals.
(Sec. 13-16.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 2, § 40-2.3) (Am.
Ord. 01-18)
§ 41-12.4 Exceptions.
(a)   City police department authorized to use all devices. Notwithstanding the
prohibitions prescribed in §
41-12.3, the chief of police or the chief of police’s subordinates may
purchase, possess, discharge, use, or transport shells, cartridges, bombs,
guns, or other devices emitting the obnoxious substances enumerated in §
41-12.3 in carrying out their duties.
(b)   Private security agencies authorized to use certain devices.
Notwithstanding the prohibitions prescribed in §
41-12.3, specifically subsections (a) and (b) thereof, private security
officers who are employees of private police or security agencies may purchase,
possess, discharge, use, or transport shells, cartridges, bombs, guns, or other
devices emitting the obnoxious substances enumerated in §
41-12.3(a) and (b) in carrying out their duties, subject to the conditions
prescribed in §
41-12.6.
(c)   Other organizations authorized to use device. Notwithstanding the
prohibitions prescribed in §
41-12.3 specifically relating to subsection (c) thereof, employees of
government and private organizations who, by necessity of their employment, are
required to go on private property to carry out their duties may possess,
discharge, use, or transport shells, cartridges, bombs, guns, or other devices
emitting the obnoxious substances enumerated in subsection (c) or animal
repellents of §
41-12.3, subject to the conditions prescribed in §
41-12.6.
(d)   Pepper sprays. The prohibitions of §
41-12.3 shall not apply to the possession, use, transportation, or other
distribution of any pepper spray as defined under §
41-27.1 in the city in a manner permitted under
Chapter 41, Article 27.
(Sec. 13-16.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 2, § 40-2.4) (Am.
Ord. 95-49)
§ 41-12.5 Permit to be obtained by agency.
(a)   Application. Any agency desiring to purchase, possess, discharge, use, or
transport obnoxious substances authorized herein shall first file an
application on forms furnished by the chief of police for a permit.
(b)   Additional requirements.
(1)   The application shall include the name of the officer or employee who has
been authorized to purchase the devices from vendors; and
(2)   Each agency is authorized to purchase only such devices emitting
obnoxious substances as are listed on its permit.
(c)   The agency shall submit the names of its employees who are to possess,
discharge, use, or transport such devices together with its application for
permit so that the chief of police may issue separate permits to the named
employees submitted by the agency.
(d)   To defray the cost of processing the permit and to administer this
article, each agency authorized under this section, except for government
agencies and except in the case of agencies desiring to use the obnoxious
substances enumerated in §
41-12.3(c), shall pay to the director of budget and fiscal services a sum of
$50 for its permit and a sum of $5 for each permit issued to its employees.
(Sec. 13-16.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 2, § 40-2.5)
§ 41-12.6 Conditions.
   Government and private agencies described in §
41-12.4(b) and (c) shall be subject to the following conditions, relative to
the purchase, use, storage, possession, transportation, and other requirements
in connection with obnoxious substances.
(a)   The chief of police, upon application by an agency, shall determine that
the possession, discharge, use, and transportation of the devices are necessary
due to the nature of the services performed by the agency. The chief of police
shall have the sole authority to designate the specific service or services for
which there is a necessity for the use of such devices. The devices shall be
used only in connection with the performance of the service or services
designated.
(b)   After the determination and designation, the agency shall submit a list
of names of employees whom the agency intends shall possess, discharge, use,
and transport the devices. The chief of police shall issue a permit to the
individual employee upon finding that the employee:
(1)   Is of good moral character;
(2)   Is of the age of 20 years or more;
(3)   Has not been convicted in this State or elsewhere of a crime of violence
or of the illegal use, possession, or sale of narcotics; and
(4)   Has not been adjudged insane.
The agency shall cooperate in providing all such evidence as to fitness of the
employee as may be required by the chief of police in making the foregoing
findings. The permit furnished by the chief of police shall be carried on the
employee’s person whenever the employee has in the employee’s possession any of
the devices.
(c)   Upon making the determination in subsections (a) and (b) favorable to the
requesting agency, the chief of police shall issue to the agency a permit
authorizing it to purchase, own, and control the specified device or devices
capable of emitting obnoxious substances listed thereon which devices shall at
all times remain subject to the exclusive ownership and control of the agency.
A copy of all permits shall be retained on file at the Honolulu police
department.
(d)   All devices emitting obnoxious substances owned by an agency except those
enumerated in §
41-12.3(c) that may be secured in a locked compartment in the agency vehicle
shall be stored at a single location which is under the exclusive control of
the agency and approved by the chief of police. The issuance and reissuance of
the devices shall be only to employees authorized pursuant to subsection (b)
according to controls approved by the chief of police. In addition, an accurate
record of the issuance and turn in of all the devices as well as the number of
such devices in the possession of each employee and the number in possession of
the agency will be kept by the agency.
(e)   The possession and transportation of the devices by an employee shall be,
unless otherwise provided, restricted to:
(1)   Transportation between the place of storage and the place of performance
of the approved service;
(2)   The location where the services for which the use of such devices was
approved and are being performed; and
(3)   Transportation from one place of performance of an approved service to
another, if during the course of the employee’s duties the employee is required
to provide services at more than one place.
(f)   The employee shall discharge or use the devices only in the scope of the
employee’s employment and only when reasonably necessary to perform the same.
(g)   The agency will be liable for the negligent use or misuse of all devices
under its control whether such devices are being used by its employees within
the scope of their employment; provided that the penalty provision of §
41-12.9 shall not apply to the agency for the unlawful acts of its employees,
unless the same are permitted or induced by the actions of the agency.
(h)   The records and procedures for the possession, use, and transportation of
such devices shall be subject to inspection by the chief of police from time to
time.
(Sec. 13-16.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 2, § 40-2.6)
§ 41-12.7 Vendor to obtain license.
(a)   Any person, corporation, partnership, or association vending the
obnoxious substances enumerated herein shall first obtain a license from the
director of budget and fiscal services.
(b)   The vendor shall keep accurate records of the sale of obnoxious
substances, including monthly inventories showing the quantity and type of
devices received, inventories showing the quantity of devices on hand, accurate
records of the sale of such devices, including the name of the purchasing
agency, date of purchase, type of obnoxious substances sold, and the number of
each type and such other records as the chief of police may require.
(c)   The chief of police shall have access to the vendor’s books and records
pertaining to the purchase and sale of obnoxious substances at reasonable times
during business hours.
(d)   The sale of obnoxious substances shall be made in case sized units as
packaged at the factory and unopened except that the unopened case may be
placed in a container provided by the local vendor before the sale. Sales of
such obnoxious substances shall be made only to the duly authorized
representative of the purchasing agency as provided in §§
41-12.5(b)(1) and
41-12.6, or in the case of delivery to the agency, such delivery shall be only
to the location specified in the agency’s permit. Deliveries as provided for
herein shall be made only by the personnel of the vendor or the delivery
service in both cases which are listed on the vendor’s permit required by this
section. No permit shall be required for the personnel or delivery service
making such deliveries.
(e)   The annual fee for a license under this section shall be $25, which shall
be payable to the director of budget and fiscal services.
(Sec. 13-16.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 2, § 40-2.7)
§ 41-12.8 Licenses—Permits renewability.
   All licenses and permits issued pursuant to this article shall be renewed
every year on or before July 1.
(Sec. 13-16.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 2, § 40-2.8)
§ 41-12.9 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a
fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding one year or both;
and upon such conviction, any license or permit issued to any person under this
section shall be revoked.
(Sec. 13-16.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 2, § 40-2.9)
§ 41-12.10 Severability.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions.
(Sec. 13-16.10, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 2, § 40-2.10)
ARTICLE 13: ADVERTISEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Sections
   
41-13.1   Definitions
   
41-13.2   Prohibition
   
41-13.3   Exceptions
   
41-13.4   Penalties
§ 41-13.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Advertisement. Any poster, banner, sticker, emblem, placard, graphic
illustration, or sign, including any neon, electronically charged, or portable
freestanding sign, used to publicize a cigarette or tobacco product to the
general public.
Business. Any person or entity engaged in a retail operation that offers
cigarettes or other tobacco products for sale to any member of the general
public for consumption or use.
Promotional Activities. The distribution of cigarette or other tobacco product
samples or materials or coupons redeemable for cigarettes or other tobacco
products free of charge or for a nominal charge to members of the general
public for the purpose of promoting a brand of cigarettes or a form of tobacco
products.
Public Property. Includes any street, sidewalk, public or private park, public
or private school ground, and any other property that is owned or controlled by
the federal, State, or city government or any agency thereof.
Publicly Visible Location. A place inside or outside of a commercial building,
including the exterior walls of the building and the exterior and interior of a
display window of a retail business, that is visible to the general public from
public property.
School Zone. Every street and all other property within 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of any public or private primary or secondary school and any
preschool licensed by the State department of human services.
Street. Has the same meaning as defined in §
13-1.1.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 10, § 40-10.1) (Added by Ord. 98-10)
§ 41-13.2 Prohibition.
(a)   It is unlawful for any business to display a cigarette or other tobacco
product advertisement in a publicly visible location within a school zone.
(b)   It is unlawful for any person to participate in any promotional
activities, as defined in §
41-13.1, on any public property or within a school zone; provided that such
promotional activities shall not be prohibited inside any business
establishment in which retail sales are made to the general public; and
provided further, that the promotional activities within any such business
establishment shall not be seen from a publicly visible location.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 10, § 40-10.2) (Added by Ord. 98-10)
§ 41-13.3 Exceptions.
   The following shall be exceptions to §
41-13.2(a):
(1)   The placement of an advertisement for a cigarette or other tobacco
product inside of a retail business establishment where the product is offered
for sale to the general public, provided that the advertisement is not in a
publicly visible location;
(2)   The operation or legal parking of a vehicle within a school zone that has
permanently painted on or affixed to the vehicle any sign, graphics, or
lettering relating to the name, trade insignia, or trademark of a cigarette or
other tobacco product, to the extent permitted in §
41-29.3; and
(3)   The placement of any advertisement for a cigarette or other tobacco
product in or upon a federal or State building or facility located within a
school zone.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 10, § 40-10.3) (Added by Ord. 98-10)
§ 41-13.4 Penalties.
   Any person who violates this article shall be fined not more than $500.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 10, § 40-10.4) (Added by Ord. 98-10)
ARTICLE 14: SMOKING
Sections
   
41-14.1   Definitions
   
41-14.2   Prohibition of smoking in certain places
   
41-14.3   Exceptions
   
41-14.4   Signs
   
41-14.5   Violation—Penalty
   
41-14.6   Enforcement—Administration
   
41-14.7   Fire code
   
41-14.8   Severability
   
41-14.9   Conflict with HRS Chapter 328J
§ 41-14.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Bar. For a July 1 to June 30 period, a place that was devoted to the serving of
alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption by patrons and where the service of
food was only incidental to the consumption of such beverages during the
previous July 1 to June 30 period, whether or not the place was open for
business during that entire period. When the preceding sentence does not apply
to a place because it was not open for business in the previous July 1 to June
30 period, the place may choose to be a bar from the date it first opens for
business until the next June 30 if, during that time, the place is devoted to
the serving of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption by patrons and the
service of food in the place is only incidental to the consumption of such
beverages. “Incidental” means less than one third of gross sales of alcoholic
beverages as opposed to food sales.
Building. A structure with at least three walls.
Bus Stop. Any place where the department of transportation services has
directed the placement of a bus stop sign designating a location where the
city’s bus service stops to service passengers. Such sign may include route
numbers and regulatory and other information.
Commercial Building. A building occupied by two or more commercial tenants.
Electronic Smoking Device. Any electronic product that can be used to
aerosolize and deliver nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from
the device, including but not limited to an electronic cigarette, electronic
cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, hookah pipe, or hookah pen, and
any cartridge or other component of the device or related product, whether or
not sold separately.
Food Court. An area with more than one restaurant and seating that is not
subject to the exclusive use or possession of any restaurant, but is made
available to the patrons of every restaurant in or other tenant of the area.
The definition of food court under §
42-3.5 shall not apply to this article.
Food Court Seating Area. The portion of a food court with unreserved seating
for patrons of any restaurant or other tenant of the food court. An “enclosed
or partially enclosed food court” means a food court that is within an
“enclosed or partially enclosed area” as defined under §
41-14.2(10).
Hotel. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Multi-Unit Dwelling. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Open to the Public. Areas within any building available for use by or
accessible to the general public during the normal course of business conducted
therein by either private or public entities.
Public Park. Any park, park roadway, playground, athletic field, beach, beach
right-of-way, tennis court, swimming pool, or other recreation area or facility
under the control, maintenance, and management of the department of parks and
recreation. Public park does not include a public thoroughfare defined as a
“mall” under §
13-1.1 unless the public thoroughfare has been:
(1)   Accepted, dedicated, or named by the council expressly as a public park
or “park”;
(2)   Placed under the control, maintenance, and management of and classified
expressly as a public park or “park” by the department of parks and recreation;
or
(3)   Constructed or situated within a larger specific recreation area or
facility listed in the preceding sentence.
Public Place. Has the same meaning as defined in §
13-1.1.
Restaurant. Any retail eating establishment where food is served or provided
for on-site consumption by seated patrons that is authorized by the State
department of health to operate as a food establishment, including any private
food establishment or club in which only members or their guests are permitted,
but excluding a “bar.” If a restaurant includes an area devoted to the serving
of alcoholic beverages, that area shall be deemed part of the restaurant, not a
separate “bar,” for this article. An establishment that is a restaurant shall
have that status for all hours of operation.
Retail Department Store. A retail establishment organized or arranged into five
or more departments and consisting of a total selling floor space of at least
22,000 square feet.
Separate Open Air Area of a Restaurant. An area, roofed or not, of a
restaurant’s premises that is both:
(1)   Directly exposed to the outside environment on every side, except a side
abutting:
(A)   An indoor area of the restaurant;
(B)   Any building that does not house the restaurant; or
(C)   Any other enclosed or partially enclosed place or area where smoking is
prohibited by this article or HRS Chapter 328J; and
(2)   Entirely separated from any abutting area, building, or place listed
under subdivision (1) by either of the following:
(A)   At least 10 feet of space that is outside the walls of the building
housing the restaurant; or
(B)   A solid wall: (i) without any opening; or (ii) with either or both of the
following, but no other opening: a closable doorway that stays closed except
when a person passes through it or a closable serving window that stays closed
except when food, drink, or eating ware is passed through it. A “solid wall”
means a wall constructed of rigid material that reaches from floor to ceiling.
It may have an unopenable plate glass window. A “serving window” means a window
through which food, drink, or eating ware may be passed from one area of a
restaurant to another area of the restaurant.
A side of a restaurant area is “directly exposed to the outside environment” if
the entire side is unenclosed or enclosed only by a barrier of not more than 4
feet high from the floor. An “indoor area of a restaurant” means the area
within the walls of the building housing all or part of a restaurant’s
premises.
Smoke or Smoking. Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or
heated tobacco product or plant product intended for inhalation in any manner
or in any form. Smoking includes the use of an electronic smoking device.
Tobacco Product. Any product made or derived from tobacco, that contains
nicotine or other substances, and is intended for human consumption or is
likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved,
inhaled, or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to, a
cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, snus, or an electronic
smoking device. Tobacco product does not include any product specifically
approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for legal sale as a
tobacco cessation product that is being marketed and sold solely for that
approved purpose.
(Sec. 13-42.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 21,
§ 41-21.1) (Am. Ords. 93-24, 93-68, 97-20, 02-06, 13-27, 13-28, 17-53, 25-2)
§ 41-14.2 Prohibition of smoking in certain places.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, smoking is prohibited in the following
places within the city:
(1)   Elevators in buildings generally open to and used by the public,
including elevators in apartment and other multi-unit residential buildings;
(2)   Patient rooms, wards, waiting rooms, lobbies, and public hallways of
public and private health care facilities, including but not limited to
hospitals, clinics, and physicians’ and dentists’ offices;
(3)   Any room which is primarily used for exhibiting any motion picture, stage
drama, dance, musical performance, or other similar performance during the time
that the room, hall, or auditorium is open to the public for such exhibition;
(4)   Museums, libraries, and galleries;
(5)   All areas within city-owned or controlled buildings, except any dwelling
unit or lodging unit, as those terms are defined by §
21-10.1, when not being used for child or adult daycare, or as a health care
facility;
(6)   Except as provided in §
41-14.3 or as limited by this subsection, all areas in business or charitable
establishments. For the purposes of this subdivision, a “business” means any
sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, business trust, limited
liability company, business corporation, professional corporation, or other
business entity formed for profit-making purposes, and “business establishment”
includes but is not limited to any of the following establishments operated by
a business:
(A)   Any school;
(B)   Any hotel, except individual hotel rooms;
(C)   Any financial institution;
(D)   Any industrial, commercial, or wholesale establishment;
(E)   Any utility;
(F)   Any retail establishment where goods or services are sold, leased, or
otherwise provided to the public or to another business;
(G)   Any bar within an enclosed or partially enclosed food court; or
(H)   Any restaurant; except that smoking will be permitted in a separate open
air area of a restaurant when the business operating the restaurant refrains
from designating the area as nonsmoking pursuant to subdivision (8);
(7)   Rest rooms. Any restroom open to the public in places specified in this
section;
(8)   Notwithstanding §
41-14.3, any area of any bar, hotel room, restaurant, or governmental property
which has been designated by the owner, operator, manager, or other persons
having control of such property as a nonsmoking area and marked with a “no
smoking” sign or signs;
(9)   All enclosed or partially enclosed areas within multi-unit dwellings that
are open to the common use of all unit owners or residents, including but not
limited to lobbies, hallways, corridors, stairways, waiting areas, and
recreation areas within multi-unit dwellings. For the purposes of this
subdivision, “enclosed or partially enclosed areas” means areas closed in by a
roof or overhang and at least one wall. An area commonly described as a lobby
or roofed mall is deemed to be enclosed or partially enclosed for purposes of
this subdivision;
(10)   All enclosed or partially enclosed areas within commercial buildings not
subject to the exclusive use and possession of a tenant and open to the common
use of the tenants of the building and their employees and customers, including
but not limited to common entrance areas, lobbies, malls, food court seating
areas, hallways, corridors, escalators, stairways, and waiting or rest areas
within commercial buildings. For the purposes of this subdivision, an enclosed
or partially enclosed area is any area for human occupancy that is contained on
two or more sides by walls and is covered by a roof, ceiling, or overhang, such
that the area of all permanent openings from the space to the open air is less
than 50 percent of the combined areas of the walls and ceiling, roof, or
overhang. If a wall does not meet the floor or the ceiling, roof, or overhang,
the calculation will be based on the vertical projection of the wall to the
plane of the floor or the plane of the ceiling, roof or overhang. Permanent
openings do not include doors or windows which are capable of being closed;
(11)   If a building is both a multi-unit dwelling and a commercial building as
defined in this article, all areas except for private residences;
(12)   All motor vehicles:
(A)   That are owned or leased by the city; or
(B)   In which a person under 18 years of age is present;
(13)   All public parks, recreation areas, and facilities under the maintenance
of the department of parks and recreation or the department of enterprise
services, except for the open air areas of a municipal golf course and such
areas within each of the following sites as the department of parks and
recreation or the department of enterprise services may designate by
appropriate signs as areas within which smoking is permissible:
(A)   Honolulu Zoo;
(B)   Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve;
(C)   Koko Crater Botanical Garden; and
(D)   Tom Moffatt Waikiki Shell; and
(14)   Any bus stop. The smoking prohibition applies to the area of the bus
stop that extends out from the bus stop sign or the footprint of the shelter in
every direction by 20 feet. The footprint of the shelter is defined by vertical
planes extending down from the outermost edges of the shelter overhang or roof.
The prohibition contemplated in this subdivision only applies to public places.
(Sec. 13-42.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 21,
§ 41-21.2) (Am. Ords. 93-24, 93-68, 93-92, 96-58, 97-20, 99-64, 02-06, 13-5,
13-27, 13-28, 17-53, 25-2)
§ 41-14.3 Exceptions.
   Smoking must not be prohibited in the following places under this article:
(1)   Private residences, except when used for child or adult daycare, or as a
health care facility;
(2)   Any hotel room;
(3)   Any bar that is not within an enclosed or partially enclosed food court;
and
(4)   Any separate open air area of a restaurant where smoking is permitted by
the business operating the restaurant pursuant to §
41-14.2(6)(H).
(Sec. 13-42.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 21,
§ 41-21.3) (Am. Ords. 97-20, 02-06, 13-27, 13-28, 25-2)
§ 41-14.4 Signs.
(a)   Clearly legible signs that include the words “smoking prohibited by law”
with letters of not less than 1 inch in height must be conspicuously posted in
all places where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator,
manager, or other person having control of such place. This subsection does not
apply to privately owned motor vehicles, unless the vehicles are used in public
transportation under the authority of the State or the city.
(b)   Alternate means of notification (individual place cards, film clips,
etc.) may be employed provided the effect thereof is equivalent to the notice
given by signs described in subsection (a).
(c)   Any person violating this section shall be issued a notice of violation
and shall comply with this section within 10 days. Thereafter, the violation
shall carry a fine of not more than $25. Each violation cited shall constitute
a separate offense.
(Sec. 13-42.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 21,
§ 41-21.4) (Am. Ords. 97-57, 02-06, 17-53)
§ 41-14.5 Violation—Penalty.
(a)   It is unlawful for any person to smoke in a place within the city where
smoking is prohibited.
(b)   Except as otherwise provided, any person violating this article shall be
punished by:
(1)   A fine of not more than $100 for a first violation;
(2)   A fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation within one year of the
date of the first violation; and
(3)   A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation of this article
within one year of the date of the preceding violation.
(Sec. 13-42.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 21,
§ 41-21.5) (Am. Ords. 93-68, 97-20)
§ 41-14.6 Enforcement—Administration.
(a)   Summons or citation.
(1)   There shall be provided for use by an officer or employee of the city
duly authorized to issue a summons or citation, or any police officer a form of
summons or citation for use in citing violators of this article, which does not
provide for the physical arrest of such violators. The form and content of such
summons or citation shall be as adopted or prescribed by the administrative
judge of the district court, shall be printed on a form commensurate with the
form of other summons or citations used in modern methods of arrest, and so
designed to include all necessary information to make the same valid within the
laws and regulations of the State of Hawaii and the City and County of
Honolulu.
(2)   In every case, when a citation is issued, the original of the same shall
be given to the violator; provided that the administrative judge of the
district court may prescribe that the violator be given a carbon copy of the
citation and provide for the disposition of the original and any other copies.
(3)   Every citation shall be numbered, and each carbon copy shall bear the
same number as its original.
(b)   Enforcement and administration of §
41-14.4 shall be under the jurisdiction of the department of planning and
permitting, which department shall have the power to formulate any applicable
rules necessary to carry out §
41-14.4.
(c)   Except as provided in subsection (b), enforcement of this article shall
be under the jurisdiction of the Honolulu police department.
(d)   In addition to the foregoing, any police officer or other officer or
employee of the city duly authorized to issue a summons or citation may eject
from the premises any person to whom a citation has been issued and who
continues to smoke after the person has been requested by the police officer or
other duly authorized officer or employee to stop smoking.
(Sec. 13-42.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 21,
§ 41-21.6) (Am. Ord. 02-06)
§ 41-14.7 Fire code.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed as superseding applicable fire
code provisions. Where a conflict between the provisions of this article and
the fire code arises, the fire code provision will prevail.
(Sec. 13-42.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 21,
§ 41-21.7)
§ 41-14.8 Severability.
   If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions
or applications of this article, which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this article are
severable.
(Sec. 13-42.8, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 21,
§ 41-21.8)
§ 41-14.9 Conflict with HRS Chapter 328J.
(a)   If any provision of this article conflicts with any provision of HRS
Chapter 328J, or any successor statute, the more stringent provision shall
control.
(b)   If any violation of this article also constitutes a violation of HRS
Chapter 328J, or any successor statute, the violator shall be subject to the
penalties and procedures set forth under this article.
(c)   This section shall not be deemed to limit the powers granted to the city
under HRS Chapter 328J or any successor statute, to enforce, administer, and
adopt rules necessary to carry out HRS Chapter 328J, or any successor statute.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 21, § 41-21.9) (Added by Ord. 93-24; Am. Ords. 02-06,
13-28)
ARTICLE 15: BIDI CIGARETTE PROHIBITIONS
Sections
   
41-15.1   Definition
   
41-15.2   Prohibition
   
41-15.3   Violation—Penalties
§ 41-15.1 Definition.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Bidi Cigarette. A product that contains tobacco that is wrapped in temburni or
tendu leaf.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 18, § 40-18.1) (Added by Ord. 00-23)
§ 41-15.2 Prohibition.
   No person shall sell, give or barter away, or in any way, furnish to any
other person a bidi cigarette.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 18, § 40-18.2) (Added by Ord. 00-23)
§ 41-15.3 Violation—Penalties.
   Any person who violates §
41-15.2 shall be fined not more than $500 for the first offense. Any subsequent
offenses shall subject the person to a fine of not less than $500 nor more than
$1,000.
   A police officer may arrest an alleged violator of this article or may issue
a citation in lieu of arrest as provided in HRS § 803-6.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 18, § 40-18.3) (Added by Ord. 00-23)
ARTICLE 16: HERBAL CIGARETTES
Sections
   
41-16.1   Definition
   
41-16.2   Sale of herbal cigarettes prohibited
   
41-16.3   Signs
   
41-16.4   Violations and penalties
§ 41-16.1 Definition.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Herbal Cigarette. A cigarette that is composed of one or more herbs or other
plants and is not a tobacco product.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 20, § 40-20.1) (Added by Ord. 00-60)
§ 41-16.2 Sale of herbal cigarettes prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give, or barter away, or in any
way, furnish herbal cigarettes to an individual under 21 years of age.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 20, § 40-20.2) (Added by Ord. 00-60; Am. Ord. 24-5)
§ 41-16.3 Signs.
   Signs using the statement “The sale of herbal cigarettes to persons under
twenty-one is prohibited” must be posted on or near any vending machine in
letters at least 0.5 inches high and at or near the point of sale of any other
location where herbal cigarettes are sold, in letters at least 0.5 inches high.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 20, § 40-20.3) (Added by Ord. 00-60; Am. Ord. 24-5)
§ 41-16.4 Violations and penalties.
   Any person who violates §§
41-16.2 or
41-16.3 shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense. Any subsequent
offenses occurring within one year of the first offense shall subject the
person to a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 20, § 40-20.4) (Added by Ord. 00-60)
ARTICLE 17: PROSTITUTION-RELATED PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT
Sections
   
41-17.1   Definitions
   
41-17.2   “Public nuisance” declaration for prostitution-related offenses
   
41-17.3   Abatement
   
41-17.4   Other actions not prohibited
§ 41-17.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Business. A corporation, partnership, or sole proprietorship.
County Organization. A city agency with authority under the Charter to bring
suit to enjoin, abate, and prevent a nuisance under HRS Chapter 712, Part V.
Premises of a Business. The portion of a structure, grounds, or both, which is
occupied by a business through ownership, lease, rental, or other conveyance.
The term does not include common areas shared by the business with other
parties.
Principal. An officer, director, shareholder, partner, or sole proprietor of a
business.
Prostitution and Promoting Prostitution. The offenses of prostitution and
promoting prostitution under HRS Chapter 712.
Prostitution-Related Public Nuisance. The public nuisance declared under §
41-17.2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 16, § 40-16.1) (Added by Ord. 99-53)
§ 41-17.2 “Public nuisance” declaration for prostitution-related offenses.
(a)   The premises of a business, to which all of the following conditions
apply, is declared a public nuisance per se:
(1)   At least three arrests of a principal, employee, or independent
contractor of the business were made within a five-year period for alleged
prostitution or promoting prostitution;
(2)   Each person arrested was charged with prostitution or promoting
prostitution for an act which allegedly occurred on the premises;
(3)   At least three of the persons charged:
(A)   Were convicted of the prostitution or promoting prostitution offenses for
which charged; or
(B)   Had the court defer acceptance of guilty or nolo contendere pleas for;
and
(4)   The same business occupied the premises continuously from the first
arrest counted under subdivision (1) until the third conviction or court
deferred acceptance of guilty or nolo contendere plea counted under subdivision
(3). For the purpose of this subdivision, a business shall be deemed the “same”
so long as controlling ownership interest in the business remained held or
shared by the same person, even if changes occurred in the name of the
business, purpose of the business, proportion of controlling ownership interest
held by the person, members of the controlling ownership group, if any, of the
business, or any other factor which did not affect the person’s holding or
sharing of controlling ownership interest.
(b)   The existence of the following conditions shall not be necessary for the
premises of a business to become a public nuisance under subsection (a):
(1)   Knowledge of any principal of the business that prostitution or promoting
prostitution was committed on the premises by another principal, an employee,
or an independent contractor of the business;
(2)   Orders by any principal of the business requiring another principal, an
employee, or an independent contractor of the business to commit prostitution
or promoting prostitution on the premises; or
(3)   Acquiescence by any principal of the business to the prostitution or
promoting prostitution committed on the premises by another principal, an
employee, or an independent contractor of the business.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 16, § 40-16.2) (Added by Ord. 99-53)
§ 41-17.3 Abatement.
(a)   This article shall not affect the authority of the prosecuting attorney
or a county organization under HRS Chapter 712, Part V, to bring a suit to
enjoin, abate, and prevent a prostitution-related public nuisance.
If, however, the prosecuting attorney or a county organization does not bring
such a suit within 30 days of the date the premises of a business becomes a
prostitution-related public nuisance, the department of the corporation counsel
shall take action in accordance with subsection (b). The “date the premises of
the business becomes a prostitution-related public nuisance” means the date of
the third conviction or court deferred acceptance of guilty or nolo contendere
plea counted under §
41-17.2(a)(3) for prostitution or promoting prostitution necessary to make the
premises a public nuisance.
(b)   When required to take action pursuant to subsection (a), the department
of the corporation counsel shall either:
(1)   Seek to enjoin, abate, and prevent the prostitution-related public
nuisance by suit brought as a county organization pursuant to HRS Chapter 712,
Part V; or
(2)   Seek to enjoin and prohibit the prostitution-related public nuisance
under HRS § 603-23. Within 60 days of the day this subsection becomes
applicable, the department of the corporation counsel shall initiate the
necessary action for an injunction to immediately close the prostitution-
related public nuisance for up to one year. The “day this subsection becomes
applicable” means the 31st day following the date the premises of the
applicable business becomes a prostitution-related public nuisance. It shall
not be a defense to an action brought by the corporation counsel that the
action was initiated on the 60th day after this subsection becomes available,
or thereafter.
When the department of the corporation counsel brings an action under HRS
Chapter 712, Part V, or HRS § 603-23 against a prostitution-related public
nuisance, the proceedings, including proof required, and remedies shall be
subject to that part or section, as applicable.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 16, § 40-16.3) (Added by Ord. 99-53)
§ 41-17.4 Other actions not prohibited.
(a)   This article shall not affect the right of a private person under
statutory or common law to bring an action to abate or collect damages for a
nuisance declared under this article.
(b)   This article shall not prohibit the prosecuting attorney or any county
organization from bringing suit under HRS Chapter 712, Part V, to close the
premises of a business before the occurrence of three convictions or court
deferred acceptances of guilty or nolo contendere plea counted under §
41-17.2(a)(3) for prostitution or promoting prostitution on the premises.
(c)   This article shall not impose any liability on the city for a failure to
seek the abatement of a public nuisance declared under this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 16, § 40-16.4) (Added by Ord. 99-53)
ARTICLE 18: ADDITIONAL AREAS OF SIGNIFICANT PROSTITUTION-RELATED ACTIVITY
Sections
   
41-18.1   City-designated areas of significant prostitution-related activity
   
41-18.2   Additional to Waikiki area
   
41-18.3   No intent to supersede HRS § 712-1207
   
41-18.4   Intent regarding “public property”
§ 41-18.1 City-designated areas of significant prostitution-related activity.
(a)   Pursuant to the authority conferred by HRS § 712-1207 and the
recommendation of the chief of police, the following areas are designated zones
of significant prostitution-related activity detrimental to the health, safety,
or welfare of the general public:
(1)   The Ala Moana/Kapiolani/Convention Center/Keeaumoku/lower Makiki/McCully/
Moiliili area shown in Exhibit A attached to this article and made a part
hereof;
(2)   The Downtown/Chinatown area shown in Exhibit B attached to this article
and made a part hereof; and
(3)   The Wahiawa area shown in Exhibit C attached to this article and made a
part hereof.
Where the boundary lines of the designated areas shown on the exhibits follow
streets or highways, the designated areas shall include the entire width of the
streets or highways, including the sidewalk or shoulder areas. For this
purpose, “streets or highways” mean the same as defined under §
15-2.23.
(b)   This article shall be deemed a county ordinance designating areas to
which HRS § 712-1207 applies.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 21, § 40-21.1) (Added by Ord. 00-67; Am. Ord. 06-48)
§ 41-18.2 Additional to Waikiki area.
   The areas designated under §
41-18.1 are additional to the Waikiki area designated under HRS § 712-1207.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 21, § 40-21.2) (Added by Ord. 00-67)
§ 41-18.3 No intent to supersede HRS § 712-1207.
   This article is not intended to supersede HRS § 712-1207.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 21, § 40-21.3) (Added by Ord. 00-67)
§ 41-18.4 Intent regarding “public property”.
(a)   The council finds that HRS § 712-1207 prohibits a person, while on public
property within Waikiki or a designated area, from offering or agreeing to
engage in sexual conduct with another person in return for a fee. Under HRS §
712-1207, “public property” includes any street, highway, road, sidewalk,
alley, lane, bridge, parking lot, park, or other property owned or under the
jurisdiction of any governmental entity or otherwise open to the public.
(b)   The council finds that, as defined, “public property” includes privately
owned real property used for commercial purposes if open to any broad class of
the public. Thus, the council finds that the term includes a liquor-serving,
massage, or adult entertainment establishment open to adult members of the
public.
The council further finds that the heading of HRS § 712-1207, which reads in
part “street solicitation of prostitution,” may not be construed as limiting
the plain language of the section to solicitation on a public street.
(c)   The council intends that the chief of police, prosecuting attorney, and
any other authorized law enforcement officer enforce HRS § 712-1207 consistent
with the findings of this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 21, § 40-21.4) (Added by Ord. 00-67)
Exhibit A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8675.png]
Exhibit B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8673.png]
Exhibit C
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e75107b30f1c8e424756d7cb633523942d867951/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8671.png]
ARTICLE 19: LASER POINTERS AND HARASSMENT WITH LASER BEAMS
Sections
   
41-19.1   Definition
   
41-19.2   Possession and providing of laser pointers prohibited
   
41-19.3   Harassment by laser beams prohibited
   
41-19.4   Violation—Penalties—Liability of parent
§ 41-19.1 Definition.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Laser Pointer. Any handheld laser which is not designed as a sighting device
for a weapon, and which is not designed for use in a medical procedure. This
term includes the product commonly referred to as a “laser pen”.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 15, § 40-15.1) (Added by Ord. 99-09)
§ 41-19.2 Possession and providing of laser pointers prohibited.
(a)   No person shall sell, give, loan, or otherwise provide or cause to be
provided a laser pointer to any person under 18 years of age.
(b)   No person under 18 years of age shall possess a laser pointer.
(c)   The prohibitions in subsections (a) and (b) do not apply to any handheld
laser devices used in a recreational activity commonly referred to as “laser
tag,” and which activity is offered for a fee or charge by a facility used for
indoor recreation or outdoor recreation as defined in § 21-10.1; provided that
the devices must be collected by the owner or operator of the facility
following their use in the recreational activity.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 15, § 40-15.2) (Added by Ord. 99-09) (Am. Ord. 25-2)
§ 41-19.3 Harassment by laser beams prohibited.
   No person shall intentionally focus, point, or shine any laser beam directly
or indirectly into the eye or eyes of another person, or on another person or
animal, in such a manner as would reasonably be expected to annoy, harass, or
alarm the person or animal.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 15, § 40-15.3) (Added by Ord. 99-09)
§ 41-19.4 Violation—Penalties—Liability of parent.
(a)   Any person convicted of violating this article shall be punished for each
violation by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500, by imprisonment
for not more than 30 days, or both.
(b)   Any father or mother of an unmarried minor who violates §
41-19.3 shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for any injury or
damage suffered as a result of such violation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 15, § 40-15.4) (Added by Ord. 99-09)
ARTICLE 20: URINATING OR DEFECATING IN PUBLIC PROHIBITED IN THE WAIKIKI SPECIAL
DISTRICT
Sections
   
41-20.1   Definitions
   
41-20.2   Prohibition
   
41-20.3   Exceptions
   
41-20.4   Violation—Penalty
§ 41-20.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Public Place. Any publicly-owned or privately-owned property open for public
use or to which the public is invited for entertainment or business purposes
and includes but is not limited to any street, sidewalk, driveway, alley,
doorway, mall, plaza, park, public building, or parking lot.
Waikiki Special District. The Waikiki special district as defined in §
21-9.80-2.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 24, § 40-24.1) (Added by Ord. 14-27)
§ 41-20.2 Prohibition.
   Within the boundaries of the Waikiki special district, no person shall
intentionally or knowingly urinate or defecate:
(1)   In a public place; or
(2)   In any area where such an act is likely to be observed by any member of
the public.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 24, § 40-24.2) (Added by Ord. 14-27)
§ 41-20.3 Exceptions.
(a)   This article shall not apply in cases where the person failed to use a
restroom or other toilet facility because of a medical condition verified by a
licensed physician.
(b)   This article shall not apply to a person urinating or defecating while
using appropriate fixtures in any restroom or other toilet facility designed
for the sanitary disposal of human waste.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 24, § 40-24.3) (Added by Ord. 14-27)
§ 41-20.4 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with HRS §§ 706-640
and 706-663, as amended.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 24, § 40-24.4) (Added by Ord. 14-27)
ARTICLE 21: URINATING OR DEFECATING IN PUBLIC PROHIBITED OUTSIDE OF THE WAIKIKI
SPECIAL DISTRICT
Sections
   
41-21.1   Definition
   
41-21.2   Prohibition
   
41-21.3   Exceptions
   
41-21.4   Violation—Penalty
§ 41-21.1 Definition.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Public Place. Any publicly-owned or privately-owned property open for public
use or to which the public is invited for entertainment or business purposes
and includes but is not limited to any street, sidewalk, driveway, alley,
doorway, mall, plaza, park, public building, or parking lot.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 24A, § 40-24A.1) (Added by Ord. 14-28)
§ 41-21.2 Prohibition.
   No person shall intentionally or knowingly urinate or defecate:
(1)   In a public place; or
(2)   In any area where such an act is likely to be observed by any member of
the public.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 24A, § 40-24A.2) (Added by Ord. 14-28)
§ 41-21.3 Exceptions.
(a)   This article shall not apply in cases where the person failed to use a
restroom or other toilet facility because of a medical condition verified by a
licensed physician.
(b)   This article shall not apply to a person urinating or defecating while
using appropriate fixtures in any restroom or other toilet facility designed
for the sanitary disposal of human waste.
(c)   This article shall not apply to any area where urination or defecation is
prohibited by State law or by a separate ordinance enactment.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 24A, § 40-24A.3) (Added by Ord. 14-28)
§ 41-21.4 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with HRS §§ 706-640
and 706-663, as amended.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 24A, § 40-24A.4) (Added by Ord. 14-28)
ARTICLE 22: ICEBOXES AND REFRIGERATORS
Sections
   
41-22.1   Prohibitions
   
41-22.2   Violation—Penalty
   
41-22.3   Severability
§ 41-22.1 Prohibitions.
(a)   It is unlawful for any person to abandon or discard in a place accessible
to children, or to store, keep or permit to remain on any property under such
person’s control in a place accessible to children, any icebox or refrigerator
which has an airtight door or lid, snaplock, or other locking device, which may
not be released from within the icebox or refrigerator, without first removing
the door or lid, snaplock, or other locking device.
(b)   Subsection (a) is not intended and shall not be construed to apply to:
(1)   Iceboxes or refrigerators kept within any building for the purposes of
display, inventory, or repair in the regular course of business; provided that
an attendant is in the building at all times when the building is not under
lock and key;
(2)   Iceboxes or refrigerators within the enclosed dwelling area of a home; or
(3)   Iceboxes or refrigerators actually being used for the purpose of
refrigeration.
(Sec. 13-22.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 4, § 40-4.1)
§ 41-22.2 Violation—Penalty.
(a)   Any person violating §
41-22.1 shall be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon conviction,
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100, or by imprisonment not
exceeding 30 days, or by both.
(b)   Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such under this section.
(Sec. 13-22.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 4, § 40-4.2)
§ 41-22.3 Severability.
   If any provision or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such provision or
portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and
such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
article.
(Sec. 13-22.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 4, § 40-4.3)
ARTICLE 23: UNOFFICIAL AGE IDENTIFICATION CARD
Sections
   
41-23.1   Definitions
   
41-23.2   Prohibition on manufacture, sale, or supply of unofficial age
identification card without required disclaimer
   
41-23.3   Prohibition on use of unofficial age identification card with false
birth date
§ 41-23.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Government Agency. An agency of the United States government, an agency of any
state government of the United States, or an agency of any political
subdivision of a state. Government agency also means an agency of any
government of a country besides the United States.
Government Document. A document issued by a government agency.
Supply. With respect to an unofficial age identification card, means to provide
or furnish to a person by other than a sales transaction.
Unofficial Age Identification Card. A card which:
(1)   Is manufactured by a private person without the express, specific
authorization of a government agency;
(2)   Is rectangular and not more than 8 inches in length and not more than 5
inches in width; and
(3)   Is imprinted, inscribed, or stamped on at least one side with at least
the following information:
(A)   A picture of an individual;
(B)   A personal name positioned or described in a manner indicating or
resulting in a reasonable assumption that it is the personal name of the
pictured individual; and
(C)   A date represented as a “birth date” and positioned or described in a
manner indicating or resulting in a reasonable assumption that the date is the
birth date of the pictured individual. A date shall be deemed represented as a
“birth date” if designated or accompanied by the words “birth date” or “date of
birth,” the initials “DOB” or “BD,” or other similar words or initials in the
English or another language.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 17, § 40-17.1) (Added by Ord. 99-66)
§ 41-23.2 Prohibition on manufacture, sale, or supply of unofficial age
identification card without required disclaimer.
(a)   Except as provided in this section, a private person shall not
manufacture, sell, supply, or attempt to sell or supply an unofficial age
identification card unless the following words are imprinted, inscribed, or
stamped across the top of each side of the card in the manner required by this
subsection: “SOUVENIR ONLY.” The words shall be in red capital letters at least
0.25 inches high and printed prominently, legibly, and conspicuously in
permanent ink. The phrase “SOUVENIR ONLY” shall be at least 2 inches wide or,
if the card is less than 2 inches wide, shall be at least 80 percent of the
width of the card.
(b)   Subsection (a) shall not apply to a private person who manufactures,
sells, supplies, or attempts to sell or supply the following:
(1)   A “credit card” as defined in HRS § 708-800;
(2)   An “employee identification card,” meaning a card given to an individual
by a private employer for the purpose of identifying the individual as an
employee of the employer;
(3)   A “school identification card,” meaning a card given to an individual by
a private academic, trade, vocational, or technical school, college, or
university for the purpose of identifying the individual as a student of the
school, college, or university; or
(4)   A card which does not meet all criteria of the definition of “unofficial
age identification card” under §
41-23.1. A card excepted by this subdivision includes a card which is
manufactured, sold, or supplied by a private person with the express, specific
authorization of a government agency, a card which does not comply with the
dimensional requirements of subdivision (2) of the definition, or a card which
does not include on at least one side all of the information specified under
subdivision (3) of the definition.
   A card described under this subsection need not include the words required
by subsection (a).
(c)   A person who manufactures, sells, supplies, or attempts to sell or supply
an unofficial age identification card in violation of this section shall be
subject for each violation to a maximum $2,000 fine, maximum one-year
imprisonment, or both. Each card manufactured, sold, supplied, or attempted to
be sold or supplied in violation of the section shall be deemed a separate
violation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 17, § 40-17.2) (Added by Ord. 99-66)
§ 41-23.3 Prohibition on use of unofficial age identification card with false
birth date.
(a)   A person shall not use or attempt to use an unofficial age identification
card with a false birth date as proof of being the requisite age to:
(1)   Enter a liquor-serving or other establishment restricted to patrons of a
minimum age; or
(2)   Purchase liquor or another product purchasable only by persons of a
minimum age.
An “unofficial age identification card with a false birth date” means an
unofficial age identification card, the birth date on which is not that of the
person who uses or attempts to use the card. The prohibition of this subsection
applies even if the unofficial age identification card includes the disclaimer
required under §
41-23.2.
(b)   Subsection (a) shall not apply when the use of a particular unofficial
age identification card with a false birth date also constitutes a violation of
a State law prohibiting the use of a fraudulent government document. By this
subsection, the council intends to avoid a conflict with the State law.
(c)   A person who violates this section shall be subject for each violation to
a maximum $2,000 fine; provided that if the person is subject to the
jurisdiction of the family court pursuant to HRS § 571-11(1), the punishment
shall be established by that court.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 17, § 40-17.3) (Added by Ord. 99-66)
ARTICLE 24: WEARING OF MASKS OR DISGUISES
Sections
   
41-24.1   Definitions
   
41-24.2   Wearing of masks or disguises prohibited
   
41-24.3   Penalty
§ 41-24.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Disguise. All items that may be worn to alter the physical appearance of the
wearer.
False Whiskers. All items that, when used, create the impression of facial hair
features that include beards, moustaches, and sideburns.
Mask. Any item that, when used, covers or conceals a person’s facial features.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 22, § 40-22.1) (Added by Ord. 01-19)
§ 41-24.2 Wearing of masks or disguises prohibited.
   No person shall wear any mask, false whiskers, or any personal disguise
(whether complete or partial) for the purpose of:
(1)   Evading or escaping discovery, recognition, or identification in the
commission of any criminal offense; or
(2)   Concealment, flight, or escape, when the person has been charged with,
arrested for, or convicted of, any criminal offense.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 22, § 40-22.2) (Added by Ord. 01-19)
§ 41-24.3 Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and shall be subject to a fine of up to $1,000, up to 30 days of imprisonment,
or both.
(1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 22, § 40-22.3) (Added by Ord. 01-19)
ARTICLE 25: LOITERING ON PUBLIC SCHOOL PREMISES
Sections
   
41-25.1   Loitering on public school premises
   
41-25.2   Exclusions
   
41-25.3   Presence considered prima facie case of violation
   
41-25.4   Violation—Penalty
§ 41-25.1 Loitering on public school premises.
   No person shall go or remain upon, loiter around, in or upon, or play or
engage in any game in or upon any public school buildings or public school
grounds, without lawful business or excuse for so doing.
(Sec. 13-5.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 32, § 41-32.1)
§ 41-25.2 Exclusions.
   Section
41-25.1 shall not apply to bona fide visitors, whether residents of the State
of Hawaii or tourists, who may go into public school buildings or upon public
school grounds for the purpose of observing or inspecting the same or to any
school teacher or other person in the State department of education, on the
island of Oahu.
(Sec. 13-5.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 32, § 41-32.2)
§ 41-25.3 Presence considered prima facie case of violation.
   A prima facie case of a violation of this article shall be established upon
the showing that any person charged with the violation of the section was
found, seen, or arrested in any public school buildings or upon public school
grounds in the city. Upon such showing, the burden of proof shall be upon the
accused to show such person’s lawful business or excuse for going or being in
any public school building or upon any public school grounds in the city.
(Sec. 13-5.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 32, § 41-32.3)
§ 41-25.4 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$100.
(Sec. 13-5.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 32, § 41-32.4)
ARTICLE 26: REGULATED USE OF UNIFORMS BY PRIVATE SECURITY PERSONNEL
Sections
   
41-26.1   Legislative intent
   
41-26.2   Definition
   
41-26.3   Uniforms
   
41-26.4   Prohibition
   
41-26.5   Exceptions
   
41-26.6   Penalty
§ 41-26.1 Legislative intent.
   It is declared to be the legislative intent of the council to regulate the
uniforms of private security personnel not covered under HRS Chapter 463 by
establishing certain standards for their appearance.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 33, § 41-33.1) (Added by Ord. 92-133)
§ 41-26.2 Definition.
   The term “private security personnel” means any uniformed persons
responsible for the safekeeping of an employer’s property and persons thereon,
and for observation and reporting relative to such safekeeping.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 33, § 41-33.2) (Added by Ord. 92-133)
§ 41-26.3 Uniforms.
(a)   The uniforms worn by private security personnel must be of two or more
different and contrasting colors or two or more different shades of the same
color or of one solid color that does not resemble the color of the uniform
worn by officers of the Honolulu police department. Each uniform shall be
approved by the chief of police and a color photograph of each uniform shall be
filed with the Honolulu police department.
(b)   No badges or other metallic objects that closely resemble the badge of
the Honolulu police department shall be worn on the uniform or any outer
garment covering the upper body.
(c)   If any outer garment covers the upper part or top of the uniform, a white
plaque bearing the word “SECURITY” in letters at least 1-inch high shall be
worn on the left breast area of that garment and the word “SECURITY” in letters
at least 3 inches high shall be worn on the back area of that garment.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 33, § 41-33.3) (Added by Ord. 92-133)
§ 41-26.4 Prohibition.
(a)   No person shall wear a private security uniform that violates the
requirements of §
41-26.3.
(b)   No person shall instruct or authorize another to wear a private security
uniform that violates the requirements of §
41-26.3.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 33, § 41-33.4) (Added by Ord. 92-133)
§ 41-26.5 Exceptions.
   These restrictions shall not apply to the following: government security
personnel; private security personnel who are regulated by the State board of
private detectives and guards; and private security personnel who are not
uniformed.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 33, § 41-33.5) (Added by Ord. 92-133)
§ 41-26.6 Penalty.
   Any corporation, unincorporated association, or member thereof convicted of
a violation of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or
by imprisonment not exceeding one year or both.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 33, § 41-33.6) (Added by Ord. 92-133)
ARTICLE 27: POSSESSION, USE, AND SALE OF PEPPER SPRAYS FOR SELF-DEFENSE
Sections
   
41-27.1   Definitions
   
41-27.2   Exceptions
   
41-27.3   Restrictions on possession, sale, and use of pepper sprays
   
41-27.4   License to distribute—Application and requirements
   
41-27.5   Conditions of license
   
41-27.6   Suspension or revocation of license
   
41-27.7   Forfeiture
   
41-27.8   Rules
   
41-27.9   Violation—Penalty
§ 41-27.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Adult. Any natural person other than a minor.
Chemical Device. Any aerosol container or other device that is capable of
emitting chloroacetaphenone (CN), orthochlorobenzalmalononitrile (CS), or
oleoresin capsicum (OC), or any combination or derivative thereof, in a vapor
or liquid form.
Chief of Police. The chief of police of the City and County of Honolulu or the
chief of police’s authorized subordinate.
Controlled Substance. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 329-1.
Department. The Honolulu police department.
Designated Place of Business. A fixed place of business owned or leased by a
licensee and designated by the licensee in its application under §
41-27.4 as a place where it desires to sell or otherwise distribute pepper
spray on a regular basis. “Designated place of business” does not include any
temporary space rented or leased by a licensee at a swap meet, open market, or
other similar setting.
Licensee. Any person who has obtained, pursuant to §
41-27.4, a license to sell, transport, or otherwise distribute pepper sprays in
the city.
Minor. Any natural person below the age of 18 years.
Pepper Spray. Any aerosol container or other device designed to fit into a
handbag or a pants pocket and has a trigger-guard, flip top, or other mechanism
to prevent the accidental release of the spray, that:
(1)   Is capable of emitting oleoresin capsicum (OC), or any derivative
thereof, in a vapor or liquid form;
(2)   Contains only the chemical substance oleoresin capsicum, or any
derivative thereof, without containing chloroacetaphenone (CN) or
orthochlorobenzalmalononitrile (CS); and
(3)   Contains a nonflammable propellant or carrier, or both.
Person. Has the same meaning as defined in §
40-1.1.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 37, § 41-37.1) (Added by Ord. 95-49)
§ 41-27.2 Exceptions.
   This article shall not apply to persons authorized under §§
41-12.4 and
41-12.7 to possess, use, sell, transport, or otherwise distribute chemical
devices in the city; provided that the persons possess, use, sell, transport,
or otherwise distribute the chemical devices while acting in their capacities
as employees of the city, of private security agencies, and of other
organizations, or as licensed vendors, all in accordance with
Chapter 41, Article 12.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 37, § 41-37.2) (Added by Ord. 95-49)
§ 41-27.3 Restrictions on possession, sale, and use of pepper sprays.
(a)   It is unlawful for any person to use any pepper spray for any purpose,
except:
(1)   Self-defense;
(2)   Defense of another person; or
(3)   Protection of property of the person or of another person.
(b)   It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any pepper spray
in the city without a license obtained pursuant to §
41-27.4.
(c)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, or otherwise
furnish any pepper spray to a minor in the city.
(d)   It is unlawful for a minor to purchase, possess, or use any pepper spray
in the city.
(e)   It is unlawful to sell or offer for sale any pepper spray on premises
where liquor or alcoholic beverages are consumed.
(f)   It is unlawful for any person to alter the manufacturer’s name on any
pepper spray to be carried or used in the city.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 37, § 41-37.3) (Added by Ord. 95-49)
§ 41-27.4 License to distribute—Application and requirements.
(a)   Any person desiring to sell or offer for sale any pepper spray in the
city may apply for a license using forms prescribed by the director of budget
and fiscal services. The application shall set forth the name and location of
the principal place of business of the licensee and, if applicable, each
additional designated place of business at which the licensee desires to sell
pepper spray on a regular basis.
(b)   Upon receipt of the completed form and the fee established in subsection
(f), the director of budget and fiscal services shall issue a license and, if
requested, certified copies thereof to the applicant.
(c)   Before making a sale of or otherwise distributing pepper spray, the
licensee shall provide a point-of-sale briefing that includes but is not
limited to the following:
(1)   The proper and safe use of the spray;
(2)   The shelf life of the spray;
(3)   The proper disposal of the spray;
(4)   First-aid or medical remedies for people who come in contact with the
spray; and
(5)   Current information regarding the effectiveness and limitations of the
spray.
After giving the briefing, and before the sale or distribution of the pepper
spray, the licensee shall obtain a signed acknowledgement from the purchaser or
other recipient acknowledging that they have received the briefing. The
acknowledgement shall be on a form provided by the department of budget and
fiscal services or a copy thereof.
(d)   The license or a certified copy thereof shall be posted at each
designated place of business during any hours when pepper spray is being sold
or offered for sale.
(e)   No license shall be issued to a minor.
(f)   The annual fee for a license under this section shall be $25 for the
principal place of business of the licensee and shall be $25 for each
additional designated place of business of the licensee, which shall be payable
to the director of budget and fiscal services. The license shall be provided by
the director of budget and fiscal services for the principal place of business
and, if applicable, a certified copy of the license shall be provided for each
additional designated place of business.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 37, § 41-37.4) (Added by Ord. 95-49; Am. Ord. 96-77)
§ 41-27.5 Conditions of license.
(a)   The licensee’s books and records for the licensee’s inventory shall be
subject to inspection by the department at reasonable times during normal
business hours. In addition to the records required to be kept under subsection
(b), the licensee shall keep a record of the licensee’s purchases, sales, and
other acquisitions and distributions of pepper sprays, as well as a record of
the licensee’s current inventory of pepper sprays.
(b)   The licensee shall keep records of pepper sprays sold or otherwise
distributed by the licensee in the city for a minimum of five years from the
date of sale or other distribution. The records kept shall include:
(1)   The recipient’s name, date of birth, and address;
(2)   The quantity and description of the pepper spray distributed, including
the name of the manufacturer;
(3)   If applicable, the business name, address, telephone number, and the
pepper spray license number of the purchaser;
(4)   The date and time of transaction;
(5)   Information as to whether the transaction was a sale, gift, or other
transaction; and
(6)   Signed acknowledgement forms required, pursuant to §
41-27.4(c), of a purchaser or recipient of pepper spray.
(c)   When displaying or storing pepper sprays at a designated place of
business, the licensee shall display or store the pepper sprays at a location
that is not within the reach of the general public and shall make a sale of
pepper spray only upon request and only to an adult.
(d)   The licensee or an adult employee of the licensee shall be present during
all hours of operation of each designated place of business of the licensee;
provided that if the pepper spray is in a locked cabinet inaccessible to minor
employees, no adult employee need be present at the place of business.
(e)   The licensee shall be responsible for the legal sale, distribution, and
proper storage of any pepper spray under the licensee’s control or at any one
of the licensee’s designated place of business.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 37, § 41-37.5) (Added by Ord. 95-49; Am. Ord. 96-77)
§ 41-27.6 Suspension or revocation of license.
   If the department has probable cause to believe that a licensee has violated
any provision of this article, the license may be suspended by the director of
budget and fiscal services. If the licensee is not convicted, then the director
of budget and fiscal services shall remove any suspension placed on the
license. If the licensee is convicted, then the license shall be revoked by the
director of budget and fiscal services.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 37, § 41-37.6) (Added by Ord. 95-49)
§ 41-27.7 Forfeiture.
   Any chemical device under the ownership of or found in the possession of or
at the premises of a licensee may be subject to forfeiture to the city in
accordance with HRS Chapter 712A and if so forfeited, shall be destroyed or, if
not destroyed, transferred to the chief of police for use by and under the
control of the department.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 37, § 41-37.7) (Added by Ord. 95-49)
§ 41-27.8 Rules.
   The director of budget and fiscal services and the chief of police are
authorized to adopt rules in accordance with HRS Chapter 91 necessary to
administer and enforce this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 37, § 41-37.8) (Added by Ord. 95-49)
§ 41-27.9 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by
a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or by
both. In addition to the penalties assessed under this section, upon conviction
of any licensee, any license issued under this article shall be suspended or
revoked pursuant to §
41-27.6. Each separate prohibited transaction shall be a separate violation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 37, § 41-37.9) (Added by Ord. 95-49)
ARTICLE 28: AERIAL ADVERTISING
Sections
   
41-28.1   Prohibited—Exceptions
   
41-28.2   Violation—Penalty
§ 41-28.1 Prohibited—Exceptions.
(a)   Except as allowed under subsection (b), no person shall use any type of
aircraft or other self-propelled or buoyant airborne object to display in any
manner or for any purpose any sign or advertising device. For the purpose of
this section, a “sign or advertising device” includes but is not limited to a
poster, banner, writing, picture, painting, light, model, display, emblem,
notice, illustration, insignia, symbol, or any other form of advertising sign
or device.
(b)   Exceptions.
(1)   Subsection (a) shall not prohibit the display of an identifying mark,
trade name, trade insignia, or trademark on the exterior of an aircraft or
self-propelled or buoyant airborne object if the displayed item is under the
ownership or registration of the aircraft’s or airborne object’s owner.
(2)   Subsection (a) shall not prohibit the display of a sign or advertising
device placed wholly and visible only within the interior of an aircraft or
self-propelled or buoyant airborne object.
(3)   Subsection (a) shall not apply to the display of a sign or advertising
device when placed on or attached to any ground, building, or structure and
subject to regulation under
Chapters 21,
40, or
41. Such a sign or advertising device shall be permitted, prohibited, or
otherwise regulated as provided under the applicable chapter.
(Sec. 13-32.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 6, § 40-6.1) (Am.
Ord. 96-33)
§ 41-28.2 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by
a fine not less than $25 nor more than $500, or by imprisonment not exceeding
three months, or by both.
(Sec. 13-32.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 40, Art. 6, § 40-6.2)
ARTICLE 29: VEHICULAR ADVERTISING
Sections
   
41-29.1   Definitions
   
41-29.2   Vehicular advertising prohibited
   
41-29.3   Business identification permitted
   
41-29.4   Violation—Penalty
Editor’s note:
   * The ordinance codified as this article, Ord. 79-23, was declared
unconstitutional on its face by the U.S. District Court for the District of
Hawaii in Beetleboards of America, Inc., et al., v. the City and County of
Honolulu, et al., Civil No. 79-0198, and the City and County of Honolulu and
other defendants were permanently enjoined from enforcing or attempting to
enforce Ord. 79-23, either directly or indirectly.
§ 41-29.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Business Identification Sign. Any sign, graphics, or lettering upon a vehicle,
relating to the company name, trade insignia, trademarks, products distributed,
manufactured, or sold, or services performed by the business enterprise owning
or leasing the vehicle. “Vehicular business identification sign” shall not
include any poster, banner, light, model, or any other device separately
attached to the vehicle.
Consideration. Any of the three or any combination thereof:
(1)   Any money;
(2)   Thing of value; or
(3)   Economic benefit conferred on or received by any person in return for
advertising services rendered or to be rendered.
Person. Has the same meaning as defined in §
1-4.1.
Pole Trailer. Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by
another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole,
or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily
used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads, such as pipes, poles,
or structural members capable, generally of sustaining themselves as beams
between the supporting connections.
Semitrailer. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
vehicle, whether propelled by motor or human power and so constructed that some
part of its weight, including that of its load, rests upon or is carried by
another vehicle.
Trailer. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer,
drawn by a vehicle, whether propelled by motor or human power and designed to
carry persons or property, and so constructed that no appreciable part of its
weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
Vehicle. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property, which would
include signs, is or may be transported or drawn upon a roadway or highway.
This definition shall include a vehicle, whether it is propelled by motor or
moved by human power.
(Sec. 13-37.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 14, § 41-14.1)
§ 41-29.2 Vehicular advertising prohibited.
   No person shall use a vehicle or trailer, or both, as defined herein,
whether it is in operable or nonoperable condition, to display in any manner,
on any highway, street, or private property, any advertising device for
consideration as defined herein, including but not limiting the generality of
the foregoing to any poster, banner, writing, picture, painting, light, model,
display, emblem, notice, illustration, insignia, symbol, and any other form of
advertising sign or device.
(Sec. 13-37.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 14, § 41-14.2)
§ 41-29.3 Business identification permitted.
   Nothing in this article shall prohibit the identification of a business
enterprise, as defined in §
41-29.1, upon a vehicle or trailer, or both, provided however:
(1)   The vehicle is registered in the name of the business entity; and
provided that such identification will not constitute a hazard to motorists or
will impair the operation of the vehicle; and
(2)   The vehicle or trailer, or both, is primarily used for the purpose of and
in the ordinary conduct of the business of the owner or lessee of the vehicle.
The vehicle or trailer, or both, however, cannot be used only for the purpose
of advertising. Any subterfuge of the owner or lessee of the vehicle or trailer
to promote the sale of its product, material, supplies, or services by
situating its vehicle or trailer, or both, in a strategic location on any
highway, street or private property calculated to attract the attention of
motorists or pedestrians, or both, to its advertisement in circumvention of
State and county billboard advertising or sign laws shall not be permitted
under this section.
(Sec. 13-37.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 14, § 41-14.3)
§ 41-29.4 Violation—Penalty.
(a)   Summons or citation.
(1)   There shall be provided for use by police officers, a form of summons or
citation for use in citing violators of this article which does not mandate the
physical arrest of such violators. The form and content of such summons or
citation shall be as adopted or prescribed by the administrative judge of the
district court and shall be printed on a form commensurate with the form of
other summonses or citations used in modern methods of arrest, so designed to
include all necessary information to make the same valid within the laws and
regulations of the State of Hawaii and the City and County of Honolulu.
(2)   In every case when a citation is issued, the original of the same shall
be given to the violator; provided that the administrative judge of the
district court may prescribe by giving to the violator a carbon copy of the
citation and provide for the dispositions of the original and any other copies.
(3)   Every citation shall be consecutively numbered and each carbon copy shall
bear the number of its respective original.
(b)   Penalty. Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine not less than $25 nor more than $500, or by imprisonment not
exceeding three months, or by both.
(c)   Every day any violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Sec. 13-37.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 41, Art. 14, § 41-14.4)
ARTICLE 30: DOMESTIC VIOLENCE PROGRAM
Sections
   
41-30.1   Domestic violence program
   
41-30.2   Domestic violence program policies
§ 41-30.1 Domestic violence program.
(a)   Legislative findings and declaration of intent. The council finds that
pursuant to an audit report published by the office of the city auditor
entitled Audit of How Domestic Violence Cases are Handled, Processed, and
Resolved, dated June 2017, Report No. 17-02, the handling, processing, and
investigation of domestic violence cases by the office of the prosecuting
attorney is inefficient and ineffective due in part to:
(1)   A statutory classification of domestic abuse in the presence of a family
or household member who is less than 14 years old as a felony, resulting in a
significant increase in the number of domestic abuse cases;
(2)   The lack of common definitions, processes, procedures, and reports
between the department of the prosecuting attorney and the Honolulu police
department that could facilitate data sharing and streamline monitoring and
processing of domestic violence cases; and
(3)   The absence of formal administrative processes, procedures, and policies
in the department of the prosecuting attorney governing domestic violence cases
and the department's reliance upon informal guidelines in the processing of
domestic violence cases.
(b)   Establishment of a domestic violence program. A domestic violence program
is hereby established to effectuate the expeditious and efficient processing
and investigation of domestic violence cases.
(Added by Ord. 19-11)
§ 41-30.2 Domestic violence program policies.
   A domestic violence program policy is hereby established to require the:
(1)   Use of vertical prosecution whenever possible and to minimize personnel
rotations for domestic violence cases.
(2)   Evaluation, and as appropriate, suspension of operational policies, such
as the “no drop” policy that may create artificial barriers to the effective
and efficient investigation and prosecution of domestic violence cases.
(3)   Establishment of shared access to data and information systems between
city agencies and departments that will facilitate data collection and
information transmission and sharing, and eliminate redundant systems.
(4)   Establishment of one, common data collection system that allows access to
data as needed by respective city agencies and departments to investigate and
prosecute domestic violence cases, while preserving the confidentiality and
security of the data and information.
(5)   Assessment of current policies, procedures, and processes for
administering domestic violence cases and develop updated policies, procedures,
and processes.
(6)   Promulgation of written rules that provide useful information for
managing, tracking, and accounting for domestic violence cases.
(7)   Development of domestic violence performance metrics and data between
city agencies and departments that allow the organizations to benchmark and
evaluate their performance, determine how well goals are being achieved, manage
their workload, and justify the need for resources.
(8)   Development of unified domestic violence terms, itemize the categories to
be reported under domestic violence, and provide consistent and uniform
definitions, terms, and jargon that facilitates domestic violence reporting and
communications.
(9)   Development of reporting parameters for periodic, formal, and regular
reports on domestic violence incidents that use consistent and regular
categories (such as HRS § 709-906 related incidents) that will allow for the
monitoring and tracking of the number and type of domestic violence cases. The
reports must provide reliable, complete, accurate, and consistent domestic
violence data that segregates the domestic violence categories under HRS § 709-
906 from the categories that fall under other sections of the HRS (e.g.,
attempted murder, kidnapping, and robbery).
(Added by Ord. 19-11)
ARTICLE 31: PUBLIC CARRY OF FIREARMS
Sections
   
41-31.1   Declaration of legislative intent
   
41-31.2   Definitions
   
41-31.3   Prohibition against the public carrying of a pistol or revolver
outside a residence without a license
   
41-31.4   Prohibition against the public carrying of firearms in a sensitive
location—Prohibition against carrying a firearm on a private business
establishment’s or charitable establishment’s premises without express consent
   
41-31.5   Signage
   
41-31.6   Duty to inform law enforcement upon contact
   
41-31.7   Criminal penalties
   
41-31.8   Enforcement
   
41-31.9   Severability
§ 41-31.1 Declaration of legislative intent.
   It is declared to be the intent of this article to protect sensitive areas
that have traditionally been subject to restrictions on the carrying or
possessing of firearms therein; to facilitate private decision-making on
private property; to protect health, life, and property; and to preserve the
order and security of the city, its inhabitants, and its visitors.
(Added by Ord. 23-6)
§ 41-31.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Business. Any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, business trust,
limited liability company, business corporation, professional corporation, or
other business entity formed for profit-making purposes.
Business Establishment. Includes any of the following establishments operated
by a business:
(1)   Any hotel, except individual hotel rooms and when actively traveling
through a hotel to or from an individual hotel room;
(2)   Any financial institution;
(3)   Any industrial, commercial, or wholesale establishment;
(4)   Any utility;
(5)   Any retail establishment where goods or services are sold, leased, or
otherwise provided to the public or to another business; and
(6)   Any restaurant or bar, as those terms are defined in §
41-14.1.
Carry on their Person. The person has immediate physical access to the firearm,
such as by carrying the firearm in a holster or other receptacle.
Charitable Establishment. Any organization classified under § 501(c) of the
Internal Revenue Code.
Child or Minor. A person under 18 years of age.
Child Care. Includes those situations where a person or organization has agreed
to assume and has been entrusted with the responsibility for the child’s
supervision, development, safety, and protection apart from the parent or
guardian. “Child care” includes any program or camp for children that occurs
before school hours, after school hours, and during breaks in school
instructional periods, including Summer Fun programs, A+ programs, children’s
programs of the YWCA and YMCA, and similar nonprofit and government-sponsored
programs for children.
Child Care Facility. A place maintained by any individual, organization, or
agency for the purpose of providing child care with or without charging a fee
at any time. It includes a family child care home, group child care center, and
group child care home as those terms are defined in HRS § 346-151. “Child care
facility” does not include any dwelling unit or lodging unit when not used as a
child care facility.
Detective, Private Detective, and Investigator. Have the same meanings as
defined in HRS § 463-1.
Dwelling Unit. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Firearm(s). Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 134-1.
Guard. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 463-1.
License. Any license to carry a concealed or unconcealed firearm issued by the
Honolulu police department.
Lodging Unit. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Operating Hours. Any time at which a place is open for customers or visitors,
including any time at which a place is open only for a limited number or group
of customers or visitors but otherwise closed to the general public.
Pistol or Revolver. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 134-1.
Place of Deposit. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 11-1.
Public Park. Has the same meaning as defined in §
10-1.1.
School. Includes all institutions that provide preschool, elementary,
secondary, post-secondary, technical, trade, or vocational education, including
youth challenge academies, and includes all athletic facilities, offices,
cafeterias, eating establishments, health care facilities, research facilities,
parking lots, school buses, and shared rooms and common areas of dormitories
thereof. “School” does not include a private residence at which education is
provided for children who are all related to one another by blood, marriage, or
adoption.
Sensitive Place. Within the city:
(1)   All areas within or on city-owned or -controlled buildings or offices,
excluding:
(A)   Any dwelling unit or lodging unit when not used as a child care facility;
(B)   The Koko Head Shooting Complex; and
(C)   The Neal S. Blaisdell Center or other city-owned or -controlled building
during the operating hours of an organized, scheduled firearms show or exhibit
there;
(2)   Except as otherwise provided by federal or State law, all areas within or
on buildings or offices owned or controlled by the United States or the State,
excluding any dwelling unit or lodging unit when not used as a child care
facility;
(3)   Any school or child care facility, including preschools, public schools,
parochial schools, private schools, colleges, or universities;
(4)   Public parks, excluding the Koko Head Shooting Complex, during each
park’s operating hours;
(5)   Shelters and residential facilities operated by a government entity or a
charitable establishment, including those that serve the homeless, homeless
children, developmentally disabled persons, victims of domestic violence,
children involved in the juvenile justice system, adults involved in the
criminal justice system, or persons who are similarly at-risk;
(6)   The buildings, grounds, and appurtenant parking lots of the following,
during the respective operating hours of each:
(A)   Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve;
(B)   Hawaii Children’s Discovery Center;
(C)   Honolulu Zoo; and
(D)   Waikiki Aquarium;
(7)   A voter service center, place of deposit, and its appurtenances, and an
area of 200 feet from the perimeter of any voter service center, place of
deposit, and its appurtenances, as designated by election officials pursuant to
HRS § 11-132, as follows:
(A)   As applied to a voter service center and its appurtenances, all operating
hours, as set forth in HRS § 11-109; and
(B)   As applied to a place of deposit and its appurtenances, all times at
which the place of deposit is accessible to the public;
(8)   The Alapai Transit Center, Kalihi Transit Center, rail stations,
nonsecure areas of airports, and cruise terminals, as well as vehicles used for
public transportation by air, sea, or land, including rail, TheBus, Handi-Van,
or ship;
(9)   Any business establishment licensed to dispense intoxicating liquor for
consumption on the premises;
(10)   Within 100 feet of or within the permitted boundaries of a public
gathering, demonstration, or event for which a government permit has been
obtained, during the conduct of such gathering, demonstration, or event;
provided that for parades, marathons, and other events characterized by the
movement of people from one place to another, the following are not a sensitive
place:
(A)   Fixed structures along the route, such as businesses and residences,
unless firearms are otherwise prohibited in those structures in accordance with
this article; and
(B)   Areas where participants are not present.
(11)   Theaters, stadiums, museums, and amusement parks;
(12)   A medical cannabis dispensary, as defined in HRS § 329D-1; and
(13)   Any public or private hospital, mental health facility, nursing home,
clinic, medical office, urgent care facility, or other place at which medical
or health services are customarily provided, including appurtenant parking
lots.
Sidewalk. Has the same meaning as defined in §
13-1.1.
Street. Has the same meaning as defined in §
13-1.1 provided that “street” does not include any portion of a parking lot.
Structure. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Theater. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Voter Service Center. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 11-1.
Voter Service Center, Place of Deposit, and its Appurtenances. Includes those
places included within those terms as enumerated in HRS § 11-132.
(Added by Ord. 23-6)
§ 41-31.3 Prohibition against the public carrying of a pistol or revolver
outside a residence without a license.
(a)   Prohibition. Except as otherwise provided by federal or State law, it is
a violation of this article for any person to intentionally, knowingly, or
recklessly carry on their person a pistol or revolver outside the person’s
residence without having a valid license in the person’s immediate possession
or to fail to display the license upon the demand of a law enforcement officer.
(b)   Exceptions. This prohibition does not apply to:
(1)   Persons exempted from HRS § 134-9 pursuant to HRS § 134-11; and
(2)   Qualified law enforcement officers and qualified retired law enforcement
officers pursuant to 18 USC §§ 926B and 926C who have documentation regarding
their qualifications in their immediate possession.
(Added by Ord. 23-6)
§ 41-31.4 Prohibition against the public carrying of firearms in a sensitive
location—Prohibition against carrying a firearm on a private business
establishment’s or charitable establishment’s premises without express consent.
(a)   Prohibition. Except as otherwise provided by federal or State law, it is
a violation of this article for any person to intentionally, knowingly, or
recklessly carry on their person a firearm, concealed or unconcealed, on the
premises of:
(1)   Any sensitive place; or
(2)   Any business establishment or charitable establishment unless the
business establishment or charitable establishment, or an agent thereof, has
expressly consented thereto. For the purposes of this subsection, signage must
be in accordance with the requirements specified in §
41-31.5.
For the purposes of this section, “the premises of any business establishment
or charitable establishment” includes all appurtenant grounds and parking lots
of the business establishment or charitable establishment, but does not include
privately owned or maintained streets or sidewalks.
(b)   Exceptions. This section does not apply to:
(1)   Persons exempted from HRS § 134-9 pursuant to HRS § 134-11;
(2)   Detectives, private detectives, investigators, and guards, authorized by
the chief of police to carry a firearm in a particular sensitive place, while
on duty, in that sensitive place or on the premises of a business establishment
or charitable establishment with the authorization of the owner of the
premises;
(3)   Any person who has a valid license to carry on their person a pistol or
revolver outside the person’s residence, or is exempted in accordance with §
41-31.3(b), and who is in the act of:
(A)   Transporting a concealed firearm within a vehicle into or out of a
parking area in a location covered under subsection (a); provided that the
firearm is secured in a locked container;
(B)   Transporting a concealed firearm in the immediate area surrounding their
vehicle within a prohibited parking lot area only for the purpose of storing or
retrieving the firearm within a locked container in the vehicle’s trunk or
other place inside the vehicle that is out of plain view;
(C)   Traveling along a public right-of-way that touches or crosses any of the
locations identified in subsection (a), if the concealed firearm is carried on
their person or is being transported in a vehicle by the licensee in accordance
with all other applicable laws; provided that nothing in this exception allows
a licensee to loiter or remain in a sensitive place longer than necessary to
complete their travel; or
(D)   Walking through or within 100 feet of a public gathering, demonstration,
or event for which a government permit is obtained in order to access a place
where firearms are allowed or their residence, place of business, or vehicle,
while the licensee is in the act of walking through the gathering,
demonstration, or event to access a place where firearms are allowed or their
residence, place of business, or vehicle; provided that nothing in this
exception allows a licensee to loiter or remain in a place longer than
necessary to complete their travel or business; and
(4)   Public gatherings, demonstrations, or events for which a government
permit is obtained, if the permit allows the carrying of a firearm, concealed
or unconcealed, during the conduct of the gathering, demonstration, or event.
(c)   Leased Premises. The landlord of a nonresidential property may, but need
not, delegate authority by contractual provision to a lessee operating a
business establishment or a charitable establishment to expressly consent to:
(1)   The carrying of firearms concealed or unconcealed by licensed persons
generally; or
(2)   The carrying of firearms by licensed detectives, private detectives,
investigators, or guards;
on the leased premises.
(Added by Ord. 23-6)
§ 41-31.5 Signage.
(a)   Signage must be posted at a business establishment or charitable
establishment to allow or prohibit the carry of firearms when the sign would
indicate a permission or prohibition that is different from the default
provisions of this article or applicable State law. Signage is not required at
a business establishment or charitable establishment to indicate a permission
or prohibition that is consistent with the default provisions of this article
or applicable State law, but any posted signage must be consistent with the
requirements of this section.
(b)   Signage posted pursuant to subsection (a) must be posted as follows:
For express consent:
(1)   Where the premises has a physical door, the sign must:
(A)   Be clearly legible from outside the door;
(B)   Be at least 8.5 inches wide by 11 inches tall in size;
(C)   Contain the phrase “GUNS ALLOWED,” where “GUNS” is in black 1-inch tall
or taller uppercase type and “ALLOWED” is in red 1-inch tall or taller
uppercase type, located at the bottom of the sign and centered between the
lateral edges of the sign;
(D)   Contain a black silhouette of a handgun inside a black-outlined circle on
a white background; and
(E)   Be placed not less than 40 inches and not more than 60 inches from the
bottom of the premises’ entrance door.
(2)   Where the premises does not have a physical door, the sign must:
(A)   Be at least 18 inches wide by 24 inches tall in size;
(B)   Contain the phrase “GUNS ALLOWED,” where “GUNS” is in black 1.5-inch tall
or taller uppercase type and “ALLOWED” is in red 1.5-inch tall or taller
uppercase type, located at the bottom of the sign and centered between the
lateral edges of the sign;
(C)   Contain a black silhouette of a handgun inside a black-outlined circle on
a white background;
(D)   Be placed not less than 40 inches and not more than 70 inches above the
ground; and
(E)   Be posted in sufficient quantities to be clearly legible from any point
of entry onto the premises.
For express prohibition.
(1)   Where the premises has a physical door, the sign must:
(A)   Be clearly legible from outside the door;
(B)   Be at least 8.5 inches wide by 11 inches tall in size;
(C)   Contain the phrase “GUNS NOT ALLOWED,” where “GUNS” and “ALLOWED” are in
black 1-inch tall or taller uppercase type and “NOT” is in red 1-inch tall or
taller uppercase type, located at the bottom of the sign and centered between
the lateral edges of the sign;
(D)   Contain a black silhouette of a handgun inside a red-outlined circle with
a diagonal red bar across the handgun; and
(E)   Be placed not less than 40 inches and not more than 60 inches from the
bottom of the premises’ entrance door.
(2)   Where the premises does not have a physical door, the sign must:
(A)   Be at least 18 inches wide by 24 inches tall in size;
(B)   Contain the phrase “GUNS NOT ALLOWED,” where “GUNS” and “ALLOWED” are in
black 1.5-inch tall or taller uppercase type and “NOT” is in red 1.5-inch tall
or taller uppercase type, located at the bottom of the sign and centered
between the lateral edges of the sign;
(C)   Contain a black silhouette of a handgun inside a red-outlined circle with
a diagonal red bar across the handgun;
(D)   Be placed not less than 40 inches and not more than 70 inches above the
ground; and
(E)   Be posted in sufficient quantities to be clearly legible from any point
of entry onto the premises.
(c)   All signs that meet the requirements of this section will be considered
public signs under §
21-7.20.
(Added by Ord. 23-6)
§ 41-31.6 Duty to inform law enforcement upon contact.
   A person granted a license to carry a concealed or unconcealed firearm and
who is in possession of or carrying their licensed firearm when contacted by a
law enforcement officer, shall immediately inform the law enforcement officer
that the person is in possession of or carrying their licensed firearm, and
shall present the license to the law enforcement officer.
(Added by Ord. 23-6)
§ 41-31.7 Criminal penalties.
(a)   Any person violating this article is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(b)   A law enforcement officer may arrest an alleged violator of this article
or may issue a citation in lieu of arrest, as provided in HRS § 803-6.
(c)   In any prosecution, it is an affirmative defense that the person was
exempt from the prohibition in §
41-31.4(a) pursuant to §
41-31.4(b).
(Added by Ord. 23-6)
§ 41-31.8 Enforcement.
(a)   The presence of a person at any sensitive place is prima facie evidence
that the person knows it is a sensitive place.
(b)   The presence of a person on the premises of any business establishment or
charitable establishment is prima facie evidence that the person knows it is
the premises of a business establishment or charitable establishment.
(c)   The failure of a person to have a valid license in the person’s immediate
possession while carrying on their person a pistol or revolver outside the
person’s residence is prima facie evidence that the person knows the person is
carrying the pistol or revolver in public without possession of the person’s
license.
(d)   The failure of a person to display the person’s license upon the demand
of a law enforcement officer while carrying on their person a pistol or
revolver outside the person’s residence is prima facie evidence that the person
has knowingly, intentionally, and recklessly failed to display the license.
(Added by Ord. 23-6)
§ 41-31.9 Severability.
   Every provision in this article and every application of the provisions in
this article is severable from each other as a matter of law. If any provision
of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is
held invalid, such invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications
of this article that may be given effect without the invalid provision or
application. This article must be construed to be enforceable up to, but no
further than, the maximum possible extent consistent with federal and State
law.
(Added by Ord. 23-6)
ARTICLE 32: PROHIBITION OF FLAVORED TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Sections
   
41-32.1   Definitions
   
41-32.2   Prohibition
   
41-32.3   Administrative penalty
   
41-32.4   Severability
Editor’s note:
   *In accordance with Ordinance 23-28: Chapter 41, Article 32 takes effect 42
days after the day on which the State of Hawaii preemption of county ordinances
on the sale of tobacco products is officially repealed or suspended. If the
42nd day after the day of the repeal or suspension of the preemption occurs on
a weekend or holiday, then this article takes effect on the next business day
following the 42nd day. Upon the effective date of this article, the
Corporation Counsel is directed to notify the City Council, the Mayor, and the
Managing Director. Once such notification is received, the City Clerk is
directed to post the effective date of Ordinance 23-28 on the City and County
of Honolulu’s official website and other public notice platforms.
§ 41-32.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
E-Liquid or Electronic Liquid. Any liquid or like substance, which may or may
not contain nicotine, that is designed or intended to be used in an electronic
smoking device, whether or not packaged in a cartridge or other container. The
term does not include prescription drugs; cannabis for medical use pursuant to
HRS Chapter 329 or manufactured cannabis products pursuant to HRS Chapter 329D;
or medical devices used to aerosolize, inhale, or ingest prescription drugs,
including manufactured cannabis products manufactured or distributed in
accordance with HRS § 329D-10(a).
Electronic Smoking Device. Any device that may be used to deliver any
aerosolized or vaporized substance to the person inhaling from the device,
including but not limited to an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic pipe, vape pen, or electronic hookah. The term includes any
component, part, or accessory of the device, and also includes any e-liquid
that may be aerosolized or vaporized by such device, whether or not the
substance contains nicotine. The term does not include drugs, devices, or
combination products approved for sale by the United States Food and Drug
Administration, as those terms are defined in the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act.
Flavored Tobacco Product. Any tobacco product that imparts:
(1)   A taste or smell, or both, other than the taste or smell of tobacco, that
is distinguishable by an ordinary consumer either prior to or during the
consumption of a tobacco product, including but not limited to any taste or
smell relating to fruit, menthol, mint, wintergreen, chocolate, cocoa, vanilla,
honey, molasses, or any candy, dessert, alcoholic beverage, herb, or spice; or
(2)   A cooling or numbing sensation distinguishable by an ordinary consumer
during the consumption of such tobacco product.
Hookah. A type of waterpipe, used to smoke shisha tobacco products, with a long
flexible tube for drawing aerosol through water. Components of a hookah may
include heads, stems, bowls, and hoses. This term does not include an e-hookah
or other electronic smoking devices.
Labeling. Written, printed, pictorial, or graphic matter upon a tobacco product
or any of its packaging.
Loose Leaf Tobacco. Cut or shredded pipe tobacco, usually sold in pouches,
excluding any tobacco product that, because of its appearance, type, packaging,
or labeling, is suitable for use and likely to be offered to, or purchased by,
consumers as tobacco for making cigarettes, including roll-your-own cigarettes.
Packaging. A pack, box, carton, or container of any kind, or if no other
container, any wrapping, including cellophane, in which a tobacco product is
sold or offered for sale to a consumer.
Premium Cigar. Any cigar that is handmade, is not mass produced by use of
mechanization, has a wrapper that is made entirely from whole tobacco leaf, has
a wholesale price of $6 or more, and weighs more than 4 pounds per 1,000
cigars. A premium cigar does not have a filter, tip, or non-tobacco mouthpiece
and is capped by hand.
Retailer. An entity that sells, offers for sale, or exchanges or offers to
exchange tobacco products to consumers for any form of consideration. The term
includes an owner or agent of a tobacco retail location.
Shisha Tobacco Product. A tobacco product smoked or intended to be smoked in a
hookah. The term includes, and may be referred to as, hookah tobacco, waterpipe
tobacco, maassel, narghile, and argileh. The term does not include any
electronic devices, such as an electronic hookah, electronic cigarette, or
electronic tobacco product.
Tobacco Product. Any nicotine product and any product made or derived from
tobacco that contains nicotine or other substances and is intended for human
consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed,
dissolved, inhaled, absorbed, or ingested by any other means, including but not
limited to a cigarette, cigar, chewing tobacco, snuff, snus, any electronic
smoking device and any e-liquid that may be aerosolized or vaporized by such
device, whether or not the substance contains nicotine, and any component,
part, or accessory of a cigarette,  cigar, chewing tobacco, snuff, snus, or
electronic smoking device, whether or not any of these contains tobacco or
nicotine, including but not limited to filters, rolling papers, blunt or hemp
wraps, or flavor enhancers. The term does not include drugs, devices, or
combination products approved for sale by the United States Food and Drug
Administration, as those terms are defined in the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act.
Tobacco Retail Location. Any premises where tobacco products are sold or
distributed to a consumer, including but not limited to any store, bar, lounge,
café, stand, outlet, vehicle, cart, location, vending machine, or structure.
(Added by Ord. 23-28)
§ 41-32.2 Prohibition.
(a)   It is unlawful for any retailer to:
(1)   Sell or offer for sale a flavored tobacco product;
(2)   Display, market, or advertise for sale in the city a flavored tobacco
product; or
(3)   Mislabel as nicotine-free, or sell or market for sale as nicotine-free,
an e-liquid product that contains nicotine.
(b)   Presumption of flavor. Any communication by or on behalf of the
manufacturer or retailer of a tobacco product that such tobacco product imparts
a taste or odor other than the taste or odor of tobacco, or that imparts a
cooling or numbing sensation, constitutes presumptive evidence that the tobacco
product is a flavored tobacco product. There is a rebuttable presumption that a
tobacco product is a flavored tobacco product if a tobacco retailer,
manufacturer, or any employee or agent of a tobacco retailer or manufacturer:
(1)   Has made or makes a public statement or claim that the tobacco product is
a flavored tobacco product;
(2)   Has used or uses text or images, or both, on the tobacco product’s
labeling or packaging to explicitly or implicitly indicate that the tobacco
product has a flavor other than tobacco, to make a public statement or claim
that the tobacco product is a flavored tobacco product;
(3)   Has taken or takes action directed at consumers that would be reasonably
expected to cause consumers to believe the tobacco product is a flavored
tobacco product; or
(4)   Has made or makes a public statement or claim that a product has a minty
or cooling effect, such as describing the product as “chill,” “ice,” “fresh,”
“arctic,” or “frost.”
(c)   Any flavored tobacco product found in a retailer’s possession that
violates this section may be considered contraband, seized by an inspector, or
subject to immediate destruction or disposal by the retailer in accordance with
the Hawaii Administrative Rules. The cost of proper disposal of electronic
smoking devices and e-liquids as hazardous waste pursuant to the Hawaii
Administrative Rules must be borne by the retailer.
(d)   Exceptions. This section does not apply to the sale, display, marketing,
or advertisement of:
(1)   Premium cigars;
(2)   Looseleaf tobacco; and
(3)   Only shisha tobacco products that are sold in retail tobacco stores as
defined in HRS § 328J-1.
(Added by Ord. 23-28)
§ 41-32.3 Administrative penalty.
   Any retailer found to have violated this article shall be subject to the
following, after reasonable notice and an opportunity for a hearing:
(1)   For the initial violation.
(A)   The retailer is responsible to pay an administrative fine of $1,000; and
(B)   The retailer is responsible to pay an administrative fine of $2,000 for
each day in which the violation persists beyond the date of the initial
violation.
(2)   For a recurring violation.
(A)   The retailer is responsible to pay an administrative fine of $2,000; and
(B)   The retailer is responsible to pay an administrative fine of $5,000 for
each day in which the violation persists beyond the date of the recurring
violation.
(Added by Ord. 23-28)
§ 41-32.4 Severability.
   If any provision of this article or its application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity does not affect the validity or
enforceability of the remaining provisions, or their application to other
persons or circumstances. The remaining provisions will be given effect to the
maximum extent possible.
(Added by Ord. 23-28)
ARTICLE 33: GAMBLING-RELATED PUBLIC NUISANCES
Sections
   
41-33.1   Definitions
   
41-33.2   Interagency cooperation
§ 41-33.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Chief of Police. The chief of police of the city or the chief’s authorized
subordinates.
Director. The director of planning and permitting or the director’s authorized
subordinates.
Gambling-Related Public Nuisance. A public nuisance as defined under HRS
Chapter 712, Part V, that involves activities related to gambling offenses
prohibited under HRS Chapter 712, Part III.
(Added by Ord. 25-29)
§ 41-33.2 Interagency cooperation.
(a)   The director and the chief of police shall cooperate in the provision of
notices, referrals, and assistance to ensure code enforcement of gambling-
related public nuisances.
(b)   The director and the chief of police are authorized to adopt rules
pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 or enter into a memorandum of agreement between the
department of planning and permitting and the Honolulu police department for
the purposes of implementing this section.
(Added by Ord. 25-29)
ARTICLE 34: AGENT’S INSPECTION OF PRIVATE REAL PROPERTY
Sections
   
41-34.1   Definitions
   
41-34.2   Inspection of private property by a police officer for nuisance
   
41-34.3   Powers of the chief of police to share information
   
41-34.4   Rules
   
41-34.5   Annual report
§ 41-34.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Chief of Police. The chief of police of the Honolulu police department or the
chief’s designee.
Department. The Honolulu police department.
Department Information. Any data, records, reports, or details collected,
maintained, or disseminated by the department in the course of its duties.
Landlord. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 521-8.
Owner. Has the same meaning as defined in §
8-6.3(c).
Police Officer. Any police officer of the department.
Premises. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 708-800.
Private Property or Property. Any real property, including but not limited to
buildings, structures, yards, open spaces, walkways, courtyards, driveways,
carports, parking areas, and vacant lots owned by any person or legal entity
other than property owned or lawfully possessed by any governmental entity or
agency.
Public Nuisance Related to Public Health and Morals or Nuisance. A building,
premises, or a place used for offenses prohibited under HRS Chapter 712, Part
I, Part II, or Part III, not including social gambling as defined in HRS § 712-
1231(a), and Part IV.
Real Property Interest Holder. Any individual or entity that has a recognized
legal right or claim to real property, including but not limited to owners,
landlords, tenants, mortgagor’s insurer, leasehold, or easement rights.
Rental Agreement. All agreements, written or oral, that establish or modify the
terms, conditions, rules, regulations, or any other provisions concerning the
use and occupancy of a private property or property.
Right to Inspect. An owner or landlord of private property’s right to access,
enter, or inspect the private property as provided by the lease, rental
agreement, or HRS Chapter 521.
(Added by Ord. 25-30)
§ 41-34.2 Inspection of private property by a police officer for nuisance.
(a)   Authority. An owner or landlord of private property with the right to
inspect may request the department to escort the owner or landlord during the
inspection of the property for nuisance, pursuant to the terms of the rental
agreement. The request must be submitted to the department by the owner or
landlord in writing. The chief of police may approve or deny the request. If
the request is approved by the chief of police, a police officer may escort the
owner or landlord to inspect the property as provided by the right to inspect
in accordance with subsection (c).
(b)   Request form. The request must be sworn on a form provided by the
department that includes:
(1)   The address of the private property;
(2)   The name of the lessee, tenant, or renter;
(3)   A copy of the current lease or rental agreement of the private property,
or a statement that the current lease or rental agreement is oral;
(4)   A statement of the need for police support with regard to the private
property and, based on the information and belief of the owner or landlord, a
description of the nature of the nuisance that has occurred or that may be
occurring on the property; and
(5)   A request that a police officer be allowed to enter the property with the
owner or landlord.
(c)   Inspection supported by police officer. A police officer authorized to
escort the owner or landlord pursuant to a request granted under subsection (a)
may escort the owner or landlord during the inspection of the real property;
provided that the inspection complies with the lease, rental agreement, or HRS
Chapter 521. The lessee or renter may withhold consent as provided in the
lease, rental agreement, or HRS Chapter 521.
(d)   Powers of police officer on inspection.  In conducting an inspection
authorized under this article, the police officer may:
(1)   At the owner’s or landlord’s request, warn persons not specifically
authorized to be present in the lease or rental agreement to leave and not
return pursuant to HRS § 708-814; and
(2)   Document any violations of law, unsafe conditions, or violations of the
lease or rental agreement.
(e)   Limitations. Nothing in the section will be interpreted to limit
preexisting law enforcement powers.
(f)   Records. All designations approved under subsection (a) must be retained
by the department for at least _ years.
(Added by Ord. 25-30)
§ 41-34.3 Powers of the chief of police to share information.
(a)   Authority. The chief of police may provide department information
regarding a nuisance to a real property interest holder in the premises.
(b)   Scope. The chief of police must determine that providing department
information will assist a real property interest holder in private action to
decrease the nuisance and will not compromise any department investigations.
(c)   Redaction. Personal data that could compromise an individual’s privacy or
safety must only be disclosed in accordance with applicable privacy laws and
must be redacted whenever possible.
(d)   Restrictions.  Any sharing of department information must comply with
federal, State, and local laws.
(Added by Ord. 25-30)
§ 41-34.4 Rules.
   The chief of police shall adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 for the
implementation, administration, and enforcement of this article.
(Added by Ord. 25-30)
§ 41-34.5 Annual report.
   Not later than January _ of each year, the chief of police shall submit to
the council a report providing information for the preceding calendar year
regarding the implementation of this article, which at a minimum must include:
the number of requests under §
41-34.2(a) that were received by the department; the number of those requests
approved by the department; the number of inspections executed by police
officers pursuant to §
41-34.2(b); and the outcome of each inspection.
(Added by Ord. 25-30)
CHAPTER 42: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF REFUSE
Articles
   
1.   General Provisions
   
2.   Collection License
   
3.   Regulations Applicable to Businesses, Private Dwellings, and Government
Facilities
   
4.   Collection and Disposal Charges
   
5.   Enforcement of Provisions
   
6.   Procedure on Arrest
   
7.   Recycling of Glass Containers
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections
   
42-1.1   Findings—Determinations—Goals
   
42-1.2   Definitions
   
42-1.3   Collection of refuse and recyclable materials by the division
   
42-1.4   Preparation and placement of refuse and recyclable materials by owner
   
42-1.5   Limitations to collection by refuse crews
   
42-1.6   Disturbing receptacles prohibited
   
42-1.7   Acceptable and nonacceptable refuse at disposal facilities
   
42-1.8   Removal of dead animals
   
42-1.9   Office of recycling coordinator established—Duties
   
42-1.10   Prohibited activities
   
42-1.11   Mandatory recycling program for city government
   
42-1.12   Islandwide curbside recycling program
   
42-1.13   Preparation of integrated solid waste management plan
   
42-1.14   Timetable for conversion of waste to energy
   
42-1.15   Charge for damage to carts
§ 42-1.1 Findings—Determinations—Goals.
(a)   The council of the City and County of Honolulu (the “city”) makes the
findings and determinations set forth in this section.
(1)   The council has heretofore determined it to be in the best interest of
the city and necessary for the health and safety of the residents of the city
to provide for environmentally sound disposal of solid waste generated and
collected in the city.
(2)   Pursuant to HRS § 340A-3, the council enacted Ordinance 79-32 to amend
this chapter, among other things, to provide that the chief of the refuse
division of the department of environmental services may require all solid
waste, whether transported by the division, licensed collectors, businesses, or
individuals, to be disposed of at disposal facilities (as defined in this
chapter) or in areas designated by such person if it is found to be in the best
public interest.
(3)   In furtherance of the determination and the implementation of the powers
granted in this chapter, it is in the best interest of the city and its
residents to further amend this chapter to redefine certain terms and to define
certain additional terms and to authorize the designation of facilities as a
part of a disposal system of the city for the processing and disposal of solid
waste generated in the city and to prescribe procedures for the enforcement of
the powers granted to the chief.
(4)   To provide for the environmentally sound and systematic disposal of solid
waste generated in the city, it is in the best interest and necessary for the
health and safety of the residents of the city to create a citywide disposal
system for processing and disposal of solid waste generated in the city and for
the director of environmental services to designate from time to time the
disposal facilities or private disposal facilities constituting a part of such
system and the methods for such processing and disposal.
(5)   To permit reusable materials to be recovered from solid waste, to achieve
the solid waste volumes necessary to meet the minimum operating requirements of
the Honolulu resource recovery facility hereinafter defined and to lessen the
demand for landfill sites in the city, it is in the best public interest of the
city and its residents for the director of the department of environmental
services to designate a particular solid waste processing disposal and resource
recovery and electric generating facility of the city to be constructed at the
Campbell Industrial Park (hereinafter defined as the “H-POWER project”) as a
part of the disposal system to be created pursuant to this chapter.
(6)   It is in the best interest of the city and its residents to approve the
form and the terms, provisions, and conditions of a contract for waste
processing and disposal services (the “disposal contract”) between the city and
Honolulu Resource Recovery Venture, a Hawaii general partnership, as
contractor, pursuant to and under authority of HRS § 46-85, and to approve the
execution and delivery thereof by the appropriate officials of the city.
(b)   (1)   In addition to the findings and determinations made under this
section, the council establishes the following goals:
(A)   By the end of 2007, at least 65 percent of the solid waste generated
within the city be recycled, reused, composted, used for the generation of
power, fuel, or electricity through a waste-to-energy or other alternative
technology facility, or otherwise diverted from placement in a landfill;
(B)   By the end of 2010, at least 75 percent of the solid waste generated
within the city be recycled, reused, composted, used for the generation of
power, fuel, or electricity through a waste-to-energy or other alternative
technology facility, or otherwise diverted from placement in a landfill; and
(C)   By the end of 2015, at least 90 percent of the solid waste generated
within the city be recycled, reused, composted, used for the generation of
power, fuel or electricity through a waste-to-energy or other alternative
technology facility, or otherwise diverted from placement in a landfill.
(2)   The percentage goals in this subsection shall be reviewed annually by the
department of environmental services, which shall recommend to the council any
necessary revisions. For the purpose of these goals, “solid waste” includes
source separated waste generated in the city, but not introduced into the
disposal system.
(Sec. 9-1.0, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, §
9-1.1) (Am. Ords. 89-114, 99-32, 06-40)
§ 42-1.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Agricultural Solid Waste. The solid waste that results from the rearing of
animals and the harvesting of crops.
Association of Apartment Owners. All of the apartment owners of a multi-unit
residential building acting as a group in accordance with the bylaws and
declaration.
Automated Collection. Refuse collection service using a city-provided refuse
receptacle (cart) that requires no manual moving and no manual lifting by city
personnel.
Business. Any individual proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association,
joint venture, or project operated, which carries on commercial or industrial
activity for gain or profit, including any hotel or hotel-apartment.
Chief. The chief of the refuse division of the department of environmental
services of the City and County of Honolulu.
Commercial Cooking Oil Waste. Has the same meaning as defined in §
43-5A.1.
Commercial FOG Waste. Has the same meaning as defined in §
43-5A.1.
Days. Calendar days, including weekends and holidays, unless otherwise
indicated.
Department. The department of environmental services of the City and County of
Honolulu.
Director. The director of the department of environmental services of the City
and County of Honolulu.
Director of Budget and Fiscal Services. The director of budget and fiscal
services of the City and County of Honolulu.
Director of Customer Services. The director of customer services of the City
and County of Honolulu.
Disposal Facilities. All the facilities controlled by the city for the disposal
of solid waste, including but not limited to incinerators, composting plants,
landfills, shredding plants, transfer stations, convenience centers, and
resource recovery facilities.
Disposal System. The citywide system for processing and disposing of solid
waste generated in the city and consisting of disposal facilities or private
disposal facilities, or a combination thereof, or methods designated by the
director from time to time for processing and disposing of solid waste in the
city and declared to constitute a part of the city’s system of processing and
disposing of solid waste.
Division. The refuse division of the department of environmental services of
the City and County of Honolulu.
Frontloader Collection Service. Refuse collection service using an owner-
provided, 3-cubic-yard container that requires no manual moving, no manual
lifting by city personnel and is lifted over the front of the collection
vehicle.
Hotel or Hotel-Apartment. An establishment operating under a license issued
pursuant to HRS § 445-92.
Incinerator. Any incinerator owned or controlled by the city where refuse is
disposed of by incineration.
Inspector. Any individual designated by the department of environmental
services to issue notices of violation or citations, or both, to enforce this
chapter.
Licensed Collector. Any person who has been licensed by the city to collect
refuse in accordance with
Article 2 of this chapter.
Manual Collection. Refuse collection service using an owner-provided refuse
receptacle or bag that requires manual moving and manual lifting by city
personnel.
Motor Vehicle. Every vehicle that is self-propelled or is propelled by electric
power but not operated upon rails, but excludes a moped.
Multi-Unit Residential Building. A building consisting of two or more dwelling
units.
Owner. The person assessed the real property tax as shown by the records of the
director of budget and fiscal services and the records, if any, in the office
of the assistant registrar of the land court.
Person. Any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, unincorporated
association, or joint venture, a government or any department or agency
thereof, or any other entity.
Private Disposal Facilities. Facilities in the city for the disposal of solid
waste, including but not limited to incinerators, composting plants, landfills,
shredding plants, transfer stations, and resource recovery facilities owned and
operated by private interests.
Recyclable Materials. Include but are not limited to the following discarded
materials for which a market exists and which are delivered to a point where
they are converted to a material for later manufacture or reprocessing:
(1)   Aluminum Can. A can that is designed and intended to hold a beverage or
other substance and is manufactured of aluminum alloy;
(2)   Battery. Any lead acid battery or dry cell battery discarded in the city
independent of intended use;
(3)   Corrugated Cardboard. Kraft, jute, or test liner pulp that is made by
combining two or more webs of paper and formed or shaped into wrinkles or folds
or into alternate ridges and grooves and discarded by commercial, industrial,
and agricultural businesses;
(4)   Food Waste. All animal, vegetable, and beverage waste that attends or
results from the storage, preparation, cooking, handling, selling, or serving
of food. The term does not mean commercial cooking oil waste or commercial FOG
waste;
(5)   Glass Container. Any container that is manufactured from a mixture of
silicates, borates, or phosphates;
(6)   Green Waste. Tree branches under 9 inches in diameter, hedge and other
plant cuttings, coconut and other palm branches or fronds, vines, and similar
materials;
(7)   Manufactured Compostable Material.  Any material specifically
manufactured to break down in a compost system at the end of its useful life
that may be made from paper or plant-based materials, along with other
ingredients that provide necessary form and functionality, and that is
certified by an appropriate authority, as determined by the department, such as
the Biodegradable Product Institute or the Composting Manufacturing Alliance,
as meeting the ASTM standard for compostability and that contains no
perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). The term includes but is
not limited to items such as bags, food ware, service ware, coffee pods, and
food packaging that are so manufactured;
(8)   Metal Scrap. Any metal, in whole or in parts, from buildings, equipment,
machinery, and vehicles discarded by commercial, industrial, and agricultural
businesses;
(9)   Newspaper. A publication that is printed and distributed and contains
news articles, opinions, features, and advertising, and is manufactured of
impermanent wood pulp material;
(10)   Office Paper. Computer paper, and white and colored ledger paper, which
is discarded by commercial, industrial, and agricultural businesses;
(11)   Paperboard. A sheet of fibrous material made from either virgin wood
fiber or recycled paper stock or a combination of these sources;
(12)   Plastic Container. A container that is designed and intended to hold a
beverage or food product and is manufactured of polyethylene terephthalate
(PET), high-density polyethylene (HDPE), and other synthetic materials;
(13)   Steel Can (also referred to as Tin Can due to a protective coating of
tin). A can made primarily of steel and manufactured to hold food or other
items; and
(14)   Used Oil. A petroleum-based oil, which through use, storage, or
handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose due to the presence of
impurities or loss of original properties.
Refuse. Any one or more of the following:
(1)   Rubbish, other than recyclable materials as defined in this section,
consisting of and including such materials as paper, cardboard, clothes, shoes,
bottles, cans, china, glass, grass, hedge cuttings, tree branches under 9
inches in diameter, and any other material of similar character; or
(2)   Bulky wastes consisting of such materials as lumber, iron pipes, tree
branches over 9 inches in diameter, refrigerators, stoves, radios, television
sets, phonographs, bedsteads, bed springs, tables, sofas, chairs, water
heaters, sinks, and other similar materials or equipment of a weighty or bulky
nature.
Registered Owner. A person who holds unencumbered title to a vehicle, a buyer
under a purchase money security interest, or a debtor under any security
interest.
Rental or U-Drive Motor Vehicle. A motor vehicle that is rented or leased for a
period of six months or less.
Resource Recovery Facility. Solid waste processing and disposal and resource
recovery and electric generating facilities located in the city that have been
designated by the director as a part of the disposal system of the city,
together with related and appurtenant structures and equipment, whether such
resource recovery facilities are owned by the city or by private interests.
Semiautomated Collection. Refuse collection service using a city-provided
receptacle (cart) that requires manual moving, but no manual lifting by city
personnel.
Sidewalk. That portion of a street between a curbline or the pavement of a
roadway, and the adjacent private or public property line, whichever the case
may be, intended for the use of pedestrians, including any setback areas
acquired by the city for road widening purposes.
Solid Waste. All refuse, soil, rock, construction debris, demolition debris,
and all similar materials.
Source Separated Waste. Recyclable materials that are set aside at their point
of generation for segregated collection and transport to specialized waste
processing sites or final manufacturing markets.
Special Wastes. Any refuse that must be handled in an exceptional and uncommon
manner because of its characteristics.
Street. The entire width between the property lines of every way publicly owned
and maintained when the part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or any private street, highway or thoroughfare
that for more than five years has been continuously used by the general public.
Transshipment Facilities. Any city-operated or city-contracted site used to
bale or ship, or both, refuse to an off-island site.
Vehicle. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a roadway or highway, but excludes devices moved by
human power or devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks and
mopeds.
(Sec. 9-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, §
9-1.2) (Am. Ords. 89-113, 95-16, 99-32, 02-14, 06-09, 10-2, 10-16, 20-4, 22-10,
23-30)
§ 42-1.3 Collection of refuse and recyclable materials by the division.
(a)   The division shall have charge of and shall administer the collection and
disposal of refuse and the collection and processing of recyclable materials as
designated by the director. No refuse shall be collected from any building or
place when:
(1)   The owner thereof has made provision for refuse collection by the owner’s
own vehicles or by a licensed collector; and
(2)   The owner thereof has installed or provided the premises with private
incineration equipment or other refuse disposal facilities that have been
approved by the director as being adequate and safe and that have been approved
by the State department of health as conforming to HRS Chapter 322, relating to
nuisances and sanitary regulations.
(b)   Any refuse or recyclable materials removed by the city and any solid
waste accepted by the city shall become the property of the city.
(Sec. 9-1.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.3) (Am.
Ord. 07-45)
§ 42-1.4 Preparation and placement of refuse and recyclable materials by owner.
(a)   The types of refuse and recyclable materials hereinafter described must
be prepared for collection as follows:
(1)   In areas provided with manual collection, tree branches set out for
collection may not exceed 9 inches in diameter and green waste must be cut into
lengths not exceeding 3 feet. All green waste must be tied in bundles, which do
not weigh more than 50 pounds each or prepared in a manner determined by the
director in accordance with §
42-1.12(b)(3). In areas with automated green waste collection, green waste must
be placed in the city-provided green waste cart as designated by the director
such that the cart lid fully closes.
(2)   In areas provided with manual collection, all empty cardboard and other
fibrous cartons, wooden boxes and crates, and other similar empty containers
must be flattened and securely tied in bundles not exceeding 3 feet in length
nor weighing more than 50 pounds each. In areas with automated mixed recyclable
materials collection, all empty corrugated cardboard boxes must be flattened
and placed in the city-provided mixed recyclable materials cart as designated
by the director such that the cart lid fully closes.
(3)   All other refuse except that mentioned in subdivisions (1) and (2) must
be placed in city-provided refuse carts as designated by the director, or in
areas provided with manual collection, in durable or nondurable containers
described as follows:
(A)   Durable containers. The interior surface of the container must be smooth
with no projections and the top diameter must be equal to or larger than the
bottom diameter. The container must have a capacity of at least 10 gallons but
not more than 35 gallons. The maximum weight of an empty container is 25
pounds. The maximum weight of a filled container is 75 pounds. Every container
holding any garbage must have a tight-fitting lid.
(B)   Nondurable containers. Nondurable containers made of plastic film, paper,
or cardboard may be used if the containers are able to contain their contents
securely at all times. The maximum weight for filled nondurable containers is
50 pounds. The containers will be collected together with their contents.
(4)   All rubbish consisting of ashes, powders, dust, sawdust, broken bottles,
glass, china, or other materials likely to cause injury to persons collecting
the same must be securely wrapped or contained before being placed in the city-
provided refuse cart as designated by the director for automated collection or
in the resident-provided container for manual collection.
(5)   Except for food waste that the director designates as a recyclable
material, garbage must be drained and securely wrapped before being placed in
the container.
(6)   Recyclable materials designated by the director, except newspaper or
other paper which is used to wrap or hold garbage or other refuse not
designated as recyclable materials, must be prepared or placed in the city-
provided mixed recyclable materials cart as designated by the director and will
be collected under procedures determined by the director.
(7)   The director shall designate the city-provided cart into which food waste
must be placed and may specify additional standards for the placement of food
waste in the carts.
(b)   On or the evening before the scheduled day of collection, all refuse,
green waste, and other recyclable materials as designated by the director
prepared for collection as hereinabove provided, must be placed on the street,
so as not to impede vehicular traffic, or sidewalk, so as not to impede
pedestrian use, in a location readily accessible to the collector. The lateral
location for each owner’s refuse within the sidewalk area must be limited to
the street frontage abutting the owner’s property or where approved by the
division. In apartment and business districts, refuse, green waste, and other
recyclable materials as designated by the director may be placed within 20 feet
of the curb, as defined in this subsection. Refuse, green waste, and other
recyclable materials as designated by the director may be placed for collection
within the sidewalk area (as defined in this subsection) of private roads and
nonstandard private roadways when all of the following conditions are met:
(1)   All of the residents along the roadway must want such collection;
(2)   The roadway must serve at least three residences;
(3)   The roadway must have an unobstructed width of at least 12 feet not
including parking lanes;
(4)   Horizontal and vertical curves of the roadway must meet subdivision
standards;
(5)   Maximum roadway grade may not exceed 19 percent;
(6)   The owners of the roadway shall provide and maintain an all-weather road
surface;
(7)   The roadway must have an adequate turnaround. If there is no turnaround,
reversing of the truck must not exceed a distance of 100 feet; and
(8)   Reversing on a grade exceeding 10 percent is not required.
(c)   Containers may not be left on the street or sidewalk area after the day
of collection. In cases of hardship, as determined by the director, automated
carts may be left on the street or sidewalk area.
(d)   Bulky wastes will be collected under procedures determined by the
director. Bulky wastes must be placed on the street, so as not to impede
vehicular traffic, or sidewalk, so as not to impede pedestrian use, for
collection no earlier than the evening before the scheduled day of collection.
(1)   In the event bulky wastes are placed on the street or sidewalk fronting a
property earlier than the evening before the scheduled day of collection, the
owner of the abutting property shall be responsible for the removal and storage
of such bulky wastes.
(2)   In the event bulky wastes are placed on the street or sidewalk fronting a
multi-unit residential building earlier than the evening before the scheduled
days of collection, the property owner or the association of apartment owners
of the abutting property shall be responsible for the removal and storage of
such bulky wastes as set forth in §
42-3.4(b).
(e)   Three-cubic-yard containers designed for mechanical handling, if used,
may not be placed on the street or sidewalk, but must be placed within the
property to be served in locations directly accessible to the pickup forks of
the collection truck. Access roadway requirements for the collection of 3-
cubic-yard containers will be those required for collection on private roads
and nonstandard private roadways as provided in subsection (b), except that
maximum roadway grade may not exceed 12 percent.
(Sec. 9-1.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, §
9-1.4) (Am. Ords. 89-113, 93-19, 95-16, 99-32, 06-09, 07-45, 10-16, 22-10)
§ 42-1.5 Limitations to collection by refuse crews.
   The division shall not collect:
(1)   Any soil, rock, concrete, explosives, liquids, radioactive materials,
construction debris, demolition debris, commercial cooking oil waste, or
commercial FOG waste; except that used oil may be collected under a curbside
collection service established pursuant to §
2-23.2;
(2)   Any refuse, green waste, and other recyclable materials as designated by
the director not prepared for collection as provided by §
42-1.4;
(3)   Any refuse, green waste, and other recyclable materials as designated by
the director not placed for collection as provided by §
42-1.4;
(4)   Any rubbish consisting of tree branches, plant cuttings, vines, and other
similar materials exceeding 1 cubic yard in volume for any single regular
collection in manual collection areas;
(5)   Any refuse, green waste, and other recyclable materials as designated by
the director placed for collection in a place that is unsafe or is likely to
cause injury to the persons collecting refuse, green waste, and other
recyclable materials; or
(6)   Any refuse from any business where the owner thereof shall have failed to
pay the service charges hereinafter provided.
(Sec. 9-1.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.5) (Am.
Ords. 89-113, 89-118, 02-14, 07-45, 16-29)
§ 42-1.6 Disturbing receptacles prohibited.
   No person shall:
(1)   Remove or disturb any refuse, green waste, and other recyclable materials
as designated by the director from the place where the same has been placed for
collection;
(2)   Collect or haul away any refuse, green waste, and other recyclable
materials as designated by the director from the place where the same has been
placed for collection;
(3)   Transport any refuse, green waste, and other recyclable materials as
designated by the director; provided that authorized persons may remove,
disturb, collect, haul away, or transport any refuse from the place where the
same has been placed for collection. For purposes of this section, “authorized
persons” means:
(A)   Owner;
(B)   Division employees during authorized working hours; or
(C)   Licensed collector.
(4)   This section shall not apply to bulky wastes placed on the street or
sidewalk earlier than the evening before the scheduled day of collection, in
which case the property owner or the association of apartment owners of the
abutting property shall remove and store such bulky wastes in accordance with §
42-1.4(d).
(Sec. 9-1.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.6) (Am.
Ords. 07-45, 10-16)
§ 42-1.7 Acceptable and nonacceptable refuse at disposal facilities.
(a)   Except as directed by the director or the director’s authorized
representative and as provided otherwise under the mandatory recycling program
for city government established under §
42-1.11, the division shall accept or cause to be accepted the following solid
waste within the disposal system: paper, cardboard, yard trimmings, bottles,
cans, plastic, garbage, lumber, and tree branches less than 5 feet long and
less than 9 inches in diameter.
Except during a suspension by the director of the requirements of §
43-5A.2(a) or (b), or both, and as authorized by the director during the
suspension, the division shall not accept into the disposal system any
commercial cooking oil waste or commercial FOG waste.
(b)   The division may conduct an examination of any truckload of refuse or
other solid waste delivered or transported to a disposal facility:
(1)   At any time that the division has cause to believe that the truckload
contains:
(A)   Twenty-five percent or more of those recyclable materials designated by
the director; or
(B)   Any commercial cooking oil waste or commercial FOG waste; or
(2)   Periodically and on a random basis to determine compliance with the
prohibition of subsection (a).
(c)   The division shall accept the following types of solid waste only at
specific disposal sites designated by the chief: large household appliances,
tree trunks, dirt, rock, concrete, reinforcing steel, metal pipe, metal
roofing, automobile parts, and bed springs.
(d)   The division shall not accept deliveries of any refuse or recyclable
materials that are not made during hours of operation as posted at each
facility.
(e)   The chief may divert all or part of the incoming refuse away from a
disposal facility, or limit the area to be served by a disposal facility when,
in the chief’s judgment, such action is necessary to undertake repairs or to
maintain the facility, or where the facility lacks the continued capacity to
handle the incoming refuse, or so as to prolong the life of the facility.
(f)   The director, or the director’s authorized representative, may designate
from time to time, those disposal facilities or private disposal facilities, or
a combination thereof, and the methods for the processing and disposal of solid
waste generated in the city constituting a part of the disposal system created
by this chapter. The director or the director’s authorized representative may
require that all solid waste, whether transported by the division, licensed
collectors, businesses, or individuals, be disposed of at specific disposal
facilities or private disposal facilities within the disposal system as
designated by such person if it is found to be in the best public interest;
provided that agricultural solid waste and source separated waste transported
for recycling purposes shall not be subject to this section; and provided
further, that if regional transfer stations are designated, transportation to
the stations shall be considered so as to minimize the operating costs of the
collector. The best public interest shall be found if disposal at the
designated disposal facility or private disposal facility within the disposal
system shall:
(1)   Result in reusable materials being recovered from solid waste;
(2)   Achieve the solid waste volumes necessary to meet a resource recovery
facility’s minimum operating requirement;
(3)   Lessen the demand for landfill sites; or
(4)   Conserve natural resources.
(Sec. 9-1.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-
1.7) (Am. Ords. 89-113, 89-117, 02-14, 04-10)
§ 42-1.8 Removal of dead animals.
(a)   Every owner of dead animals shall remove such animals, or cause the same
to be removed, within a reasonable time after death or before the same shall
constitute a nuisance.
(b)   Any person who has actual knowledge of the dead animal shall cause such
animal to be removed within a reasonable time after death, or before the same
shall constitute a nuisance.
(c)   Dead animals weighing up to 70 pounds will be collected and disposed by
the division, provided they are placed in an open area that is accessible to
the collector, or such animals will be accepted at any municipal incinerator
during operating hours.
(d)   Dead animals weighing over 70 pounds will be accepted at disposal areas
other than the municipal incinerators during operating hours.
(Sec. 9-1.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.8)
§ 42-1.9 Office of recycling coordinator established—Duties.
(a)   There is established within the division a recycling coordinator. Subject
to council authorization and the availability of council appropriations, other
positions within the division may be established and filled to serve under and
assist the recycling coordinator in the performance of duties. The recycling
coordinator and, if any, subordinate employees, shall be under the supervision
and direction of the chief.
(b)   The recycling coordinator shall have the following duties, according to
the following order of priorities:
(1)   Establishment and implementation of recycling education and promotion
programs;
(2)   Establishment and implementation of recycling programs within or by city
government;
(3)   Conduct of research and development of recycling issues and techniques;
and
(4)   Provision of technical assistance concerning recycling.
The purpose of the order of priorities shall be to guide the recycling
coordinator in making decisions on the expenditures, budget requests, programs,
and other activities to be made or undertaken. This subsection shall not
prevent the recycling coordinator from undertaking, expending funds for or
requesting appropriations for programs or activities of lesser priority, rather
than those of higher priority, when deemed in the best public interest.
(c)   In the establishment and implementation of recycling education and
promotion programs, the recycling coordinator may undertake, but shall not be
limited to, the following:
(1)   Establishment of a recycling telephone hotline serving to take inquiries
and disseminate information on recycling;
(2)   Formulation of recycling education curricula and materials to be made
available and distributed to public and private elementary, intermediate, and
high schools, and instruction of teachers who will teach the curricula. For the
purpose of this paragraph, the recycling coordinator shall cooperate and
coordinate with the department of education and private school administrations
to distribute the curricula and materials to the schools. If deemed desirable
or necessary, and subject to the approval of the appropriate school authority,
the recycling coordinator may provide direct instruction to the students;
(3)   Conduct of media advertising and community relations campaigns to promote
public awareness of the benefits of recycling, detriments of solid waste
disposal, and methods of recycling recyclable refuse;
(4)   Promotion of public awareness of products that are not recyclable nor
degradable and the detriments of use and disposal of the products;
(5)   Publication and dissemination of a directory of businesses engaged in
recycling to promote their patronage by the public;
(6)   Publication and dissemination of guidebooks and instruction manuals to
promote recycling; and
(7)   Publication and dissemination of a newsletter to promote or provide
information on recycling.
(d)   In the establishment and implementation of recycling programs within or
by city government, the recycling coordinator may undertake, but shall not be
limited to the following:
(1)   Formulation and, with the approval of the appropriate authority,
imposition of recycling activities on city agencies and employees;
(2)   Formulation and evaluation of recycling demonstration projects that the
division may choose to implement. Demonstration projects may include those
under which:
(A)   Residents in selected areas are required to separate recyclable refuse
from other refuse;
(B)   The division collects or authorizes another person to collect the
recyclable refuse under procedures separate from the collection of other
refuse; and
(C)   The division recycles, and not disposes of, the recyclable refuse;
(3)   Recommendation to city officers of the establishment or revision of
administrative policies or practices, procurement practices, or other policies
or practices to promote recycling;
(4)   Recommendation to and advocacy before the council of legislation to
promote recycling; and
(5)   Identification of products manufactured of recycled material that are
usable by the city and substitutable for products manufactured of virgin
material.
(e)   In the conduct of research and development of recycling issues and
techniques, the recycling coordinator may undertake, but shall not be limited
to, the following:
(1)   Study of recycling techniques to determine the most cost-effective manner
of collecting, processing, storing, transporting, reusing, or converting
recyclable refuse;
(2)   Study and monitoring of the market conditions for recyclable refuse and
the recycling industry;
(3)   Function as a clearinghouse for information on recycling;
(4)   Sponsor seminars, workshops, and classes to discuss and disseminate
information on recycling;
(5)   Identify Hawaii, national and foreign businesses reusing or converting
recyclable refuse to which businesses engaged in recycling or the public may
sell recyclable refuse;
(6)   Study the feasibility of recycling different types of refuse; and
(7)   Conduct public opinion surveys to assess attitudes on and practices of
recycling and disposal of solid wastes.
(f)   In the provision of technical assistance concerning recycling, the
recycling coordinator may undertake, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
(1)   Advise and assist owners or managers of businesses and multi-family
dwelling unit buildings on effective and efficient techniques to separate
recyclable refuse;
(2)   Advise and assist licensed collectors on effective and efficient
techniques to collect and recycle recyclable refuse;
(3)   Advise and assist businesses engaged in recycling and manufacturers
reusing or converting recyclable refuse on effective and efficient techniques
to make their operations more efficient, cost-effective, or profitable;
(4)   Advise and assist businesses engaged in recycling and manufacturers
reusing or converting recyclable refuse in the obtainment of loans, grants, and
necessary permits pertinent to the promotion of recycling activities; and
(5)   Disseminate findings of research and development studies and advise and
assist willing persons in implementing the finding.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.9) (Added by Ord. 89-83)
§ 42-1.10 Prohibited activities.
(a)   No person shall throw, drop, place, dump, or deposit refuse, to include
bulky wastes, on a street, roadside, alley, highway, or public place except as
provided in this chapter.
(b)   No person shall operate or use a vehicle in committing a violation of
subsection (a).
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.10) (Added by Ord. 16-9; Am. Ord. 20-4)
§ 42-1.11 Mandatory recycling program for city government.
(a)   There shall be a mandatory recycling program for city agencies. Under the
program, the following types of recyclable materials generated by city agencies
and their employees and discarded at places of work shall be recycled or reused
and not disposed of as waste: newspaper, cardboard, office paper, aluminum
cans, glass containers, plastic containers, and any other type of recyclable
material identified by the division. The division shall establish procedures
for:
(1)   Either the:
(A)   Separation of the recyclable materials from other refuse at the source of
generation and collection of the recyclable materials under procedures separate
from the collection of other refuse; or
(B)   Collection of mixed recyclable materials and other refuse from the source
of generation and, after collection, separation of the recyclable materials
from other refuse; and
(2)   The sale, recycling, or reuse, but not disposal as waste, of the
recyclable materials. If the recyclable materials are sold, the revenues
derived from the sale of the recyclable materials shall be realizations of the
general fund.
(b)   The mandatory recycling program shall be in conformance with all
applicable laws, rules, and collective bargaining agreements. City agencies
shall comply with the mandatory recycling program.
(c)   The division may contract with a private person to collect, separate,
store, sell, or transport the recyclable materials as part of the
implementation of the program. If determined desirable by the division, the
person contracted shall not have to be a licensed collector.
(d)   The division shall supervise and enforce the mandatory recycling program
of this section.
(e)   
Articles 5 and
6 of this chapter shall not apply to any violation of the mandatory recycling
program.
(f)   The division may contract with a not-for-profit organization that would
provide a valuable community service in exchange for the potential market value
of the recyclable materials collected from the city under the mandatory
recycling program of this section. The not-for-profit organization shall
collect the recyclable materials without monetary recompense to the city. If
such a contract is determined desirable by the division and permissible under
the State procurement code by the director of budget and fiscal services:
(1)   Preference shall be given to such a contractual agreement over sale by
bid;
(2)   Proposals shall be solicited by public notice and reviewed for selection
by a committee designated by the division and approved by the director of
budget and fiscal services; and
(3)   Selection shall be based on an evaluation of the community service to be
rendered by the not-for-profit organization and the organization’s ability and
qualifications to service the needs of the mandatory recycling program.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.11) (Added by Ord. 89-117; Am. Ords. 93-05,
04-10, 14-24)
§ 42-1.12 Islandwide curbside recycling program.
(a)   The director shall establish an islandwide program for the curbside
collection of recyclable materials. The director may implement the program in
stages; provided that by July 1, 2007, the curbside collection of recyclable
materials includes, at a minimum, the collection of at least two of the
following:
(1)   Glass containers;
(2)   Newspapers;
(3)   Plastic containers;
(4)   Green waste;
(5)   Food waste; and
(6)   Manufactured compostable materials.
By July 1, 2008, the director shall include, at a minimum, an additional two
recyclable materials from the list in this subsection. By April 1, 2026, the
director shall include the collection of food waste and manufactured
compostable materials.
(b)   The director shall determine the structure of the program, including:
(1)   The types of recyclable materials to be collected;
(2)   The frequency in which recyclable materials shall be collected; and
(3)   How recyclable materials shall be prepared for collection.
(c)   The director shall adopt rules in accordance with HRS Chapter 91 for the
implementation, administration, and enforcement of this section. The rules may
provide that recyclable materials not prepared or set out at the curbside in
accordance with the rules may not be collected by the city.
(d)   The director may contract with a private entity or entities to sort and
sell the recyclable materials after they are collected.
(e)   The director may establish incentive programs to encourage participation
in the islandwide curbside recycling program.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.12) (Added by Ord. 06-09; Am. Ords. 22-10, 23-
30, 25-24)
§ 42-1.13 Preparation of integrated solid waste management plan.
(a)   The department shall prepare and submit to the council, for its review, a
revised 10-year integrated solid waste management plan and interim status
report that meet the requirements of HRS Chapter 342G, Part III. The department
shall submit the revised plan to the State department of health and have it
reviewed in accordance with HRS § 342G-24.
(b)   In addition to the contents of the integrated solid waste management plan
required by HRS § 342G-25, the county plan shall include an evaluation of
alternative technologies that may be developed in the future to dispose of
solid waste.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.13) (Added by Ord. 06-27; Am. Ord. 12-39)
§ 42-1.14 Timetable for conversion of waste to energy.
   By July 1, 2010, the city shall convert or cause to be converted at least
700,000 tons per year of municipal solid waste to energy.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.14) (Added by Ord. 06-41)
§ 42-1.15 Charge for damage to carts.
   City-provided carts are the responsibility of the owner or occupant, or
both. If the department determines the city-provided cart must be replaced due
to intentional damage by the owner or occupant, or both, and not due to normal
wear and tear of the cart, the owner shall be assessed a unit charge of $75 per
cart.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.15) (Added by Ord. 07-45)
ARTICLE 2: COLLECTION LICENSE
Sections
   
42-2.1   License required to collect refuse
   
42-2.2   Application—Bond—Insurance—Term—Fee
   
42-2.3   Conditions of licenses
   
42-2.4   Prohibitions
   
42-2.5   Initial compliance
   
42-2.6   Denial or revocation of license
   
42-2.7   Notice of suspension or revocation—Hearing
   
42-2.8   Rule-making powers
   
42-2.9   Disposal system created
   
42-2.10   Designation of H-POWER project as part of disposal system
§ 42-2.1 License required to collect refuse.
   No person shall engage in any business that involves the collecting of any
refuse from any building or premises other than that person’s own without first
obtaining a license therefor as provided in §
42-2.2.
(Sec. 9-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 2, § 9-2.1)
§ 42-2.2 Application—Bond—Insurance—Term—Fee.
(a)   Application. No license to engage in such business shall be issued until
the applicant secures from the director of the department of environmental
services and presents to the director of customer services an approved
application. Such application shall include but not be limited to the following
information:
(1)   Name and home address of the applicant;
(2)   Business address and the address where all trucks, other vehicles, and
operating equipment will be kept (if other than the business address), and the
zoning code classification of each address;
(3)   State of Hawaii general excise tax license number of the applicant;
(4)   If applicant is a firm, association, organization, partnership, joint
venture, corporation, limited liability corporation, business trust, company,
or cooperative, the names and addresses of all owners and officers and their
respective percentage of ownership;
(5)   For each truck, vehicle, and equipment that the applicant owns or has
under the applicant’s control or intends to use for collection or
transportation of refuse, the applicant shall provide:
(A)   Registration number;
(B)   Valid registration number assigned by the State department of
transportation; and
(C)   Copy of a valid safety inspection certificate issued by the State
department of transportation;
(6)   Facts demonstrating that the applicant owns or has access to suitable
facilities for keeping equipment clean and in good repair and that the
applicant owns or has access to reasonable office facilities; and
(7)   Facts demonstrating that the applicant owns or has the legally
enforceable right to use at least two trucks or has made documented
arrangements for continued service to customers in case of truck breakdown.
(b)   Bond. Every applicant for a license shall execute and submit a surety
bond in favor of the city in the penal sum of $1,000, which bond shall be
subject to all of the conditions set forth in §
42-2.3, including the cost of collecting and disposing of refuse by the city if
the licensee fails to collect and dispose of refuse which the licensee has
contracted so to do with others. The bond shall be issued by a surety company
authorized to do business in Hawaii in accordance with HRS § 78-20.
(c)   Vehicular public liability and damage insurance. The licensee shall
secure and present to the director at the time of application a standard
automobile liability insurance policy covering the licensee, or any person
driving any vehicle belonging to the licensee with the licensee’s permission in
the amount of $100,000 for bodily injury to or death of one person in any
accident and in the amount of $300,000 for bodily injury to or death of two or
more persons in any one accident respectively, and property damage insurance in
the amount of $50,000 because of damage to or destruction of property of others
in any one accident.
(d)   Comprehensive nonvehicular public liability insurance policy. The
licensee shall secure and present to the director at the time of application a
standard comprehensive nonvehicular public liability insurance policy covering
the licensee and the licensee’s employees and agents, which shall also include
a rider covering the city in the sum of $300,000. Such rider shall be in the
form of an endorsement issued by the insurer.
(e)   Term of license. Such refuse collection license shall be issued for a
term of one year commencing July 1 through June 30 of the next succeeding year.
Such license may be renewed annually on or before July 1 upon application by a
licensee, if the director determines that the licensee remains in compliance
with this chapter.
(f)   License fee. The fee for an annual license to collect refuse shall be
$500, payable in advance to the director of customer services on or before July
1 of each year. The fee for any annual license issued to an applicant after
July 1 shall be prorated according to the remaining months of each fiscal year.
No license fee shall be refundable.
(g)   Determination of eligibility for license.
(1)   Upon receipt of a completed application for a license to collect or
transport refuse, the director shall determine if the applicant meets all the
requirements of this chapter applicable to collectors and transporters of
refuse.
(2)   After such determination the director shall either approve the
application by proper endorsement or deny the application specifying in writing
the cause or causes for such disapproval.
(Sec. 9-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 2, § 9-2.2) (Am.
Ords. 96-58, 99-32, 10-16)
§ 42-2.3 Conditions of licenses.
(a)   Every license issued under this article shall be subject to the following
conditions.
(1)   All vehicles used by the licensee for the collection of refuse shall be
so designed and constructed as to prevent the spilling or scattering of its
contents upon the public streets. All such vehicles and equipment shall be kept
in a clean, inoffensive and sanitary condition. Such vehicles shall carry at
all times: a shovel, broom, and fire extinguisher. The name and phone number of
the licensee shall be marked on each side and across the back of all such
vehicles and containers in letters not less than 2 inches in height. Trucks
with a rated capacity of more than 1.5 tons used in the transportation or
collection of refuse that contains garbage shall be closed, leakproof, and
constructed for the purpose of refuse collection. Vehicles shall not be loaded
in excess of the gross vehicle weight.
(2)   All refuse shall be handled and transported by the licensee in such a
manner as to prevent scattering, spilling, or leaking of the same or to
otherwise create a nuisance thereby or to violate any rule or regulation of the
State department of health.
(3)   All refuse collected by the licensee shall be disposed of at such
disposal facilities or private disposal facilities within the disposal system
designated by the director, or as otherwise directed by the director or the
director’s authorized representative.
(4)   Disposal charges incurred by the licensee for disposing of refuse at
disposal facilities or private disposal facilities within the disposal system
designated by the director shall be paid when due.
(5)   The licensee shall not violate any provisions contained herein or in any
other ordinance relating to the collection and disposal of refuse within the
city.
(6)   All vehicles and other equipment used by a licensee in the collection and
transportation of refuse shall be inspected at least once per year by the
director of the department of environmental services to determine use in
conformance with this article and such rules as the director may duly adopt
pursuant hereto.
(b)   The director shall provide for each truck or equipment found to be in
compliance herewith a durable tag or decal, at cost, and upon payment of the
license fee to the director of customer services by the licensee. Such tag or
decal shall be securely fastened and maintained by the licensee on each vehicle
or equipment so as to be clearly visible.
(Sec. 9-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 2, §
9-2.3) (Am. Ords. 99-32, 10-16)
§ 42-2.4 Prohibitions.
(a)   No person licensed to collect refuse shall scatter or spill or cause to
be scattered or spilled any refuse set out for collection, either at the
location at which it is collected or while transporting the same for disposal,
unless the refuse so scattered and spilled is immediately gathered up and
removed.
(b)   No person licensed to collect refuse shall violate any of the conditions
prescribed in §
42-2.3. Notwithstanding other penalties provided under this chapter, violations
of §
42-2.3 shall be punishable by a fine of $1,000.
(c)   No person licensed to collect refuse shall collect, remove, or transport
any commercial cooking oil waste or commercial FOG waste, in any form or in any
combination with other material, unless the person also holds a valid
industrial wastewater discharge permit.
(Sec. 9-2.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 2, §
9-2.4) (Am. Ord. 02-14)
§ 42-2.5 Initial compliance.
   Licensees are granted until June 30, 1979 to bring vehicles used by them
into compliance with §
42-2.3(a)(1) and (a)(5).
(Sec. 9-2.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 2, § 9-2.5)
§ 42-2.6 Denial or revocation of license.
(a)   The director of customer services is authorized to deny initial issuance
of a refuse collection license if the applicant cannot demonstrate compliance
with the requirements set forth in this article to the satisfaction of the
director of customer services. Written notice of denial of an application for a
license shall be mailed to the applicant, specifying the reason or reasons for
the denial. The applicant may appeal the decision of the director of customer
services by requesting a hearing in the manner provided for in §
42-2.7(c).
(b)   The director may deny issuance of a vehicle decal if a vehicle or other
equipment of the licensee or applicant for a license cannot demonstrate
compliance with the requirements set forth in this article to the satisfaction
of the director. Written notice of denial of a vehicle decal shall be mailed to
the licensee or applicant, specifying the reason or reasons for the denial. The
licensee or applicant may appeal the decision of the director by requesting a
hearing in the manner provided for in §
42-2.7(c).
(c)   The director of customer services is authorized to suspend or revoke any
refuse collection license, and the director is authorized to suspend or revoke
any vehicle decal, if the provisions contained in this chapter are violated or
the requirements of this chapter, or any rules adopted pursuant to this
chapter, are not complied with by the licensee. In the case of suspension or
revocation of a license or vehicle decal, the licensee shall be afforded notice
and an opportunity for a hearing before the suspension or revocation.
(Sec. 9-2.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 2, §
9-2.6) (Am. Ord. 10-16)
§ 42-2.7 Notice of suspension or revocation—Hearing.
(a)   Notice of intent to suspend or revoke a refuse collection license or
vehicle decal. The licensee shall be given written notice, pursuant to HRS §
91-9, of the intent to suspend or revoke a refuse collection license or vehicle
decal (hereinafter referred to as “business documents”). If the licensee waives
such person’s right for a hearing, the director of customer services or the
director, as the case may be, shall issue in writing an appropriate decision
and order.
(b)   Service of notice. The foregoing notice will be served upon the
appropriate party in the manner provided by HRS § 91-9.5.
(c)   Request for hearing. The appropriate party who has received a notice
shall, if such person desires a hearing, affix such person’s signature as
designated on the copy and have same returned to the director of customer
services or the director, as the case may be, by certified mail.
(d)   Notice of date of hearing. Whenever the appropriate party requests a
hearing, a notice of the date of such hearing shall be issued to the
appropriate party, and such hearing shall be held no later than 20 working days
after the request for hearing is received.
(e)   Procedure for hearing. Any hearing conducted under this section shall be
pursuant to rules adopted by the director of customer services or the director,
as the case may be.
(f)   Director of customer services or the director, as the case may be, to
suspend, revoke or deny business documents. After the hearing, the director of
customer services or the director, as the case may be, may rule either in favor
or against the suspension or revocation of a license or vehicle decal.
(g)   Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by the final decision and order of
the director of customer services or the director, as the case may be, may
appeal same to the circuit court as provided in HRS § 91-14.
(Sec. 9-2.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 2, §
9-2.7) (Am. Ord. 10-16)
§ 42-2.8 Rule-making powers.
   Pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, the director of budget and fiscal services and
the director are authorized to adopt any rules or regulations not inconsistent
with this chapter to administer and enforce this chapter.
(Sec. 9-2.8, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 2, §
9-2.8)
§ 42-2.9 Disposal system created.
   There is created a citywide system for the processing and disposal of solid
waste generated in the city. As authorized in this chapter, the director of the
department of environmental services is authorized and directed to designate
from time to time those properties or the methods for the processing and
disposal of waste generated in the city, whether “disposal facilities” or
“private disposal facilities” (as defined in this chapter), at which the city
disposes of waste as part of such system.
(Sec. 9-2.9, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 2, §
9-2.9) (Am. Ord. 99-32)
§ 42-2.10 Designation of H-POWER project as part of disposal system.
   The director of the department of environmental services is directed to
designate as a part of the disposal system created pursuant to §
42-2.9 that certain solid waste processing and disposal and resource recovery
and electric generating facility of the city to be constructed at the Campbell
Industrial Park in the city and known as the “H-POWER project,” together with
related and appurtenant structures and equipment (the “H-POWER project”).
(Sec. 9-2.10, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 2, §
9-2.10) (Am. Ord. 99-32)
ARTICLE 3: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO BUSINESSES, PRIVATE DWELLINGS, AND
GOVERNMENT FACILITIES
Sections
   
42-3.1   Business
   
42-3.2   Private dwellings
   
42-3.3   Service to government buildings
   
42-3.4   Multi-unit residential buildings
   
42-3.5   Food waste recycling
§ 42-3.1 Business.
(a)   No person shall operate or maintain a business without arranging or
providing for the collection of all refuse therefrom.
(b)   Where the collection of refuse is to be made by the division, the owner
or occupant of the business shall prepare and place refuse for collection in
the manner set forth in §
42-1.4.
(c)   The owners of liquor-serving establishments shall arrange and provide for
the separate collection and recycling of glass containers and the owners of
office buildings shall provide for the separate collection and recycling of
office paper, newspaper, and corrugated cardboard. In so doing, liquor-serving
establishments and office buildings shall not place those recyclable materials
in the same containers as those holding refuse, or in a manner which causes or
is intended to cause the collection of the recyclable materials with refuse.
For the purposes of this subsection, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Liquor-Serving Establishment. A business establishment that sells liquor or
intoxicating liquor to be consumed on the premises of the establishment, and
shall include bars, nightclubs, cabarets, taverns, and any restaurant where
liquor or intoxicating liquor is sold for consumption on the premises,
including restaurants within hotels and office buildings.
Liquor or Intoxicating Liquor. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 281-1.
Office Building. Any building with, or group of connected buildings with an
aggregate of, 20,000 square feet or more of office space, excluding common
areas; provided that office space shall not include any portion of a building
used for resort, retail, or educational purposes.
An office building, as defined in this subsection, which is occupied by city
agencies, in whole or in part, shall be subject to the requirements of this
subsection, except where the city agencies are already participating in a
recycling program under §
42-1.11.
The owner of a liquor-serving establishment or office building may petition the
chief for an exemption from the recycling requirements of this subsection in
part or in full if the owner can demonstrate that the establishment or office
building, as the case may be, does not generate a sufficient amount of the
designated recyclable material to warrant separate collection for recycling.
The owner of a liquor-serving establishment or office building may petition the
chief to suspend the applicability of this subsection to the applicant if the
applicant demonstrates that recycling service for the items the applicant is
required to recycle is unavailable to the applicant, or that the cost of
recycling the applicable recyclable materials exceeds the cost of disposing of
those same items at the H-POWER facility or the city’s landfills. If the chief
grants the application, the requirements of this subsection shall be suspended
until such time as recycling service becomes available to the applicant, or the
cost of the recycling service is less than or equal to the cost of disposal of
the recyclable items at the H-POWER facility or the city’s landfills. The chief
shall, from time to time, review the availability and cost of the recycling
service to those persons for whom the requirements of this subsection have been
suspended.
For the purposes of this subsection, the “cost of the recycling service” shall
include only those costs that the recycler would charge the owner of a liquor-
serving establishment or office building, whichever applies, for picking up and
disposing of the items to be recycled, and the cost of disposal of the items to
be recycled at the H-POWER facility or the city’s landfills shall include the
city’s tipping fee and the cost of transporting the recyclable items to either
of the aforementioned disposal facilities. If the chief determines that the
requirements of this subsection shall no longer be suspended with regard to a
particular liquor-serving establishment or office building, the chief shall
notify the owner of the establishment or building by registered mail and such
owner shall be required to recycle the appropriate items in accordance with
this subsection within 60 days of receipt of the notice.
The chief may also suspend the requirements of this subsection during the
period of a work stoppage or any other interruption of refuse collection
service to the office buildings and liquor-serving establishments that are
subject to this subsection.
(Sec. 9-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 3, § 9-3.1) (Am.
Ords. 95-64, 14-24)
§ 42-3.2 Private dwellings.
(a)   Every owner of a private dwelling shall arrange or provide for the
collection and disposal of all refuse therefrom.
(b)   Where the collection of refuse is to be made by the division, the owner
or occupant of a private dwelling shall prepare and place refuse for collection
in the manner set forth in §
42-1.4.
(c)   Every owner shall keep the street and sidewalk fronting the owner’s
property free of refuse, except for refuse prepared and placed for collection
in accordance with §
42-1.4.
(Sec. 9-3.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 3, §
9-3.2) (Am. Ord. 10-16)
§ 42-3.3 Service to government buildings.
   The division may provide refuse collection services to buildings of the
federal and State governments upon request from the authorities responsible for
such buildings. The charge for service to such governmental buildings, other
than buildings used for residential purposes, shall be that which applies to a
place of business. For services rendered to buildings used for residential
purposes, the charges shall be established by agreement. Such agreement shall
be executed by the director of budget and fiscal services, with the
recommendation of the director, on behalf of the city.
(Sec. 9-3.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 3, § 9-3.3) (Am.
Ord. 99-32)
§ 42-3.4 Multi-unit residential buildings.
(a)   Every owner of a multi-unit residential building or individual unit or
the owner’s designated management agent in such building who has not made
provisions for refuse collection by the division pursuant to §
42-3.2(b) shall present to the director or the director’s authorized
representative upon reasonable request one of the following, whichever applies:
(1)   Evidence that the owner or the owner’s designated management agent has
engaged a licensed refuse collector to collect and dispose of the refuse at
least once a week;
(2)   Evidence that the owner or the owner’s designated management agent has
independently disposed of the refuse at a properly designated disposal site at
least once a week; or
(3)   Evidence that the owner or the owner’s designated management agent is
disposing of refuse pursuant to §
42-1.3(a)(2).
(b)   Every owner of a multi-unit residential building or individual unit or
the owner’s designated management agent in such building shall maintain a clean
and sanitary storage area for accumulated refuse between scheduled collection
days.
(c)   Every owner of a multi-unit residential building or individual unit or
the owner’s designated management agent in such building shall keep the street
and sidewalk fronting the property free of refuse, except for refuse prepared
and placed for collection in accordance with §
42-1.4.
(d)   The director or the director’s authorized representative shall determine
whether a multi-unit residential building is being adequately serviced by
refuse collection.
(e)   Any person residing in a multi-unit residential building may file a
complaint with the director if the owner of such building does not provide for
refuse removal pursuant to this chapter.
(f)   Notwithstanding any other penalty provided under this chapter, a
violation of this section shall be subject to a civil fine of $250 per day,
beginning with the day the violation is verified by the director or the
director’s authorized representative and continuing until conditions are
brought into conformity with the law. This subsection shall not apply to bulky
wastes that are improperly placed on the street or sidewalk abutting a property
that shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
42-5.1(e).
(Sec. 9-3.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 3, §
9-3.4) (Am. Ord. 10-16)
§ 42-3.5 Food waste recycling.
(a)   The owners of the following food establishments located within the city
shall: (i) arrange and provide for the separate collection of food waste and
for its recycling by a recycling facility in the city; or (ii) separate food
waste from all other solid waste generated by the food establishment and
deliver the food waste to a recycling facility:
(1)   A restaurant that occupies 5,000 square feet or more of floor area and
serves 400 or more prepared meals per day based on an annualized average. If a
restaurant is also a catering establishment, it shall be considered a
restaurant for purposes of this section. If a restaurant has on its premises a
place where the primary method of service, for all mealtimes, is food and drink
orders taken and served to customers at a self-service counter, that portion of
the premises devoted to the taking and serving of such food and drink orders,
and any dining area serving customers of such self-service counter, shall not
be counted in determining the square feet of the restaurant or the number of
prepared meals served by the restaurant;
(2)   A food court as defined in subsection (g). The company or entity that
manages the shopping center or building where the food court is located shall
be required to comply with the requirements of this section, unless the owners
of the food establishments in the food court are responsible for the disposal
of their refuse, in which case the owners of those establishments shall be
responsible for complying with this section;
(3)   A hotel with a kitchen or kitchens and one or more function rooms. For
the purposes of this subdivision, a “kitchen” means that place that is not part
of a restaurant and where food is prepared for hotel employees or functions on
the hotel’s premises;
(4)   A market that occupies 18,000 square feet or more of floor area;
(5)   A food manufacturer or processor that occupies 5,000 square feet or more
of floor area;
(6)   A catering establishment that is not also a restaurant or part of a
restaurant and that serves or sells 400 or more prepared meals per day based on
an annualized average; and
(7)   A hospital that serves 400 or more prepared patient meals a day based on
an annualized average.
For the purposes of this subsection, for the first year following January 1,
1997,* the annualized average number of prepared meals served or sold per day
by a food establishment shall be the average number of meals prepared per day
in the year before January 1, 1997,* for food establishments that have been in
existence for one year or more before January 1, 1997.* For establishments that
have not been in existence for that length of time before January 1, 1997,* the
annualized average shall be determined based on the number of prepared meals
served or sold per day during the first year that the food establishment has
been in existence following January 1, 1997.* Except as provided above,
establishments shall use the prior year’s average number of prepared meals
served or sold per day in determining whether they are required to recycle
their food waste in accordance with this section.
(b)   This section shall not apply to any church or nonprofit organization
except a hospital, as provided in subsection (a). Further, this section shall
not apply to any food service establishment that offers as the primary method
of service, for all mealtimes, food and drink orders taken at and served to the
customer at a self-service counter; provided that this exemption shall not
apply to food establishments in markets or establishments in a food court.
(c)   The requirement to recycle food waste under this section applies only to
the food waste from kitchens and food preparation, handling, and manufacturing
or processing areas, and from dining areas where customers are served by
waiters or waitresses, or where tables or meals are cleared away by employees
of the business or establishment.
The requirement of this subsection does not apply to commercial cooking oil
waste or commercial FOG waste. Instead, the removal, transport, and disposal of
such waste is subject to
Chapter 43, Article 5A.
(d)   A food establishment that is required to recycle food waste under this
section may combine such waste with that of other establishments, or may
separately collect and recycle its own food waste.
(e)   All food establishments otherwise required to recycle food waste under
this section shall not be required to do so if the disposal charge for
disposing of food waste at a recycling facility in the city, including the cost
of transporting the food waste to the facility, exceeds the tipping fee or
disposal charge for disposing of waste at the H-POWER facility, as provided in
§
42-4.2, plus the cost of transporting refuse to such facility. The chief shall
make this determination.
(f)   The owner of a food establishment that is otherwise required to recycle
food waste may petition the chief to suspend the applicability of this section
to the applicant if the applicant demonstrates that recycling service for food
waste is unavailable to the applicant. If the chief grants the application, the
requirements of this section shall be suspended until such time as recycling
service becomes available to the applicant. The chief shall, from time to time,
review the availability of recycling service to food establishments for which
the requirements of this section have been suspended. If the chief determines
that recycling service is available and that the requirements of this section
shall no longer be suspended with regard to a particular food establishment,
the chief shall notify the owner of the establishment by registered mail and
that owner shall be required to recycle food waste in accordance with this
section within 60 days of receipt of the notice.
   The chief may also, on the chief’s own initiative, suspend the requirements
of this section:
(1)   During the period of a work stoppage or any other interruption of
recycling collection service to the food establishments that are subject to
this section; or
(2)   Whenever the chief determines that there are inadequate recycling
facilities or there is inadequate recycling capacity to dispose of the food
waste being collected pursuant to this section.
(g)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Catering Establishment. Establishments primarily involved in the preparation
and transfer of finished food products for immediate consumption upon delivery
to off-premises destinations, including but not limited to hotels, restaurants,
airlines, and social events.
Composting Facility. An establishment that conducts composting operations.
Food Bank. A facility that receives donations of food for redistribution to
needy groups, individuals, or families.
Food Court. An area within a building or shopping center where five or more
food establishments are situated and serviced by a common dining area.
Food Establishment. A catering establishment, food court, food manufacturer or
processor, hospital, hotel, market, or restaurant.
Food Manufacturer or Processor. An establishment that generates food waste and
is primarily involved in the manufacture or processing of food products,
including animal products, but excluding baked goods.
Food Waste. Has the same meaning as defined under the definition of “recyclable
materials” in §
42-1.2.
Function Room. An area within a hotel where events are held at which food is
served, including but not limited to wedding receptions, business meetings,
conferences, banquets, and parties.
Hospital. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Hotel. Has the same meaning as defined in §
21-10.1.
Market. Includes establishments where fresh meat, fish, or produce is prepared,
handled, and displayed for sale at retail or wholesale.
Meal. Includes any food item or items served as an entree at breakfast, lunch,
or dinner, but excludes beverages and desserts, if the beverages or desserts
are served by themselves and not part of a breakfast, lunch, or dinner.
Prepared Meals. Meals that have been cleaned, cooked, or otherwise prepared on
the premises of the food establishment, and excludes prepackaged meals that are
cooked or otherwise prepared elsewhere and only sold on the premises of the
establishment. Includes meals a portion of which have been precooked or
prepared off the premises of the establishment.
Recycling Facility. Includes a composting facility, waste bioconversion
facility, rendering facility, pig farm, or other agricultural facility that
uses food waste as animal feed or for other agricultural use, or any other
facility that recycles food waste and is approved by the director for that
purpose.
Recycling Service. A service or collection of services that includes the
collection and transportation of food waste to a recycling facility by a refuse
hauler or other company that collects the food waste, and the recycling or
reuse of that food waste by a recycling facility, which may or may not be
operated by the company that collects and transports the food waste.
Rendering Facility. An establishment that converts kitchen grease, cooking
oils, meat scraps or other slaughterhouse waste, waste from meat processing
plants, or any combination of the foregoing items, for use in the manufacture
of such products as cosmetics, detergents, plastics, paints, tires, and animal
feed products.
Restaurant. A place of business where food is served for compensation and
includes the kitchen or food preparation area of that place of business, but
excludes any portion of the establishment that is a bakery serving baked goods
for consumption on or off the premises of the restaurant and excludes a quick-
serve food service establishment that offers as the primary method of service,
for all mealtimes, food and drink orders taken at and served to the customer at
a self-service counter.
Waste Bioconversion Facility. A facility where food and other organic waste are
converted into useable byproducts.
(h)   The department may adopt rules in accordance with HRS Chapter 91, having
the force and effect of law, for the implementation, administration, and
enforcement of this section.
(i)   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the director or the director’s
duly authorized representative, may enter at reasonable times any building or
premises of a food establishment and inspect the books and records of a food
establishment to determine compliance with the requirements of this section;
provided that such entry and inspection shall be made in such a manner as to
cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession of the
property and the owners of the food establishment; and provided further that an
order of a court authorizing such entry and inspection shall be obtained before
entry or inspection if such entry or inspection is denied or resisted by the
persons in possession or owners of the food establishment.
(j)   On January 1, 1997* and quarterly thereafter:
(1)   Each waste bioconversion facility in the city shall report to the refuse
division on:
(A)   How much private refuse haulers or other companies are being charged as
of the end of the quarter being reported, per unit of weight or volume, for
disposing of food waste at the bioconversion facility, and how much the
facility is charging per unit of weight or volume, if the facility both
collected and disposed of food waste from a food establishment; and
(B)   The amount of food waste, per unit of weight or volume, that the facility
recycled during the previous quarter; and
(2)   Each refuse hauler or other company that collects and transports food
waste shall report to the refuse division on how much, per unit of weight or
volume, the hauler or company charged food establishments as of the end of the
quarter being reported to collect and dispose of their food waste.
(k)   Nothing in this section shall preclude a food establishment from donating
leftover or unsold food that is safe to consume to a food bank.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 3, § 9-3.5) (Added by Ord. 96-20; Am. Ords. 99-32, 02-
14, 25-2)
Editor’s note:
   * “January 1, 1997” is substituted for “the effective date of this
ordinance.”
ARTICLE 4: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL CHARGES
Sections
   
42-4.1   Collection charges for businesses
   
42-4.2   Disposal charges for businesses and federal, State, and city agencies
   
42-4.3   Payments of charges
   
42-4.4   Failure to pay charges
   
42-4.5   Dead animals—Collection fee
   
42-4.6   Disposition of fees, charges, and deposits
   
42-4.7   Refuse collection and disposal charges—Waiver
   
42-4.8   Cost of bulky wastes removal
§ 42-4.1 Collection charges for businesses.
(a)   For refuse generated by businesses and collected by manual collection.
(1)   Unit charge for collection. For all refuse collected and removed by the
division on regularly scheduled collection days from places of business, there
shall be a unit charge or a minimum charge, whichever is greater, assessed
against each business served by the division in accordance with the following
schedule:
 
Unit Charge      Minimum Charge                  Effective Date
(per cubic foot) (per month or fraction thereof)
$1               $30                             July 1, 1997
 
(2)   Volumes of refuse shall be based on monthly averages determined by
periodic measurements. New accounts shall be charged the minimum charge
specified in paragraph (1) per month during the period that the monthly average
volume is being determined; provided that after the average monthly volume is
determined, retroactive adjustment of charges over the minimum may be made if
deemed to be warranted, such determination to be made by the director of budget
and fiscal services.
(b)   For refuse generated by businesses and collected by automated collection
with 90-gallon city-issued carts.
(1)   Cart deposit charge. An initial cart deposit fee shall be charged for
each business cart. Upon return of the cart to the city refuse division, a
portion of the cart deposit fee shall be returned to the business. The
difference between the deposit fee and the deposit return shall be retained by
the city for administrative handling, including cart delivery. Carts are the
responsibility of the business owner. Damaged carts under warranty will be
repaired or replaced by the city. The city will collect the deposit fee for all
carts issued to businesses, including the carts issued before July 1, 1997.*
 
Deposit Fee Deposit Return Effective Date
(per cart)  (per cart)
$90         $70            July 1, 1997
 
(2)   Unit charge. The unit charge for collection will be according to the
following schedule:
 
Monthly Unit Charge Minimum Charge                  Effective Date
(per cart)          (per month or fraction thereof)
$75                 $75                             July 1, 1997
 
(3)   New account charge. New accounts shall be charged the minimum charge
specified in paragraph (2) of this subsection.
(Sec. 9-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 4, §
9-4.1) (Am. Ords. 89-77, 97-45)
Editor’s note:
   * “January 1, 1997” is substituted for “the effective date of this
ordinance.”
§ 42-4.2 Disposal charges for businesses and federal, State, and city agencies.
(a)   Unit charges for disposal. For the receipt and disposal of refuse and
other solid wastes delivered to disposal facilities by any business or any
federal or State agency, the following unit charges shall apply:
 
Disposal Facility        Unit Charge Unit Charge
                         (per ton)   (per cubic yard or fraction thereof)
H-POWER                  $81         $25.25
Transfer stations        $110.60     $34.50
Landfills                $81         $25.25
Transshipment facilities $81         $25.25
 
(b)   Minimum and special charges.
(1)   Minimum charges. The minimum charge per truckload shall be equal to the
unit charge per cubic yard. The unit charge per cubic yard will be assessed
only in the event of a breakdown or unavailability of weighing equipment at the
disposal facility.
(2)   Special charges. All special charges will apply to businesses, and
federal and State agencies.
(A)   Landfill. In addition to the unit charges established in this section, a
charge per truckload for special wastes requiring special handling or
arrangements by the city’s or operating contractor’s employees for proper
disposal at landfills shall be imposed as follows:
 
Special Handling Charge
$84.25
 
(B)   H-POWER. In addition to the unit charges established in subsection (a), a
per ton and a per hour charge for waste delivered to the H-POWER facility
requiring special handling or arrangements by the H-POWER contractor’s
employees shall be imposed as follows:
 
Disposal Area     Per Ton Charge                  Minimum Load Charge
                  Special Handling Per Ton Charge
Auger bin         $540                            $270
RDF storage floor $440                            $220
MSW storage floor $320                            $210
 
The charge per ton or minimum load charge, whichever is greater, shall be
assessed against each business or agency served. In addition to this
assessment, there shall be a per hour charge as specified below:
 
Per Hour Charge
Disposal Area     Special Handling Per Hour Charge
Auger bin         $250 per hour or fraction thereof
RDF storage floor $25 per hour or fraction thereof per H-POWER contractor’s
                  employee
MSW storage floor $25 per hour or fraction thereof per H-POWER contractor’s
                  employee
 
(c)   Discount for disposal of residue from recycling operations. The unit
charges for disposal of residue from recycling operations shall be discounted
to 75 percent of the unit charges for disposal set forth in subsection (a). For
the purposes of this subsection, a “recycling operation” is a facility that
recovers post-consumer waste materials for use in new consumer products. To be
eligible for the discounted unit charges for disposal, the following conditions
must be met:
(1)   The recycling operation shall recover at least 2,000 pounds of recyclable
materials per month;
(2)   The recyclable material shall be shipped off-island, or the recyclable
material shall be incorporated into a new consumer product directly by the
recycling operation;
(3)   The residue shall be a maximum of 25 percent of the weight of the
recyclable materials recovered;
(4)   The residue shall be a direct result of the recycling operation;
(5)   The residue shall not be commingled with other waste at delivery;
(6)   The residue shall not contain any recyclable material; and
(7)   The recycling operation shall be in compliance with all applicable
permits and licenses required by the City and County of Honolulu, State of
Hawaii, and the federal government; noncompliance will result in
disqualification until compliance is resolved and certified.
Upon submission of a written request and supporting data from the recycling
operation’s owner or the recycling operation’s owner’s designee, the director
shall determine whether the recycling operation is eligible for the discounted
unit charge for disposal. After such determination, the director shall either
approve the application by proper endorsement or deny the application
specifying in writing the cause or causes for such disapproval.
All vehicles used by the recycling operation to transport residue to disposal
facilities shall be constructed so as to allow ready inspection of their load
before disposal.
Disposal charges shall be charged directly to the recycling operation. The
recycling operation’s owner or the recycling operation’s owner’s designee shall
submit monthly reports to the director documenting types and quantities of the
materials recycled and the residues resulting therefrom. If the director
determines that the residue from the recycling operation does not meet the
conditions for the discounted unit charge for disposal as set forth in this
subsection, the director shall not apply the discount and shall not apply the
discount until such time that the director determines that the applicable
conditions for such discount have been met.
(d)   Exemption.
(1)   Any eleemosynary or charitable organization that has been determined by
the Internal Revenue Service to qualify as a tax-exempt organization under §
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and that recovers post-consumer waste
materials for charitable use through a donated merchandise program, generating
residue as a byproduct of its charitable function for disposal at a city
disposal facility; and
(2)   Any one-day solid waste cleanup event or activity approved by the
department of environmental services for the express, noncommercial benefit of
the community that involves the collection of litter and other solid waste from
noncommercial sources and that results in the disposal and recycling of that
waste, shall be exempt from the disposal and special handling charges of
subsections (a) and (b) and the fees of subsection (e). The residue generated
from a donated merchandise program run by an eleemosynary or charitable
organization, pursuant to subdivision (1), and waste collected through the
event or activity described in subdivision (2), that are to be disposed of at
any city disposal facility, shall be clearly marked as such residue or waste,
as the case may be, and shall not be commingled with any other waste.
If an eleemosynary organization contracts with a private business to dispose of
residue in compacted form or otherwise, the private business shall be initially
charged the standard disposal fees for the disposal of the residue. The
exemption to disposal fees shall be applied to the private business’s account
after the eleemosynary organization submits a monthly report to the chief
engineer documenting dates and numbers of loads of residue dispatched to the
disposal sites.
(e)   In addition to the charges outlined in subsections (a) and (b), there
shall be a surcharge of 12 percent on those charges. The 12 percent surcharge
shall also be applied to the charge that the city pays for disposing of refuse
and other solid wastes at the H-POWER facility. All charges collected in
accordance with this subsection shall be deposited into the recycling account
of the solid waste special fund established by §
6-49.1.
(f)   Surcharge for recovering State and federal fees. In addition to the
disposal charges at municipal landfills, incinerators, and transfer stations
delineated in this section, the department is authorized to impose a surcharge
to recover the amount of any solid waste regulatory or permit fee imposed by
the State or federal government together with any administrative cost to the
city for imposing and collecting the fee.
(Sec. 9-4.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 4, §
9-4.2) (Am. Ords. 89-77, 91-66, 92-60, 92-111, 95-06, 95-39, 95-40, 96-58, 97-
45, 99-32, 99-33, 00-27, 01-65, 02-32, 03-20, 04-07, 04-16, 10-2, 11-6, 11-25,
12-37, 16-4)
§ 42-4.3 Payments of charges.
(a)   Collection and disposal charges shall be paid at the time of disposal or
billed monthly or bimonthly by the director of budget and fiscal services or
the director’s designated billing agency, such determination to be made by the
director. Charges billed shall be paid within 30 days after the date of the
bill.
(b)   Billed charges not paid within 30 days shall become delinquent and shall
be subject to interest at the rate of 1 percent per month for each month or
fraction thereof that such charges remain delinquent.
(c)   If partial payment of a delinquent charge is made, the amount received
shall first be credited to interest and then to principal.
(Sec. 9-4.3, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 4, §
9-4.3) (Am. Ords. 99-32, 99-65, 14-13)
§ 42-4.4 Failure to pay charges.
(a)   The director shall discontinue collection and disposal service to any
business for failure to pay any charge when due. The director shall resume
service upon request for reinstatement of service by the business and upon
payment to the director of budget and fiscal services of all delinquent charges
including interest. There shall be a service reinstatement fee of $10 that
shall be paid to the director of budget and fiscal services when request for
reinstatement of service is made.
(b)   A service fee of $25 will be charged for handling a dishonored check.
(Sec. 9-4.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 4, §
9-4.4) (Am. Ord. 99-32)
§ 42-4.5 Dead animals—Collection fee.
   There shall be no charge for the collection or disposal of dead animals
described in §
42-1.8.
(Sec. 9-4.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 4, §
9-4.5)
§ 42-4.6 Disposition of fees, charges, and deposits.
   All fees and charges collected under this chapter shall be deposited into
the solid waste special fund.
(Sec. 9-4.6, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 4, §
9-4.6) (Am. Ords. 92-111, 99-32)
§ 42-4.7 Refuse collection and disposal charges—Waiver.
(a)   The director is authorized to waive the collection and disposal charges
established by this article in cases of natural or man-made disasters and for a
time period in which the director deems necessary to remove disaster debris.
(b)   For the purposes of this section, a “natural disaster” includes disasters
caused by fire, flood, tidal waves, hurricanes, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions,
earthquakes, or other natural causes; and a “man-made disaster” includes
disasters caused by enemy attacks, sabotage, other hostile actions, or
disasters to individual homes, or other disasters manufactured, created, or
constructed by mankind.
(c)   The director may adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 to implement this
section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 4, § 9-4.7) (Added by Ord. 92-137)
§ 42-4.8 Cost of bulky wastes removal.
(a)   The failure of any owner or association of apartment owners to properly
dispose of or remove bulky wastes within seven days after written notice shall
constitute a public nuisance. Any person responsible for noncompliance with §
42-1.4(d) shall be liable to the city for the cost of removing such bulky
wastes.
(1)   Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner or association of
apartment owners so notified to properly dispose of or remove bulky wastes
within seven days after receipt of written notice or within seven days after
the date of such notice in the event the same is returned to the city because
of an inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same is properly
addressed to the last known address of such owner or association of apartment
owners, the director is authorized and empowered to dispose of such bulky
wastes or to order its disposal by the city. The director or the director’s
authorized representative, including any contractor with whom the director
contracts under this section and assistants, employees or agents of such
contractor are authorized to remove bulky wastes on the street or sidewalk
fronting the property of the owner or association of apartment owners.
(2)   When the city has effected the removal of bulky wastes or has paid for
their removal upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or association
of apartment owners so notified to properly dispose or remove bulky wastes, the
owner or association of apartment owners shall be billed by mail and charged
the actual cost incurred by the city, plus any administrative expenses
associated with the removal of the bulky wastes. The bill shall apprise the
owner or association of apartment owners that failure to pay the bill within 30
days after the bill has been mailed for payment will result in a lien being
placed upon the property as authorized by HRS § 46-1.5. Interest at the rate of
8 percent per year shall accrue on any unpaid balance from the 31st day after
the bill has been mailed to the owner or association of apartment owners.
(3)   The director shall cause to be kept in the department a permanent record
containing:
(A)   A description of each parcel of the property for which a notice to remove
bulky wastes has been given under this subsection;
(B)   The name of the owner or association of apartment owners if known;
(C)   The date on which such notice was mailed and posted;
(D)   The fee for removing the bulky wastes; and
(E)   A brief summary of the work performed.
(b)   All moneys collected under this section shall be deposited into the solid
waste special fund.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 4, § 9-4.8) (Added by Ord. 10-16)
ARTICLE 5: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS
Sections
   
42-5.1   Violation—Penalty
   
42-5.2   Revocation or suspension of license
   
42-5.3   Enforcement authority
   
42-5.4   Nonliability of department personnel
§ 42-5.1 Violation—Penalty.
(a)   Except as otherwise provided, any person violating this chapter shall be
subject to a civil fine not exceeding $500 for each violation. Each day that a
person violates this chapter shall constitute a separate violation.
(b)   Any person violating §
42-1.4(a)(6) shall be subject to a civil fine not exceeding $250 for each
violation.
(c)   Any person violating §
42-3.1(c) shall be subject to a civil fine not exceeding $250 for each
violation.
(d)   Any person violating §
42-3.5 shall be subject to a civil fine not exceeding $250 for each violation.
For purposes of this subsection, “person” means any natural person,
partnership, corporation, firm, sole proprietorship, trust, unincorporated
association or joint venture, cooperative, or any other entity; provided that
the term shall exclude a church and a nonprofit organization, as defined in §
38-1.3, except a hospital.
(e)   Any person violating both §§
42-1.4(d) and
42-4.8 shall be subject to a civil fine not exceeding $250 for each violation.
Each time an owner or association of apartment owners violates §
42-1.4(d), and fails to properly dispose of or remove the bulky wastes after
receiving a written notice pursuant to §
42-4.8, that shall constitute a single violation. The fine shall be in addition
to any removal costs billed to the owner or association of apartment owners.
(f)   Any person violating §
42-1.10 shall be subject to a civil fine not exceeding $2,500 for each
violation; provided that any person violating both §§
42-1.4(d) and
42-1.10 shall be subject only to the civil fine set forth in subsection (a).
(g)   The penalties under this section are in addition to any other penalty
that may be imposed on a person for a violation of this chapter.
(h)   Appeal of the fines set forth in this section shall be pursuant to rules
adopted by the director as necessary to carry out this chapter.
(Sec. 9-5.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 5, §
9-5.1) (Am. Ords. 89-113, 95-64, 96-20, 99-32, 10-16, 16-9)
§ 42-5.2 Revocation or suspension of license.
   In the case where a person has been convicted, the court shall have the
further power to suspend or revoke any license or permit issued to such person
under this section for any remaining portion of the term of such license or
permit, or such person may be punished by both such fine, suspension, or
revocation. No license or permit shall be issued to any person whose license or
permit has been so suspended or revoked, as above prescribed for a period of
two years after the date of such suspension or revocation. The court may also
order forfeiture of the bond provided in §
42-2.2(b) or any part thereof, for the nonobservance or violation by a licensee
of the conditions of the license.
(Sec. 9-5.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 5, § 9-5.2)
§ 42-5.3 Enforcement authority.
(a)   Any inspector is authorized to:
(1)   Issue a written citation pursuant to §
42-5.1 if such enforcement officer witnesses a violation, receives a report
from a private citizen witnessing a violation or has probable cause to believe
that a person has violated this chapter;
(2)   Investigate any refuse and bulky wastes found thrown, deposited, or
dumped on a street, roadside, alley, highway, or public place to find any
personal identification contained therein;
(3)   Issue a written citation pursuant to §
42-5.1 for violations of this chapter; and
(4)   Issue a written citation pursuant to §
42-5.1(f) for violations of §
42-1.10. When a vehicle is used in violation of §
42-1.10(b), the inspector is authorized to issue a written citation to the
registered owner of the vehicle. The registered owner may be determined by the
identification of the vehicle’s license plates. If the registered owner is the
lessor of a rental or U-drive motor vehicle and if the vehicle is leased at the
time of the violation, the lessee at the time of the violation shall be cited
and notified of the citation in the same manner as the registered owner and
shall be responsible for responding to the citation.
(b)   Any person who witnesses the throwing, dropping, placing, dumping, or
depositing of refuse or bulky wastes in violation of this chapter, including
the throwing of refuse or bulky wastes from a vehicle, may report the date,
time of day, location and license number of the vehicle, to any enforcement
officer. It shall not be necessary that an act of illegal dumping or other
violation of this article shall have occurred in the presence of or have been
witnessed by an employee of the department for the director to determine that a
violation has occurred.
(c)   All complaints of alleged violations shall be investigated by the city.
Inspectors shall, wherever practicable, inspect any refuse found on any street,
highway, alley or public place, and any traceable ownership shall be subject to
this chapter. Reasonable evidence may be considered by the department in
investigating complaints of illegal dumping or related violations, including
photographs and video recordings, in determining whether a violation has
occurred.
(d)   A written citation for a violation of §
42-1.10 shall contain information identifying or describing the location of the
violation, the date and time the violation occurred or was discovered, a copy
of any photograph or digitized image of the violation, provided that the
inspector uses such photograph or image in issuing the citation, and the
license plate number of any vehicle used. The inspector shall cause the written
citation to be sent by certified mail or registered mail that is postmarked
within five days of the occurrence or discovery of the violation, to the
individual identified as having committed the violation, or where a vehicle was
involved, to the registered owner at the registered owner’s address on record
with the department of customer services or appropriate motor vehicle
registration agency, or, in the case of a rental or U-Drive motor vehicle, to
the lessee of the vehicle at the time of the violation. If the end of the five-
day period falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, then the period shall run
until the end of the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday.
Upon receipt of the citation, the individual or the registered owner or lessee
shall be given fourteen days to respond to the citation by:
(1)   Paying a fine by mail; or
(2)   Requesting that a hearing be set on the matter.
A mail receipt signed by the individual, registered owner, or lessee is prima
facie evidence of notification.
A rebuttable presumption exists that the registered owner or lessee of a
vehicle used in committing a violation of §
42-1.10(a) is the person who operated or used the vehicle in violation of §
42-1.10(b). The registered owner of the vehicle shall not be presumed to be the
operator or user of the vehicle for violations §
42-1.10(b) when the vehicle or license plates have been reported stolen before
the violation occurs.
(e)   ln any proceeding for a violation of §
42-1.10(b), the information contained in the citation issued in accordance with
subsection (d) shall be deemed evidence that the vehicle was observed as being
involved with the unlawful throwing, dropping, placing, dumping, or depositing
of refuse or bulky wastes, on a street, roadside, alley, highway, or other
public place.
(f)   The director may adopt rules to administer and enforce this chapter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 5, § 9-5.3) (Added by Ord. 10-16; Am. Ord. 20-4)
§ 42-5.4 Nonliability of department personnel.
   No member, employee, or officer of the department shall be civilly or
criminally liable or responsible under this chapter for any acts done under
this chapter in the performance of their duties as a member, an officer, or an
employee of the city.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 5, § 9-5.4) (Added by Ord. 10-16)
ARTICLE 6: PROCEDURE ON ARREST
Sections
   
42-6.1   Procedure
   
42-6.2   Summons or citation
§ 42-6.1 Procedure.
   Any authorized police officer or special officer, upon making an arrest for
a violation of this chapter, shall take the name and address of the alleged
violator and shall issue to such person in writing a summons or citation
hereinafter described, notifying such person to answer to the complaint to be
entered against such person at a place and at a time provided in the summons or
citation. The term “special officer” means any officer or employee of the
department of environmental services who has the duty and responsibility to
enforce this chapter and who has been conferred and appointed as special
officer by the chief of police of the City and County of Honolulu.
(Sec. 9-6.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 6, § 9-6.1) (Am.
Ord. 99-32)
§ 42-6.2 Summons or citation.
(a)   There shall be provided for use by police officers or special officers, a
form of summons or citation for use in citing violators of this chapter where
the circumstances do not mandate the physical arrest of such violators. The
form and content of such summons or citation shall be as adopted or prescribed
by the administrative judge of the district court and shall be printed on a
form commensurate with the form of other summonses or citations used in modern
methods of arrest, so designed to include all necessary information to make the
same valid within the laws and regulations of the State of Hawaii and the City
and County of Honolulu.
(b)   In every case when a citation is issued, the original of the same shall
be given to the violator; provided that the administrative judge of the
district court may prescribe by giving to the violator a carbon copy of the
citation and provide for the disposition of the original and any other copies.
(c)   Every citation shall be consecutively numbered and each carbon copy shall
bear the number of its respective original.
(Sec. 9-6.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 6, § 9-6.2)
ARTICLE 7: RECYCLING OF GLASS CONTAINERS
Sections
   
42-7.1   Incentive for licensed recycler
   
42-7.2   Definitions
   
42-7.3   License application—Bond—Insurance—Fee—Term—Revocation
   
42-7.4   Glass incentive program
   
42-7.5   Payment of incentives
   
42-7.6   Prohibitions
   
42-7.7   Violation—Penalty
§ 42-7.1 Incentive for licensed recycler.
   The department shall pay to each licensed recycler engaged in the recycling
of glass containers an incentive in accordance with this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 7, § 9-7.1) (Added by Ord. 89-125)
§ 42-7.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Cullet. Pieces of crushed glass that may be melted and made into new glass.
Glass Container. A container that is designed and intended to hold a beverage,
food, cleaning, health, beauty, or similar product and is manufactured from a
mixture of silicates, borates, or phosphates.
Glass Dealer. Any person who is engaged in the manufacture of glass containers
within the city or who imports glass containers from without the city.
Incentive. The payment for each ton of glass containers recycled, as authorized
under §
42-7.5.
Licensed Recycler. A person licensed under §
42-7.3.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 7, § 9-7.2) (Added by Ord. 89-125; Am. Ords. 99-32, 10-
16)
§ 42-7.3 License application—Bond—Insurance—Fee—Term—Revocation.
(a)   Any person wholly or partially engaged in the business of recycling glass
containers may apply to the department for licensure as a licensed recycler.
The application shall contain the following information from the applicant:
(1)   Name and home address;
(2)   Business address;
(3)   Address at which the applicant refills glass containers, processes glass
containers for shipment out of State or crushes glass containers into cullet;
(4)   State of Hawaii general excise tax license number;
(5)   If the applicant is a firm, association, organization, partnership, joint
venture, corporation, business, trust, company, or cooperative, the names and
addresses of all owners and officers and their respective percentages of
ownership; and
(6)   Facts demonstrating that the applicant is engaged in the business of
recycling glass containers.
(b)   Every applicant for a license shall execute and submit a surety bond in
favor of the city in the penal sum of $1,000. The bond shall be issued by a
surety company authorized to do business in Hawaii in accordance with HRS § 78-
20.
(c)   The applicant shall secure and present to the department at the time of
application a standard automobile liability insurance policy covering the
applicant, or any person driving any vehicle belonging to the applicant with
the applicant’s permission in the amount of $100,000 for bodily injury to or
death of one person in any accident and in the amount of $300,000 for bodily
injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident, respectively,
and property damage insurance in the amount of $10,000 because of damage to or
destruction of property of others in any one accident. The applicant shall
secure and present to the department at the time of application a standard
comprehensive nonvehicular public liability insurance policy covering the
applicant and the applicant’s employees and agents, which shall also include a
rider covering the city in the amount of $300,000. The rider shall be in the
form of an endorsement insured by the insurer.
(d)   The fee for an annual glass recycling license shall be $100, payable in
advance to the director of customer services. The fee for any license issued to
an applicant after July 1 shall be prorated according to the remaining months
of each fiscal year. No license fee shall be refundable.
(e)   The director of customer services shall issue a license to each applicant
upon satisfaction of the truth of the information on the application and
payment by the applicant of the license fee. Issuance of the license shall
confer upon the licensed recycler the privilege of receiving the incentive
under this article, and no other privilege, right, power, duty, or obligation.
Issuance of the license shall not be deemed an approval, endorsement or
sanction by the director of customer services or city of the licensed recycler
or any activity conducted by the licensed recycler. Nor shall issuance of the
license be deemed an expressed or implied imposition or acceptance of a
regulatory obligation upon the director of customer services or city over the
licensed recycler or any activity conducted by the licensed recycler, except as
otherwise provided under this article.
(f)   The glass recycling license shall be issued for a term of one year
commencing July 1 and ending on June 30 of the next succeeding year.
(g)   Revenues from the license fee and renewal fee shall be a realization of
the solid waste special fund.
(h)   The director of customer services may suspend or revoke a license for
cause, subject to the same procedure as applicable to the suspension or
revocation of a refuse collection license under §
42-2.6.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 7, § 9-7.3) (Added by Ord. 89-125; Am. Ords. 96-58, 99-
32, 10-16)
§ 42-7.4 Glass incentive program.
(a)   The amount of funding provided in the glass incentive account referenced
in §
6-49.1 shall be adequate to meet glass recycling program goals as determined by
the department, considering the economic and environmental benefits to be
realized.
(b)   Every glass dealer shall pay to the department an assessment to cover
incentives and the expense of administering the glass recycling program, which
assessment shall be paid only once on the same glass container and shall not
exceed 1 cent per glass container in the first year of operation and shall not
exceed 2 cents per container, if needed, in the second year, and thereafter an
amount to be determined by the department consistent with the glass recycling
program goals as determined by the department pursuant to subsection (a).
In addition to the revenues provided by the glass dealers through the
assessments, the city shall pay to the fund an amount not to exceed $300,000 in
the first year of operation and $600,000, if needed, in the second year, and
thereafter an amount to be determined by the department consistent with the
glass recycling program goals as determined by the department pursuant to
subsection (a), subject to appropriation by the council. The assessment shall
be paid at a time and in a manner prescribed by rules adopted by the department
in accordance with HRS Chapter 91. The assessment shall not be paid on glass
containers exported from the city, unless the glass dealer decides to make such
payment.
(c)   The department may require glass dealers to maintain records reflecting
their manufacture and importation of glass containers, to furnish to the
department such information as may be requested relating to such manufacture
and importation, and to permit inspection by the department of such books and
records. Proprietary information obtained by the department shall be kept
confidential, and shall not be disclosed to any other person except:
(1)   As may be reasonably required in any administrative or judicial
proceeding to enforce this chapter or any rule adopted to implement or
administer this chapter; and
(2)   Under any order or subpoena issued by a court.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 7, § 9-7.4) (Added by Ord. 89-125; Am. Ord. 99-22; Am.
Ord. 21-18)
§ 42-7.5 Payment of incentives.
(a)   The department may pay an incentive to each licensed recycler who agrees
in writing to pay to the public a minimum price established by the department
for glass to be recycled in the program.
(b)   The amount of the incentive shall be determined by the department in
accordance with rules adopted pursuant to HRS Chapter 91. In determining the
amount of the incentive, the department shall consult with the glass dealers
and licensed recyclers based on, among other things:
(1)   The minimum price licensed recyclers must pay the public to achieve the
recycling goals set forth in §
42-7.4(b); and
(2)   The avoided cost of collecting and disposing of glass.
(c)   The amount of the incentive shall be the same for all licensed recyclers.
(d)   To qualify for the payment of the incentive, the licensed recycler shall:
(1)   Transport not less than 1 ton of the glass to a processing facility
designated by the department; and
(2)   Provide sufficient documentation as determined by the department
indicating the number of tons received by the ultimate user of the glass
containers, and the amount paid for each ton received.
(e)   To receive payment of the incentive, the licensed recycler shall show
proof or provide appropriate attestation that recyclable glass containers have
been:
(1)   Processed for refilling, or have been refilled, within the State;
(2)   Loaded onto an air carrier or water carrier for shipment out-of-State; or
(3)   Loaded onto an air carrier or water carrier for use within the State, or
otherwise used within the city in a manner approved by the director.
(f)   The department shall make the appropriate payment to the licensed
recycler upon satisfaction that all of the recycled glass has been processed,
refilled, loaded, or used.
(g)   All assessments collected or received by the department under this
chapter may only be used for costs and expenses directly relating to
operational and administrative costs of the program actually incurred.
(h)   Surplus funds may be:
(1)   Carried over into the next fiscal year and may be used to assist in
defraying the cost of the program in succeeding fiscal years; or
(2)   Refunded at the close of the fiscal year on a pro rata basis to all
persons from whom assessments were collected.
(i)   Upon termination of the incentive program, all moneys remaining that are
not required by the department to defray the expenses of the program shall be
refunded on a pro rata basis to all persons from whom assessments were
collected. If amounts returnable are so small as to make impractical the
computation and remitting of the pro rata refunds, the remaining funds shall
become a realization of the city.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 7, § 9-7.5) (Added by Ord. 89-125)
§ 42-7.6 Prohibitions.
(a)   No person shall falsify the proof or attestation required to collect an
incentive. No person shall pay an incentive based upon false proof or
attestation if knowing that the proof or attestation is false.
(b)   No person shall submit false information on the application for issuance
or renewal of a license under §
42-7.3. No person shall apply for, receive, or issue a license under §
42-7.3 on a fraudulent basis.
(c)   No person shall use a license issued under §
42-7.3 if the person is not the licensed recycler to which the license was
issued or an authorized officer or employee of the licensed recycler. No
unauthorized officer or employee shall use the licensed recycler’s license.
(d)   No person shall violate any other provision of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 7, § 9-7.6) (Added by Ord. 89-125)
§ 42-7.7 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by the
immediate termination of the license, and for each violation by a fine not
exceeding $1,000 and imprisonment not exceeding one year.
(1990 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 7, § 9-7.7) (Added by Ord. 89-125)
CHAPTER 43: SEWERS, DRAINAGE, AND CESSPOOLS
Articles
   
1.   General Provisions
   
2.   Sewer System for New Subdivision
   
3.   Sewer System for Other Than in New Subdivisions
   
4.   Private Sewer System
   
5.   Industrial Wastewaters
   
5A.   Commercial FOG Waste and Commercial Cooking Oil Waste
   
6.   Sewer Service Charges
      
Appendix 43-A: Sewer Service Charge Schedules
   
7.   Pumping or Treating of Cesspools
      
Appendix 43-B: Cesspool Charge Schedules
   
8.   Sewer Fund
   
9.   Termination of Water Service
   
10.   Wastewater System Facility Charges
      
Appendix 43-C: Wastewater System Facility Charges
   
11.   Drainage, Flood, and Pollution Control
Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to Chapter 43, Article 6, in Ord. 25-27, take effect on
October 1, 2025. Amendments made in Ord. 25-2 to Sections 43-6.2, 43-10.3,
Appendix 43-A, and Appendix 43-B were repealed on June 24, 2025, in accordance
with Ord. 25-27.
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections
   
43-1.1   Purpose
   
43-1.2   Definitions
   
43-1.3   Authority of the director
   
43-1.4   Emergency actions
   
43-1.5   Use of public sewers
   
43-1.6   Sewer extensions—Application—Payment—Specifications
   
43-1.7   Lateral sewer construction and connection
   
43-1.8   Use of public sewers—Restrictions—Violations
   
43-1.9   Right of entry and inspection
   
43-1.10   Recordkeeping
§ 43-1.1 Purpose.
(a)   
Articles 1 through
10 of this chapter set forth uniform requirements for industrial users of the
city’s wastewater collection and treatment system, to enable publicly owned
treatment works (“POTW”) to protect their interceptors, treatment, pumping, and
disposal systems and to comply with all applicable State and federal laws
required by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, and the
General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR part 403).
(b)   The objectives of
Articles 1 through
10 of this chapter are:
(1)   To protect the health and safety of the people and enhance the
environmental quality of the city and its surroundings;
(2)   To comply with the applicable State and federal laws relating to the
protection of the environment, control of water pollution, pretreatment of
industrial discharges, and the disposal of hazardous wastes in POTWs;
(3)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants in the POTW that will interfere
with the operation of the POTW, including interference with its use or disposal
of municipal sludge;
(4)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants in the POTW that will pass
through the treatment works or otherwise be incompatible with such works;
(5)   To ensure that the quality of the POTW sludge is maintained at a level
that allows its use and disposal in compliance with applicable statutes and
regulations;
(6)   To protect the health and welfare of workers at the treatment plants;
(7)   To prevent the introduction of wastes to sewers connected to the POTW
that could result in the POTW being classified as a hazardous waste treatment,
storage, or disposal facility under applicable State or federal laws;
(8)   To provide for source monitoring and control of quantity, quality, and
rate of flow of residential, commercial, and industrial wastes entering the
POTW;
(9)   To establish enforcement procedures and penalties for violations;
(10)   To regulate the use, connection, and construction of all public and
private sewers and to fix charges therefor; and
(11)   To authorize the director of the department of environmental services to
effectively enforce
Articles 1 through
10 of this chapter.
(Sec. 11-1.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 1, § 14-1.1) (Am.
Ords. 94-46, 01-64)
§ 43-1.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Act. See definition of “federal act” in this section.
Advanced Primary Treatment. An intermediate form of wastewater treatment that
provides for removal of generally 75 percent of the suspended solids and 45
percent of the biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5 ).
Assessment or Sewer Assessment. A compulsory levy or charge on selected
property for a particular sewer improvement undertaken in the interests of the
public and which benefits the lessees or owners of the selected property.
Authorized Representative. Pursuant to 40 CFR § 403.12(1), an authorized
representative of the industrial user is defined as and shall be any one or
more of the following:
(1)   A responsible corporate officer if the industrial user submitting the
statement or report is a corporation. For the purposes of this definition, a
“responsible corporate officer” means:
(A)   A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the corporation
in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs
similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
(B)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation
facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or
expenditures exceeding $25,000,000, if authority to sign documents has been
assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures;
(2)   A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user submitting the
statement or report is a partnership or sole proprietor, respectively;
(3)   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in
subdivision (1)(A) or (1)(B) of this definition if:
(A)   The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in
subdivision (1)(A) or (1)(B) of this definition;
(B)   The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the
industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager or a
position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company; and
(C)   The written authorization is submitted to the department; or
(4)   If an authorization under subdivision (3) of this definition is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of
subdivision (3) of this definition shall be submitted to the department before
or together with any other reports to be signed by an authorized
representative.
Backup Facilities. The wastewater conveyance system (interceptors, trunk
sewers, mains, and pumping stations); the wastewater treatment plant; and the
ocean outfall or wastewater disposal system. Specifically excluded are sewer
laterals, in-tract facilities, and main extensions, for which the costs have
been contributed by users of the system.
Benefited or Special Benefited Property. That property or portion of a property
provided with a direct or indirect connection to the public sewer, deriving
therefrom the direct and indirect advantages and benefits of sewer service.
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD5 ). A standard test used in assessing sewage
strength and is the measure of decomposable organic material in domestic or
industrial wastewater as represented by the oxygen used over a period of five
days at 20 degrees Celsius and as determined by the appropriate procedure in
“Standard Methods.”
Building Sewer or House Sewer. That portion of a pipe or conduit carrying
sanitary sewage or industrial wastes, or both, from a building to the public
sewer or a common sewer.
Bypass. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an
industrial user's treatment facility.
Categorical Industrial User. An industrial user who is subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under 40 CFR § 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N,
Parts 405 through 471.
Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits adopted by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency in accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, which apply to a specific category of industrial users
and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
Cesspool. A covered lined or partially lined pool, pit, or deep hole in the
ground to receive the untreated discharges of sewage and from which the liquids
seep into the surrounding soil through the bottom or sides.
Combined Sewer. A sewer receiving a mixture of stormwater and sanitary sewage
with or without industrial wastes.
Commercial Cooking Oil Waste. Has the same meaning as defined in §
43-5A.1.
Commercial FOG Waste. Has the same meaning as defined in §
43-5A.1.
Composite Sampling. A collection of a number of discrete sample aliquots
obtained through flow-proportional samples, at constant time intervals between
samples and composites for analysis. Composite sampling techniques shall be
performed in accordance with Appendix E to 40 CFR Part 403.
Connection. Any connection made or to be made to a public sewer at a manhole,
in a new manhole, at the end of a stub, wye, saddle wye, lateral, or main.
DOH. The State department of health.
Days. Calendar days, including weekends and holidays, unless otherwise
indicated.
Department. The department of environmental services of the City and County of
Honolulu.
Director. The director of the department of environmental services or the
director’s authorized representatives.
Discharge. See definition of “indirect discharge” in this section.
Domestic Wastewater. The water-carried wastes produced from noncommercial or
nonindustrial activities and which result from normal human living processes.
Drain, Storm. A pipe, conduit, or channel used for conveying stormwater,
surface water, wash water, or other similar discharges, but excludes sewage and
polluted industrial wastes.
Dry Weather Flow. Wastewater flow during periods of little or no rainfall.
Rates of flow exhibit hourly, daily, and seasonal variations. A certain amount
of infiltration may also be present.
Dwelling Unit. A room or rooms connected together constituting an independent
living unit with independent exterior access that includes a food preparation
area. The existence of separate rental/lease agreements, addresses, and
mailboxes can be used in determining dwelling unit counts for sewer service
charge assessment purposes.
Effluent. Sewage, water, or other liquid flowing out of any basin treatment
device or facility.
Entitlement. The amount of sewage capacity reserved for the property.
EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Equivalent Single-Family Dwelling Unit (ESDU). The fundamental unit that will
be used to express the imputed seasonal average wastewater volume for new
applicants for service and for existing users of the city’s wastewater system.
One “ESDU” is equal to about 305 gallons per day in Honolulu, or about 9,000
gallons per month.
Extension or Extension Sewer. The continuation of an existing public sewer
through public or private property not owned, in whole or in part, by the
applicant or owner of the particular property or subdivision to be served.
Federal Act, Act, or the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. Refers to P.L.
92-500, also known as the Clean Water Act, and amendments thereto, 33 USC §§
1251 et seq., as well as regulations and standards adopted by the EPA, or
successor, pursuant to the act.
Food Preparation Area. An area containing fixtures, appliances, or devices for:
(1)   Heating, preparing, or cooking food;
(2)   Refrigerating food; and
(3)   Washing utensils used for dining and food preparation or for washing and
preparing food, or both.
The permanent removal of both elements (1) and (2) above, or element (3) above
is required to eliminate a food preparation area for sewer service charge
assessment purposes.
Force Main. A pipeline on the discharge end of a pump carrying flow under
pressure.
40 CFR. Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations relating to the protection
of the environment.
Grab Sampling. A method of obtaining an individual sample collected over a
period of time not exceeding 15 minutes. Grab sampling may be employed where
the pollutants being evaluated are those that may not be held for an extended
period because of biological, chemical, or physical interaction that takes
place after sample collection and affects the results.
Grease. Any material that is extractable from an acidified sample of a waste by
hexane or other designated solvent and as determined by the appropriate
procedure in “Standard Methods.”
House Connection. The sewer connecting the building sewer or building waste
drainage system to the public sewer for the purpose of conveying domestic
wastewater.
House Sewer. See definition of “building sewer” in this section.
Indirect Discharge or Discharge. The introduction of pollutants into a POTW
from any nondomestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c), or (d) of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act.
Individual Wastewater Disposal System. Any system of storing, treating, or
disposing of wastewater on the property where it originates or on adjacent or
nearby property under the control of the user where the system is not connected
to a city wastewater system. Individual wastewater disposal systems include but
are not limited to cesspools, septic tanks, and household aerobic units.
Excluded are wastewater treatment plants.
Industrial Connection Sewer. The sewer connecting the building sewer or
building waste drainage system to the public sewer for the purpose of conveying
industrial wastewater.
Industrial User or User. A source of indirect discharge.
Industrial Wastewater. All water-carried wastes and wastewater excluding
sanitary wastewater.
Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit or Permit. A document issued by the
department authorizing discharge of industrial waste, unless otherwise
indicated.
Infiltration. The unintentional entry of water into the wastewater collection
system from the surrounding soil. Common points of entry include broken pipe
and defective joints in the pipe or walls of manholes. Infiltration may result
from sewers being laid below the groundwater table or from saturation of the
soil by rain or irrigation water, seepage of groundwater into a sewer system,
including service connections. Seepage frequently occurs through defective or
cracked pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls.
Inflow. Water discharged into the sewer system and service connections from
such sources as but not limited to roof leaders, cellars, yard and area drains,
foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy
areas, and around manhole covers or through holes in the covers, cross
connections from storm and combined sewer systems, catch basins, stormwaters,
surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage. Inflow differs from
infiltration in that it is a direct discharge into the sewer rather than a leak
into the sewer itself.
Influent. Sewage, water, or other liquid flowing into any basin treatment
device or facility.
Interceptor. A sewer that is laid transversely to the general sewer system that
receives flow from sewer mains and lateral sewers and conducts such flow to a
plant for treatment and disposal.
Interference. Any discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources:
(1)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or
its sludge processes, use, or disposal; or
(2)   Is a cause of a violation of the NPDES permit or of the prevention of
sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory
or regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder: § 405 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including
Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA); any State regulation contained in any State sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic
Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries
Act.
Lateral or Lateral Sewer. A branch or side sewer of a minimum 6-inch inside
diameter in size from a public sewer main to serve one or more lots.
Local Limits. Prohibitive discharge limits developed by the city pursuant to 40
CFR § 403.5 and are deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of § 307(d)
of the act.
Main. A sewer into which several laterals or other sewer lines may discharge.
Manhole. An opening in a sewer constructed for the purpose of permitting a
person to enter or leave the sewer.
May. Is permissive.
NPDES Permit (National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit). Refers
to the written requirements established by DOH, which govern the quality and
quantity of wastewater discharged from a POTW.
National Pretreatment Standard, Pretreatment Standard, or Standard. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits adopted by the EPA in
accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as
amended, which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive
discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR § 403.5, categorical
pretreatment standards, and local limits provided in the sewer ordinance.
New Source. Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commences
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307(c) of the
act that will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter
adopted in accordance with that section. Specific location and construction
criteria for determining a new source are as defined in 40 CFR § 403.3(k), as
revised.
Noncompliance. Any violation of
Articles 1 through
10, the local limits, the industrial wastewater discharge permit, or National
Categorical Standards.
Ocean Outfall. A conveyance system whereby treated wastewater is discharged to
the marine receiving waters for final disposal.
Order or Director’s Order. A written determination, revocation, authorization,
permission, direction, or document, including but not limited to a permit
issued by the director pursuant to this chapter.
Owner. Includes a holder in fee, life tenant, executor, administrator, trustee,
guardian, or other fiduciary, lessee, or licensee holding under any government
lease or license of real property.
Pass Through or Pass-Through. A discharge that exits the POTW into the waters
of the State in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of
any requirement of the district’s NPDES permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation, or that causes water quality standards
established by the State or EPA to be exceeded.
Permit. See definition of “industrial wastewater discharge permit” in this
section.
Person or Words Importing Persons, for Instance, Another, Others, Any, Anyone,
Anybody, and the Like. Signifies not only individuals, but corporations,
trusts, partnerships, limited liability companies, firms, associations,
societies, communities, assemblies, inhabitants of a district or neighborhood,
or persons known or unknown, and the public generally, where it appears, from
the subject matter, the sense, and connection in which such words are used,
that such construction is intended.
pH. The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration. It
indicates the intensity of acidity and alkalinity on a pH scale running from 0
to 14. A pH value of 7.0, the midpoint of the scale, represents neutrality.
Values above 7.0 indicate alkalinity and those below 7.0 indicate acidity.
Pollution. The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical,
biological, and radiological integrity of water.
POTW. See definition of “publicly owned treatment works” in this section.
Pretreatment Requirement. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to
pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard, applicable to an
industrial user.
Pretreatment Standard. See definition of “national pretreatment standard” in
this section.
Pretreatment System or Device. Any control equipment that performs the process
of pretreatment.
Primary Treatment. A basic form of wastewater treatment that provides for
removal of generally 30 percent of the suspended solids and 30 percent of the
BOD5.
Private Sewer. A sewer, privately owned, which is not directly controlled by
the department.
Public Sewer. A sewer directly controlled by the department.
Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW). A treatment works as defined by § 212 of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, which is owned by a state or
municipality (as defined by § 502(4) of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act). This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes
of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only
if they convey wastewater to a POTW. The term also means the municipality as
defined in § 502(4) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, which has
jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a
treatment works.
Relief Sewer. A sewer constructed to relieve an existing line or lines
determined to be structurally defective or inadequate and of insufficient
capacity.
SADWF. See definition of “seasonal average dry weather flow” in this section.
Sanitary Sewer. A sewer the specific purpose of which is to carry only sanitary
sewage.
Seasonal Average Dry Weather Flow (SADWF). The average daily flow during the
month of maximum wastewater discharge for each seasonal discharger.
Secondary Treatment. An advanced form of wastewater treatment that provides for
removal of 85 percent of the suspended solids and 85 percent of the BOD5,
minimum.
Self-Monitoring. Wastewater sampling performed by an industrial user in
accordance with the municipality’s pretreatment program. Self-monitoring
requirements will be specified in the industrial wastewater discharge permit.
Septic Tank. A watertight settling tank in which settled sludge is in immediate
contact with the sewage flowing through the tank and the organic solids are
decomposed by an aerobic bacterial action.
Sewage. The waterborne wastes derived from ordinary human living processes and
of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special
treatment, into the public sewer, a private sewer, or by means of a household
sewage disposal system.
Sewage Pump Station. Any arrangement of devices within a structure used for
lifting and forcing out sewage.
Sewage Treatment Plant. Any arrangement of devices and structures for treating
sanitary sewage and industrial wastes excluding cesspools, individual household
septic tank systems, and individual household aerobic units.
Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
Sewer, Building or House. That portion of a pipe or conduit carrying sanitary
sewage or industrial wastes, or both, from a building to the public sewer or a
common sewer.
Sewer, Private. A sewer, privately owned, which is not directly controlled by
the department.
Sewer, Public. A sewer directly controlled by the department.
Sewer System. A system of piping, with appurtenances, for collecting and
conveying sewage from source to discharge.
Shall. Is mandatory.
Significant Industrial User. Defined as:
(1)   All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under
40 CFR § 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N; and
(2)   Any other industrial user that:
(A)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler
blowdown wastewater);
(B)   Contributes to a process wastestream that makes up 5 percent or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plant; and
(C)   Is designated as such by the city on the basis that the industrial user
has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
Significant Noncompliance. A significant industrial user (or any industrial
user that violates 40 CFR § 403.8(f)(2)(viii)(C),(D), or (H)) is in significant
noncompliance, as defined in 40 CFR § 403.8(f)(2)(viii), if its violation meets
one or more of the following criteria:
(1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits,
as defined by 40 CFR § 403.3(l);
(2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of
the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous
limits, as defined by CFR § 403.3(l), multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC
equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);
(3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement, as defined
by 40 § CFR 403.3(l), (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit,
or narrative standard) that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
(4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to
human health or welfare, or to the environment, or has resulted in the POTW’s
exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR § 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) and §
43-1.4 to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order
for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance;
(6)   Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required reports
such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-
monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
(7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
(8)   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation
of BMPs, that the POTW determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.
Slug. Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited
to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge as defined under 40
CFR § 403.8(f)(2)(vi) that has a reasonable potential to cause interference or
pass-through, or in any other way violate the city's regulations, local limits,
or permit conditions.
Storm Drain. A slotted opening leading to an underground pipe or an open ditch
for carrying surface runoff.
Storm Sewer. A sewer that carries only stormwater.
Stormwater. Runoff from a storm event, and surface runoff and drainage.
Subdivision. A division of a piece of property into two or more lots.
Suspended Solids. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids; and which are largely removable
by laboratory filtering and as determined by the appropriate procedure in
“Standard Methods.”
Toxic Pollutant. Any pollutant listed as toxic under § 307(a)(1) of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act.
Toxic Substances. Any substance whether gaseous, liquid, or solid, which when
discharged to the sewer system in sufficient quantities may tend to interfere
with any sewage treatment process, or to constitute a hazard to human beings or
animals, or to inhibit aquatic life or create a hazard to recreation in the
receiving waters of the effluent from the sewage treatment plant.
User. An individual, establishment, or industry using any part of the public
sewer.
Waste Hauler. Any person carrying on or engaging in any one of more of the
following: the collection, vehicular transport, or disposal of wastewater.
Wastewater. Any liquid waste of any kind, whether treated or not, and whether
animal, mineral, or vegetable, including sewage, agricultural, industrial, and
thermal wastes.
Wastewater System Facility Charge. A fee levied against:
(1)   A new applicant for service, for the privilege of connecting its property
to the city’s wastewater system; and
(2)   An existing user of the city’s wastewater system, for the privilege of
increasing its prior use of the city’s wastewater system or for any enlargement
of existing structures.
Wastewater System Facility Charge Increment. The fee levied against the
applicant who increases the applicant’s entitlement. The fee is determined by
subtracting the applicant’s current ESDU from the applicant’s future ESDU.
(Sec. 11-1.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 1, § 14-1.2) (Am.
Ords. 90-80, 91-86, 91-93, 93-04, 93-32, 94-46, 94-73, 96-58, 01-64, 02-14, 12-
7, 21-28)
§ 43-1.3 Authority of the director.
(a)   The director is authorized to administer and enforce this chapter; to
conduct an industrial waste pretreatment program; to issue permits containing
discharge requirements, indemnification and surety provisions and other
conditions; to deny or revoke any permits, orders, or variances issued pursuant
to this chapter; to adopt local limitations imposing specific discharge
requirements; to enforce this chapter by any lawful means available for such
purpose; to monitor and inspect any industrial user; to require industrial
users to perform and submit for the director’s review and approval wastestream
and process environmental audits and to require industrial users to implement
any objectives, including reclamation and waste minimization objectives,
identified by the audits; and to adopt such orders and rules necessary to
accomplish the purposes of this chapter in accordance with the requirements
that have been or may be adopted by federal or State governments, including the
EPA and the DOH.
The director also may monitor, inspect, and audit any business with a
pretreatment device, any business using or selling cooking oil, any person
removing and transporting commercial cooking oil waste or commercial FOG waste,
and any recycling facility converting commercial cooking oil waste or
commercial FOG waste into a marketable product.
(b)   The director may require the industrial user to construct and operate
additional pretreatment systems or devices to treat wastewater before discharge
into the sewerage system to achieve compliance with applicable categorical
pretreatment standards. New categorical industrial users shall install and
operate pretreatment systems necessary to meet applicable pretreatment
standards before discharge and shall comply with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards within the shortest feasible time, not to exceed 90
days. The director may require any industrial user to develop a compliance
schedule containing dates for the commencement and completion of major events
leading to the construction and operation of pretreatment systems or devices
necessary for compliance with this chapter in the shortest time possible. No
compliance schedule shall allow more than nine months from commencement of the
compliance schedule to achieving a milestone compliance to full compliance. In
the case of a new categorical industrial user, the final date in the compliance
schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable categorical pretreatment standard. All proposed pretreatment systems
or devices shall be subject to the review and comment of the director, but such
review shall not relieve an industrial user of the responsibility for taking
all steps necessary to comply with all applicable discharge limitations and
standards pursuant to this chapter and other laws. All required pretreatment
systems or devices shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the
industrial user’s expense. The director is authorized to require industrial
users to promptly notify the department in advance of any substantial change in
the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed
or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the IU has submitted initial
notification under 40 CFR § 403.12(p).
(c)   The director may, by permit or order, require an industrial user to
construct, in accordance with current city standards and at the industrial
user’s expense, a monitoring facility immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities. If no pretreatment facilities exist, the monitoring facility shall
be constructed immediately downstream from the regulated process.
(d)   Any permit may be revoked, modified, or suspended by the director, in
addition to seeking injunctive relief or imposing civil penalties, or both,
when such action is necessary to stop a discharge or a threatened discharge
that may present a hazard to the public health, safety, welfare, natural
environment, or sewerage system, to prevent or stop violations of this chapter,
the industrial wastewater discharge permit and federal pretreatment standards,
or to implement programs or policies required or requested of the city by
appropriate State or federal regulatory agencies.
(e)   The director retains the right to deny or condition new or increased
contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants discharged
into the city’s treatment plants by industrial users where such contributions
or changes do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or
where such contributions would cause the city to violate the requirements of
its NPDES permit.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 1, § 14-1.3) (Added by Ord. 94-46; Am. Ords. 02-14,
21-28)
§ 43-1.4 Emergency actions.
   The director is authorized to take all necessary actions to immediately and
effectively halt or prevent any discharge or threatened discharge of pollutants
to the sewerage system that may pose an imminent danger to the health or
welfare of persons or to the environment, or that interferes or threatens to
interfere with the operations of the sewerage system. The industrial user shall
immediately cease undertaking such action or discharge of any wastewater
presenting such a hazard upon verbal or written notification by the director.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 1, § 14-1.4) (Added by Ord. 94-46)
§ 43-1.5 Use of public sewers.
(a)   When required. Every lot that has sanitary facilities requiring sewage
disposal that is accessible to a public sewer and is not connected shall be
connected to the public sewer within 90 days after the owner or person legally
responsible has been notified to do so. The director may grant an owner or
person legally responsible a 30-day extension of time to connect to the public
sewer upon a showing of extenuating circumstances and a good faith effort by
such owner or person to make the connection. Under no circumstances shall the
director grant more than three 30-day extensions of time.
(b)   Permit to connect.
(1)   A permit to connect shall be obtained from the department before any
connection or reconnection may be made to a public sewer.
(2)   The permit is issued only for the facility or improvement shown on the
original plans and specifications or application.
(3)   Where any money or payment is due the department for a connection, the
full amount shall be paid before the connection is made.
(4)   The permit will be issued only after an application for a building permit
has been filed.
(5)   All connections for industrial wastewater shall require an industrial
wastewater discharge permit before a permit to connect is issued.
(c)   Where public or private sewer system is not available. Where public or
private sewers are not available or accessible, an owner may elect to construct
a cesspool or septic tank or other aerobic treatment unit as defined in Hawaii
Administrative Rules, Chapter 62, provided the use of such a unit meets the
public health requirements of all public agencies having jurisdiction over the
use of the facilities.
(d)   Where public or private sewer is inadequate. Where public or private
sewers are inadequate to accommodate additional sewage, connection will not be
permitted until the inadequacy is relieved either by the city or the applicant
at the applicant’s expense. For sewer lines, the relief sewer shall be
constructed to the city’s ultimate master plan size and location in accordance
with §
43-2.1(b).
(e)   The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining the integrity of
the sewer lateral line from his or her residence or building to the edge of the
property line. This maintenance shall include but not limited to keeping the
lateral line in such a state that there is no inflow or excessive infiltration
entering the lateral line.
(Sec. 11-1.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.); Sec. 14-1.3, R.O. 1990) (1990 Code, Ch. 14,
Art. 1, § 14-1.6) (Am. Ord. 94-46)
§ 43-1.6 Sewer extensions—Application—Payment—Specifications.
(a)   Application.
(1)   The property owner or subdivider of an unsewered area may apply for an
extension. The application must be in writing. If the application is approved
by the department, the department shall make an estimate of the cost and submit
it to the applicant.
(2)   The cost shall include land acquisition, engineering, and inspection.
(b)   Payment and refund.
(1)   The owner or subdivider shall pay 50 percent of the cost of any portion
of such extension that passes through property not owned or controlled by such
person and 100 percent of the cost of any portion that passes through property
owned or controlled by such person.
(2)   Before any contract is let, the applicant shall deposit with the
department a sum equal to the applicant’s share of the estimated cost. In the
event the sewer extension costs less than the estimate, a refund will be made
to the applicant. If it costs more than the estimate, the applicant shall pay
the applicant’s share of the difference to the department.
(c)   Specifications.
(1)   The extension of an existing public sewer, any part of which runs through
property not owned or controlled, wholly or in part, by the owner or subdivider
shall be constructed by the department, upon approval by the director, in
accordance with HRS Chapter 103, as amended. Such extension shall extend to the
proximate boundary of the land specified in the application or of land owned by
the owner or subdivider and contiguous to the land specified, whichever is
closer.
(2)   The department shall construct the extension including any laterals to
serve the applicant’s area. The department shall determine the type, size, and
location of the extension. The applicant, property owner, or subdivider shall
not have any title to the extension.
(Sec. 11-1.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.); Sec. 14-1.4, R.O. 1990) (1990 Code, Ch. 14,
Art. 1, § 14-1.7) (Am. Ord. 94-46)
§ 43-1.7 Lateral sewer construction and connection.
(a)   Lateral construction. All laterals shall not have less than 6-inch inside
diameter and shall be installed, when practicable, at a right angle with the
sewer. Each shall end at the property line with a 6 x 4 inch or the required
size reducer properly capped unless excepted in special cases by the director.
(b)   Connection to a lateral.
(1)   A 4-inch or appropriate size cast iron long radius 90-degree bend shall
be connected to the lateral from which shall extend the cast or schedule 40
polyvinyl chloride riser and cleanout vertically to at least 1 inch above
ground except in a sidewalk and driveway area. In sidewalk and driveway areas,
the cleanout shall be flush with the surface and shall be made of brass. The
director may require the installation of a concrete block below the 90-degree
bend in sandy or soft soil areas. No construction shall be backfilled or
covered until inspected and approved by the department.
The lateral connection described in this subsection may be varied at the
approval of the department to accommodate special topographic conditions. In
all cases, the pipe connection to the lateral and the riser extension shall be
of cast iron material.
The entire cleanout shall be installed within the property and at the expense
of the property owner. In improvement district projects, the city may install
all or a portion of the riser extension at city expense when directed by the
director. A sewer manhole in lieu of the above cleanout shall be installed when
directed by the director.
(2)   If an existing lateral connection does not include a cleanout as
described above, the property owner shall have one installed within 60 calendar
days after written notice has been given the owner by the director.
(3)   Special control structures and other appurtenances shall be constructed
by the applicant when required by the director.
(c)   Lateral installation charges. An applicant for lateral sewer installation
shall pay for installation charges in accordance with the schedule of charges
in §
43-3.2.
(Sec. 11-1.5, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.); Sec. 14-1.5, R.O. 1990) (1990
Code, Ch. 14, Art. 1, § 14-1.8) (Am. Ords. 90-50, 94-46)
§ 43-1.8 Use of public sewers—Restrictions—Violations.
(a)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or any other
source of inflow into any public sewer or any private sewer that is connected
to the public sewer. However, the director may approve discharges of any nature
or origin from public projects into the public sewer or any private sewer,
which is connected to the public sewer.
(b)   No person shall enter, obstruct, uncover, or tamper with any portion of
the public sewer, or connect to it, or discharge any wastewater or any other
substance directly into a manhole or other opening in the public wastewater
system other than in accordance with requirements established by
Articles 1 through
10 and through service sewers approved by the director, except that the
director may grant permission and establish requirements and policies for such
direct discharge.
This subsection, however, shall not authorize the director to approve the
discharge of any commercial cooking oil waste or commercial FOG waste into the
public sewer system.
(c)   No person or party shall remove or demolish any building or structures
with plumbing fixtures connected directly or indirectly to the public sewer
without first notifying the department of the intention to do so. All openings,
in or leading to the public sewer line or lines caused by such work, shall be
sealed watertight.
(d)   No person shall fill or backfill over, or cause to be covered or obstruct
access to, any sewer manhole.
(e)   No person shall erect any improvements, including but not limited to
foundations, structures, or buildings over public sewers without the written
permission of the director of planning and permitting.
(f)   The general and specific prohibitions set forth by the federal
regulations at 40 CFR § 403.5 are incorporated into this chapter by reference.
(g)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
into any public sewer or any private sewer that is connected to a public sewer:
(1)   Any pollutant that may cause obstruction, upset, pass through, or
interference with the operation of the POTW or may impact public health or the
environment;
(2)   Pollutants that may create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW,
including but not limited to wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less
than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR § 261.21. At no time shall two successive readings on an
explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the system be over 5
percent, nor shall any single reading be over 10 percent of the lower explosive
limit of the meter;
(3)   Pollutants that cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no
case discharges with pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 11.0, unless the POTW is
specifically designed to accommodate such discharges;
(4)   Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts that may cause obstruction to the
flow in the POTW resulting in interference;
(5)   Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released
in a discharge at a flow rate or pollutant concentration, or both, that may
cause pass through or interference in the POTW;
(6)   Heat in the amounts that may inhibit biological activity in the POTW
resulting in interference, but in no case shall heat be permitted in such
quantities that the temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds 40 degrees
Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit);
(7)   Pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes
within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety
problems;
(8)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except those allowed by permit at
discharge points designated by the director;
(9)   Ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, paper ware (either whole or ground), or any
other solid or viscous substances, or normally dry solid wastes capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in or damage to sewers or other interference
with the proper operation of the wastewater works;
(10)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants such as herbicides and
insecticides, in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create a toxic effect in the
receiving waters of the POTW. A toxic pollutant shall include but is not
limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, as amended;
(11)   Any unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastewater constituting
“slugs,” as defined in §
43-1.2, without notification to the POTW;
(12)   Water or wastes that have been contaminated by radioactive materials;
(13)   Water added for the purpose of diluting wastewater, which would
otherwise exceed applicable maximum concentration limitations set by the POTW
or the federal categorical pretreatment standards;
(14)   Water or wastewater that violates the local limits developed by the
city;
(15)   Wastewater with concentrations exceeding national categorical
pretreatment standards adopted by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in
accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as
amended. The national categorical pretreatment standards in 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, are incorporated into this section. These
standards, unless specifically noted otherwise, shall be in addition to all
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements set forth in Articles 1
through 10 and, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this section,
shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this section;
(16)   Any substance that may cause a city wastewater treatment plant’s
effluent or any other products thereof, such as residues, sludges, or scum to
be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation
process. In no case shall a substance discharged to a city wastewater treatment
plant cause it to be in noncompliance with sludge use or the disposal criteria,
guidelines, or regulations developed under § 405 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act (P.L. 92-500), as amended; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations
affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal
Act, the Clean Air Act, or the Toxic Substances Control Act; or State criteria
applicable to the sludge management method being used;
(17)   Any substance that may cause the city’s wastewater treatment plant to
violate its national pollutant discharge elimination system permit or State
water quality standards;
(18)   Any wastewater with an animal/vegetable fat, oil, and grease (FOG)
content having detrimental characteristics so as to cause obstruction, upset,
interference, or pass through in the POTW, or result in adverse impact on
public health or the environment; and
(19)   Any wastewater with petroleum hydrocarbon concentration greater than 100
mg/L or having detrimental characteristics so as to cause obstructions, upset,
interference, or pass through in the POTW, or result in an adverse impact on
the public health or the environment.
(h)   A pretreatment device shall be required when deemed necessary by the
director for users that may discharge any pollutant/indirect discharge,
including but not limited to fats, oils, and grease of animal, fish, marine
mammal, or vegetable origin, into any public sewer or any private sewer that is
connected to a public sewer.
(1)   All pretreatment devices shall be designed, sized, constructed,
installed, and maintained such that they comply with:
(A)   All applicable federal, State, and local discharge limits; and
(B)   All department policies and rules, as amended.
(2)   All pretreatment devices shall be maintained in efficient operation at
all times by the owner at the owner’s expense. The maintenance frequency shall
be determined by the director and shall be based on department policies or
rules. In cases where there are no department policies or rules, the frequency
of maintenance for a pretreatment device shall be established by the
recommendation of the manufacturer of the pretreatment device. In maintaining
these pretreatment devices, the owner shall be responsible for the proper
removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material, and shall
maintain records of the dates, amounts, and means of disposal, all of which
shall be subject to review by the director.
(i)   Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any wastewater as
a condition of its acceptance, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner’s expense.
(j)   When required by the director, the owner of any property served by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastewater shall install monitoring and
recording equipment, and a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastewater. Such
manhole shall be readily accessible and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director. If applicable,
the manhole shall be designated in the industrial user’s wastewater discharge
permit as its approved sampling location. The manhole shall be installed and
maintained by the owner at the owner’s expense.
(k)   All pretreatment program monitoring activities discussed in
Articles 1 through
10 shall be conducted in accordance with the methods and procedures in 40 CFR
Part 136, as amended, and shall be made at the sampling location identified in
the industrial wastewater discharge permit.
(l)   Dilution is prohibited as a substitute for treatment. Except where
expressly authorized by the director to do so by an applicable pretreatment
standard or requirement, no industrial user shall ever increase the use of
process water, or in any other way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial
or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement. The director may impose mass limitations
on industrial users that are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass
limitations is appropriate.
(m)   Any discharge that would be considered a hazardous waste, as defined by
any one or more of the following: the State or federal laws or regulations,
shall be prohibited from the sewer system.
(n)   In addition to complying with
Articles 1 through
10, all industrial users shall comply with all applicable requirements set
forth in federal categorical pretreatment standards and other applicable
federal regulatory standards, applicable State orders and water quality control
regulations, wastewater discharge permits and orders issued to the city by
federal and State agencies, federal and State pretreatment program approval
conditions, local discharge limitations and rules adopted by and regulations
adopted by the director and the city, and any other applicable requirement
regulating the discharge of wastewater into the wastewater system. The director
is authorized to develop and enforce such local limitations as the director
deems necessary for the city’s compliance with State and federal laws and
requirements and the enforcement of
Articles 1 through
10.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 1, § 14-1.9) (Added by Ord. 94-46; Am. Ords. 94-73,
01-64, 02-14; 21-28)
§ 43-1.9 Right of entry and inspection.
(a)   Existing systems. The department may, during reasonable hours and upon
notification to the person with a right to possession, enter any building or
premises in the discharge of its official duties to examine or copy records or
inspect, investigate, measure, or test the wastes discharged or the private
sewer connected, directly or indirectly, to the public system as per 40 CFR §
403.12(o) and to use existing sewer lateral cleanouts for the purpose of
inspecting, maintaining, or cleaning blockages in the public sewer system.
(b)   Inspection of construction of sewer system works.
(1)   During the construction of all sewer system works, including private
sewers that directly or indirectly connect to the public system, the city shall
have access thereto for inspection purposes and if considered advisable by the
director, may require an inspector on the job continuously. At no time shall
sewers be backfilled or covered until the department has been notified and has
given proper inspection and approval. If the work is not approved, it shall be
repaired or removed and reconstructed, whichever is directed by the director.
(2)   All costs of inspection and testing shall be borne by the owner or
subdivider.
(c)   Premises of industrial users.
(1)   Upon showing proper credentials, persons authorized by the director or
persons authorized by EPA or DOH, when necessary for the performance of their
duties, shall have the right to enter the industrial user’s premises during
scheduled, unscheduled, announced, or unannounced inspections. Such authorized
personnel shall have access to any facilities and records necessary for
determining compliance, including but not limited to the ability to copy any
records, inspect any monitoring equipment, and sample any wastewater subject to
regulation under this chapter. Notwithstanding any provision of law, persons
authorized by the director may enter an industrial user’s premises at any time
if the director determines that an imminent hazard to persons or property
exists on or as a result of activities conducted on the industrial user’s
premises.
(2)   The director may inspect the process areas of an industrial user, inspect
chemical and waste storage areas, and inspect, sample, and monitor wastewater
production activities to determine compliance with the provisions herein and
any permit or order issued herein. Inspections may include but are not limited
to visual observations of the pretreatment and monitoring facilities, review of
the measures undertaken by the industrial user to minimize risks for slug
discharges, spills, and discharges that would violate any limitations and
specific prohibitions, and inspections of any hazardous waste storage areas.
(3)   Persons authorized by the director, EPA or DOH may witness any sampling
or sampling procedures required of any industrial user as part of a self-
monitoring program or an industrial wastewater discharge permit.
(Sec. 11-1.7, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.); Sec. 14-1.7, R.O. 1990) (1990
Code, Ch. 14, Art. 1, § 14-1.10) (Am. Ords. 93-04, 94-46)
§ 43-1.10 Recordkeeping.
   All industrial users subject to the reporting requirements of 40 CFR §
403.12 shall maintain and retain, and make available for inspection and copying
by EPA, DOH, or city officials, personnel, or their agents, all records, and
information required to be retained herein. All records relating to compliance
with pretreatment requirements and standards shall be retained by industrial
users for a minimum of three years from the date of any investigation or
enforcement action undertaken by EPA, DOH, or the city. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning compliance
with applicable laws.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 1, § 14-1.11) (Added by Ord. 94-46)
ARTICLE 2: SEWER SYSTEM FOR NEW SUBDIVISION
Sections
   
43-2.1   Generally
   
43-2.2   Temporary treatment plants—Pumping stations
   
43-2.3   Construction costs
§ 43-2.1 Generally.
(a)   Connection to public sewers. In every subdivision where connection to a
public sewer system is practicable and reasonable, or where temporary sewage
treatment and disposal facilities have been approved by all authorities having
jurisdiction, the subdivider shall install a complete sewer system connected to
the public sewer or temporary sewage treatment and disposal facility, unless
such subdivision is for agricultural purposes where the lots are 2 acres or
larger in size and the soil is deemed suitable and adequate for an acceptable
private sewage disposal system.
(b)   Specifications.
(1)   The sewer system shall be of the type and size and at the locations
approved by the director; provided that these shall not be contrary to the
locations fixed for utilities by the city general plan or for sewer system
facilities by the department of environmental services master plans.
(2)   The sewer system shall be constructed in accordance with the current
standards and specifications of the city. Before the construction of a sewer is
commenced, the construction plan therefor shall be approved by the director and
by the State department of health pursuant to HRS Chapter 342D, Part III.
(3)   A lateral shall be provided to service each lot.
(c)   Title to city.
(1)   Upon completion of the construction of the subdivision sewer system and
any other related new construction and approval of the construction by the
department, the subdivider or developer shall convey title of the sewer system
to the city for use of the department if required by the director.
(2)   Before acceptance of the sewer system by the department, the subdivider
shall convey easements covering those portions of the sewer system installed in
privately owned areas and shall convey to the city, for the use of the
department, fee simple title to all sites on which are located pump stations or
treatment plants constructed by the subdivider or developer as part of the
public sewer system.
(Sec. 11-2.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 2, § 14-2.1) (Am.
Ord. 93-32)
§ 43-2.2 Temporary treatment plants—Pumping stations.
(a)   Specifications. Where connection to a public sewer is not available, the
subdivider may construct temporary treatment and disposal facilities or where
gravity service to the public sewer is not possible, the subdivider may
construct a temporary pump station; provided that the sewer system, including
the temporary treatment plant with pertinent structures, shall be constructed
in accordance with the standards and specifications of the department, or other
agency having jurisdiction or other standards or requirements as may be
established by the director; and provided further, that prior written approval
of the director has been obtained as to the necessity for such plant or
station.
(b)   Title.
(1)   The subdivider shall convey the title to the treatment plant or the pump
station including the site, in fee to the city for the use of the department,
except as provided herein. Acceptance of title and possession to either the
plant or station reserves for the department the right to admit sewage or
wastewater to either facility from other areas provided that the needs of the
subdivider are met for a stipulated period as mutually agreed upon before date
of conveyance. Title shall revert to the grantor or the grantor’s successors or
assigns in the event the director finds the plant or the station is no longer
needed.
(2)   In remote areas where the treatment plant or pump station serves less
than 40 lots, or any area where it serves less than 10 lots, the director may
require the facility to be owned and maintained as a private system at the
owner’s or subdivider’s expense.
(Sec. 11-2.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 2, § 14-2.2)
§ 43-2.3 Construction costs.
(a)   General. Except as otherwise provided herein or by statute, the entire
cost of installation of sewer system works within a subdivision and for any new
construction required for connection to the public sewers shall be borne by the
subdivider or developer.
(b)   Temporary treatment plant and temporary or permanent pump station. The
entire cost of constructing a temporary treatment plant or a temporary or
permanent pump station shall be borne by the subdivider or developer.
(c)   Oversize facilities.
(1)   Whenever the director finds that good planning and engineering practice
require sewer system works of greater capacity or greater depth than required
to serve a subdivision, the director shall require the provisions thereof.
(2)   Whenever the director requires a subdivider to install a treatment plant
or pump station with pertinent structures or other sewer system works or sewer
lines with an inside diameter of more than 8 inches, which are, in either case,
of greater capacity or at greater depth than is necessary to serve the
subdivision or other land under the same ownership, which is hereinafter
referred to as the “initial subdivider’s area,” the department shall install or
provide for the installation of the same in accordance with HRS Chapter 103.
Before any contract is let, the subdivider shall pay the department an amount
equivalent to the cost of construction of the facilities adequate to serve the
“initial subdivider’s area,” as determined by the director.
(Sec. 11-2.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 2, § 14-2.3)
ARTICLE 3: SEWER SYSTEM FOR OTHER THAN IN NEW SUBDIVISIONS
Sections
   
43-3.1   Connections within improvement districts
   
43-3.2   Installation charges
§ 43-3.1 Connections within improvement districts.
(a)   No lateral installation charge shall be made for one or more original
laterals to an original lot that is being or has been assessed in accordance
with the improvement district ordinance, unless this lot has later been rezoned
for higher usage and the owner desires an additional lateral or the lot is
required to be served by a relief sewer, which has been or will be constructed
to relieve an inadequate existing sewer.
(b)   No lateral installation charge shall be made for one or more original
laterals to a property within an improvement district when the property is
served by an existing properly functioning individual wastewater disposal
system, other than a cesspool, permitted by the DOH and constructed pursuant to
§
43-1.5(c); provided that if the owner or person legally responsible
subsequently wishes to connect to the sanitary sewer system, the owner or
person legally responsible shall be required to pay the lateral installation
charge.
If a property within an improvement district served by an existing properly
functioning individual wastewater disposal system, other than a cesspool,
permitted by the DOH and constructed pursuant to §
43-1.5(c) is required to connect to the public sewer system, then the owner or
person legally responsible shall not be required to pay the lateral
installation charge for a period of 25 years following connection to the public
sewer system; provided that if such property is sold or otherwise transferred,
except for a transfer due to the death of the property owner, prior to the end
of the 25-year period, then the owner of the property, or person legally
responsible, following such sale or other transfer shall be required to pay the
lateral installation charge immediately following such sale or other transfer.
(Sec. 11-3.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 3, § 14-3.1) (Am.
Ord. 20-36)
§ 43-3.2 Installation charges.
(a)   Charge.
(1)   For unsewered properties. An applicant for sewer service for an unsewered
property shall pay the following assessment per square foot of specially
benefited area:
(A)   Residential zoned areas: 16 cents psf;
(B)   Business and industrial zoned areas: 20 cents psf; and
(C)   Hotel and apartment zoned areas: 24 cents psf
The benefited area shall be determined by the department.
Upon approval of the application by the department and payment of assessment
charge by the applicant, the department will construct the sewer to the
property line as soon as possible.
(2)   For sewered properties rezoned to higher use. For properties with an
existing sewer lateral that have been rezoned to higher use after the existing
sewer service was provided; and the property is required to be served by a
relief sewer that has been or will be constructed to relieve the inadequate
existing sewer; shall pay the difference between the rates per square foot of
that zoned to higher use and that zoned from, specified in subsection (a)(1).
(b)   Special conditions.
(1)   No charge will be made for replacements of lateral sewer installations
because of normal deterioration.
(2)   Charges for construction of an additional lateral shall be the actual
total cost of the installations, including overhead costs.
(3)   A charge shall be made for a lateral sewer that has already been
constructed for which no assessment or installation charge has been paid. The
charge shall be as specified in subsection (a)(1).
(Sec. 11-3.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 3, § 14-3.2)
ARTICLE 4: PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEM
Sections
   
43-4.1   Building or house sewers
   
43-4.2   Treatment plant—Pumping stations
§ 43-4.1 Building or house sewers.
(a)   Inspection after connection. Existing private sewers connected to the
public system may be inspected and tested for excessive infiltration whenever
deemed necessary by the director. If the rate of infiltration is excessive, the
owner, when informed by the director, shall effect approved remedial measures
within 30 days. Infiltration in excess of 500 gallons per day per inch of
diameter of pipe per mile of pipe shall be considered excessive. The cost of
inspection after corrective action has been completed shall be paid by the
owner.
(b)   Restrictions. All private sewers connected to the public systems shall be
governed by §
43-1.6.
(Sec. 11-4.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 4, § 14-4.1)
§ 43-4.2 Treatment plant—Pumping stations.
(a)   Existing. The department may agree to operate and maintain existing
treatment plants and pump stations if these facilities are upgraded to conform
with standards to be established by the director pursuant to subsection (c),
and title is conveyed to the city. Title shall revert to the grantor or the
grantor’s successors or assigns in the event the director finds the plant or
the station is no longer needed.
(b)   New. Provisions contained in §
14-2.2 are also applicable to new private treatment plants and pump stations.
(c)   The director is authorized to prescribe and enforce rules to carry out
this section by establishing procedures and standards for city acceptance of
private treatment plants and pump stations.
(Sec. 11-4.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 4, § 14-4.2)
ARTICLE 5: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATERS
Sections
   
43-5.1   Industrial wastewater discharge permit—Violations
   
43-5.2   Permit application
   
43-5.3   Change of permit restrictions
   
43-5.4   Permit suspension
   
43-5.5   Permit revocation
   
43-5.6   Industrial wastewater discharge permit revocation or suspension
   
43-5.7   Wastewater discharge permit modification
   
43-5.8   Issuance and reissuance of wastewater discharge permit
   
43-5.9   Transfer of wastewater discharge permit
   
43-5.10   Compliance schedules
   
43-5.11   Sampling, analyses, flow measurements, and reporting requirements
   
43-5.12   Pretreatment of industrial wastewaters
   
43-5.13   Liability for damage
   
43-5.14   Trade secrets
   
43-5.15   Administrative enforcement
   
43-5.16   Judicial enforcement of order
   
43-5.17   Enforcement orders
   
43-5.18   Appeals
   
43-5.19   Violation provisions
   
43-5.20   Injunctive relief
   
43-5.21   Nonliability of department personnel
§ 43-5.1 Industrial wastewater discharge permit—Violations.
(a)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any industrial
wastewater into the public sewers or into any private sewer that discharges to
the public sewers, without first applying for and obtaining an industrial
wastewater discharge permit. Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall meet
the following requirements or include the following provisions:
(1)   Permits shall be issued by the director for a specified time period, not
to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period of less than a year
or may be stated to expire on a specific date as determined by the director;
(2)   No permit shall be transferable without the prior written consent of the
director and provision of a copy of the existing permit to the new owner or
operator;
(3)   Effluent limits based on applicable general pretreatment standards,
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and State and local law;
(4)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping
requirements, including an identification of the pollutants to be monitored,
sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based on the applicable
pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and
State and local law;
(5)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of
pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance
schedule. Such schedules shall not extend the compliance date beyond applicable
federal deadlines;
(6)   A statement requiring the notification of a hazardous wastewater
discharge in accordance with §
43-5.12(f);
(7)   Recordkeeping requirements as detailed in §
43-1.10; and
(8)   Permittees shall provide the director with written notification upon the
discontinuance of their business operations.
(b)   This permit may require pretreatment of industrial wastewater before
discharge, compliance with a schedule containing commencement and completion
dates of events leading to the construction and operation of pretreatment
systems, restriction of peak flow discharges, discharge of certain wastewater
only to specified sewers, relocation of point of discharge, prohibition of
discharge of certain wastewater components, restriction of discharge to certain
hours of the day, self-monitoring programs and submission of self-monitoring
reports and may include other conditions deemed appropriate by the director to
ensure compliance with
Articles 1 through
10 of this chapter, and federal and State laws.
(c)   No person shall discharge industrial wastewater in excess of the quantity
or quality limitations set by the industrial wastewater discharge permit. Any
person desiring to discharge wastewater that is not or use facilities that are
not in conformance with the permit shall apply to the department for an amended
permit.
(d)   All self-monitoring submittals required by the permit, and reports filed
with the director shall comply with §
43-5.11(a)(3).
(e)   Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall
submit baseline monitoring reports. The baseline monitoring report requirements
for industrial users in 40 CFR § 403.12(b), as further detailed in §§
43-5.8 and
43-5.11(b) and (c), are incorporated into this section. These standards, unless
specifically noted otherwise, shall be in addition to all applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements set forth in
Articles 1 through
10.
(f)   All waste haulers shall apply for and obtain an industrial wastewater
discharge permit.
(g)   With the exception of those industrial users defined by federal
regulations as significant industrial users (categorical industrial users), the
director may exempt certain industrial users or waste haulers from the
requirement to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit if the quantity
or quality, or both, of the wastewater, or hauled wastewater is deemed to be
unlikely to cause obstructions, upset, interference, or pass through in the
POTW or result in an adverse impact on public health or the environment.
(h)   Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take enforcement action
against an industrial user for a bypass, unless:
(1)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or
severe property damage;
(2)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of
auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance
during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if
adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass occurring during normal
periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and
(3)   The industrial user submitted notices as required under paragraph (c) of
Section 40 CFR § 403.17.
(i)   Bypass notice.  If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a
bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director, if possible at least 10
days before the date of the bypass. An industrial user shall submit oral notice
of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to
the director within 24 hours from when the industrial user becomes aware of the
bypass. A written submission shall also be provided by the industrial user
within five days of the bypass. The written submission shall contain:
(1)   A description of the bypass and its cause;
(2)   The duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the
bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue;
and
(3)   Steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of
the bypass.
The director may waive the requirement for a written report, on a case-by-case
basis, if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
(j)   All industrial users shall promptly notify the director in advance of any
substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge.
(Sec. 11-5.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.1) (Am.
Ords. 91-93, 94-46, 01-64, 21-28)
§ 43-5.2 Permit application.
   In support of the permit application, an industrial user shall submit, in
units and terms appropriate for evaluation, all information as required by the
director to evaluate the permit application. This information shall include,
but not be limited to: industrial process identification; flow rates;
wastestream constituents and characteristics; time and duration of discharge;
peak discharge amounts; locations of all discharge points; pretreatment
facilities; sampling and monitoring equipment and points; description of
activities, facilities, and plant processes, including raw materials, processes
and types of materials that are or could be produced; number of employees; site
diagrams; and flow schematics. Specific information required for application
evaluation will be identified in the permit application package. A statement
shall be included, which describes possible subcategories that may be
applicable, supporting evidence for applicability of each subcategory and
certification of factual information. After evaluation of the information
submitted, the director shall determine if an industrial wastewater discharge
permit is required. If the director so determines, a permit may be issued
subject to the terms and conditions provided in this chapter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.2) (Added by Ord. 94-46)
§ 43-5.3 Change of permit restrictions.
   The department may change the restrictions and conditions of a permit from
time to time as provided in this article or as required by law. An industrial
user shall be allowed a reasonable period of time as determined by the director
to comply with any permit modifications.
(Sec. 11-5.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.); Sec. 14-5.2, R.O. 1990) (1990 Code, Ch. 14,
Art. 5, § 14-5.3) (Am. Ord. 94-46)
§ 43-5.4 Permit suspension.
(a)   The director may suspend a permit as provided in this article or by law
for a period not to exceed 45 calendar days when such suspension is necessary
to stop a discharge which presents an immediate hazard or threat to the public
health, safety, or welfare, to the environment, to the public sewer system, or
to those employed by the city.
(b)   Any industrial user notified of a suspension of such person’s permit
shall immediately cease and desist in the discharge of all industrial
wastewater to the sewer system. In the event of a failure of the industrial
user to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director shall take
such steps as necessary to insure compliance or invoke penalties as provided in
this chapter.
(c)   The director may reinstate the permit upon proof of satisfactory
compliance with all discharge requirements of the department.
(d)   This provision does not preclude a person’s right to appeal the
director’s order as provided herein and by the department’s rules.
(e)   The director’s order is not stayed pending any appeal.
(Sec. 11-5.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.); Sec. 14-5.3, R.O. 1990) (1990 Code, Ch. 14,
Art. 5, § 14-5.4) (Am. Ord. 94-46)
§ 43-5.5 Permit revocation.
(a)   The director may order a permit revoked as provided in this chapter or by
law or upon a finding that the industrial user has violated this chapter, or of
applicable laws or regulations.
(b)   An industrial user whose permit has been revoked shall immediately stop
all discharges of any liquid-carried wastes covered by the permit to the sewer
system. The director may disconnect or permanently block from the sewer system
the industrial sewer connection of any industrial user whose permit has been
revoked if such action is deemed necessary by the director to ensure compliance
with the revocation order or if the director deems that there is an immediate
hazard or threat to the public health, safety or welfare, to the environment,
to the public sewer system, or to persons employed by the city.
(c)   An industrial user whose permit has been revoked shall apply for a new
permit and pay all delinquent fees, charges, penalties, and such other sums as
may be due to the department. Costs incurred by the department in revoking the
prior issued permit and disconnecting the industrial sewer connection shall be
paid by the industrial user before issuance of a new permit.
(d)   This provision does not preclude a person’s right to appeal the
director’s order as provided herein and by the department’s rules.
(e)   The director’s order is not stayed pending any appeal.
(Sec. 11-5.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.); Sec. 14-5.4, R.O. 1990) (1990 Code, Ch. 14,
Art. 5, § 14-5.5) (Am. Ord. 94-46)
§ 43-5.6 Industrial wastewater discharge permit revocation or suspension.
   Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked or suspended based on violations
of this chapter, laws, rules, or any final judicial order, including but not
limited to the following reasons:
(1)   Failure to provide notification to the director of changed ownership or
operations pursuant to this article;
(2)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
wastewater discharge permit application;
(3)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports or late submittal of reports;
(4)   Failure to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(5)   Tampering or actions which disrupt the proper functioning of monitoring
equipment;
(6)   Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises and
records;
(7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(8)   Failure to pay fines;
(9)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
(10)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
(11)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge
permit application;
(12)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of the permitted
facility;
(13)   Nonuse or cessation of operations;
(14)   Failure to notify the director immediately of all discharges that could
cause problems to the POTW and collection system, including slug discharges and
specific prohibitions, as defined by §
43-1.8 and by 40 CFR § 403.5(b); or
(15)   Any discharge that is in violation of any one or more of the following:
any applicable city, State, or federal laws and requirements or results in any
enforcement action by the city, EPA, or DOH.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.6) (Added by Ord. 94-46)
§ 43-5.7 Wastewater discharge permit modification.
(a)   The director may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause,
including but not limited to the following:
(1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, State, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements;
(2)   To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial user’s
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance;
(3)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
(4)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the
city’s POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters;
(5)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
(6)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
(7)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR § 403.13;
(8)   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit; or
(9)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation, or both, to
a new owner/operator in accordance with this section.
The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge permit
modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit condition.
(b)   It is declared a policy of this chapter that any user of the POTW who
violates any provision herein shall have the user’s wastewater discharge permit
suspended or revoked, and, upon due process, be disconnected from the water
system or have the sewer connection severed, or both.
(1)   The procedures for water service disconnection shall be in accordance
with the above provisions, and severance of sewer connection shall be in
accordance with guidelines established by the director.
(2)   If a user violates the discharge prohibitions of this chapter and does
not comply with the order issued by the director, then a notice of termination
shall be forwarded by registered mail, return receipt requested, certified
mail, or personal service, to any one or more of the following: an authorized
representative of an industry, or the occupant or owner of record of the
property.
(3)   The director shall reinstate water service and approve reconnection to
the city’s sewer system upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying
discharge.
Whenever the director finds that a discharge of wastewater produces an imminent
hazard to public health or safety or endangers public or private property, the
director shall act immediately to suspend water service or sever all pertinent
connections to the sewer or both, without giving advance notice or warning to
the persons.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.7) (Added by Ord. 94-46)
§ 43-5.8 Issuance and reissuance of wastewater discharge permit.
   First time issuance. Categorical Industrial Users shall apply for an
industrial wastewater discharge permit for a first-time issuance no less than
180 days prior to commencement of operations by submitting to the department a
complete industrial wastewater discharge permit application to include a
baseline monitoring report, as follows:
(1)   Existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the city shall submit to the director a report that
contains the information listed in 40 CFR § 403.12(b)(1) through (b)(7) within
180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or
the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR §
403.6(a)(4), whichever is later.
(2)   New sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard shall, at
least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, submit to the director
a report that contains the information listed in 40 CFR § 403.12(b)(1) through
(b)(5). A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use
to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source shall also give
estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.8) (Added by Ord. 94-46; Am. Ord. 21-28)
§ 43-5.9 Transfer of wastewater discharge permit.
   If a change in ownership or operations would affect the nature or
characteristics of the wastewater discharged, the permittee shall provide,
within 20 days of the change, written notice of the change to the director. If
applicable, a new permit will be issued to reflect the change.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.9) (Added by Ord. 94-46)
§ 43-5.10 Compliance schedules.
(a)   Compliance schedule progress report. The conditions herein shall apply to
any compliance schedule required by the director. The schedule shall set forth
progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (such events include hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components,
commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine
operations). No increment set forth herein shall exceed nine months. The
industrial user shall submit a progress report to the director no later than 14
days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance
including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with steps being taken by
the industrial user to return to the established schedule. In no event shall
more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director.
(b)   Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial
user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the director a report containing the measurement of flow and pollutant and
certification of pretreatment standards being consistently met. If pretreatment
standards are not being met consistently, a description of additional operation
and maintenance requirements or pretreatment shall be included in the report.
For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR § 403.6(c), this report
shall contain a reasonable measure of the industrial user’s long-term
production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
industrial user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All
compliance reports shall be signed and certified in accordance with §
43-5.11(c).
(c)   Periodic compliance reports.
(1)   Any significant industrial user subject to a pretreatment standard shall,
at a frequency determined by the director, but in no case less than twice a
year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the discharge, which are limited by such
pretreatment standards, and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily
flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports shall be signed
and certified in accordance with §
43-5.11(c).
(2)   All wastewater samples shall be representative of the industrial user’s
daily operations and discharge as described in the permit issued to the user.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure to keep the monitoring facility in good working order shall not be
grounds for the user to claim that sample results do not properly report the
discharge constituents and characteristics.
(3)   If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements of this
section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW, using
the procedures prescribed in §
43-5.11, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.10) (Added by Ord. 94-46)
§ 43-5.11 Sampling, analyses, flow measurements, and reporting requirements.
(a)   The city may require an industrial user to monitor its discharge into the
sewerage system and report the results of the monitoring to the department
periodically. These specific monitoring and reporting requirements shall be
listed in the industrial wastewater discharge permit. The director, or the
director’s agent, may require additional monitoring and reporting to document
compliance with pretreatment requirements.
(1)   Sampling. The industrial user shall sample its discharge into the
sewerage system at a frequency provided in the industrial wastewater discharge
permit or as deemed reasonable and necessary by the director to demonstrate
compliance. The director, at the director’s discretion, may require
nonpermitted industrial users to conduct sampling and analysis. If sampling
indicates a violation, the industrial user shall notify the director within 24
hours of becoming aware of the violation and resample within five working days.
The results of the resampling shall be submitted to the director within 30
days.
(2)   Analytical procedures. All samples shall be taken, preserved, and
analyzed in accordance with the procedures outlined in 40 CFR Part 136
(guidelines establishing test procedures for the analysis of pollutants). Where
no test procedure is specified by federal regulations, the procedure shall be
one that is approved by EPA, or, if there is no EPA-approved procedure, by the
city. Unless approved otherwise by the director, all analysis for the specific
pollutants and matrix shall be performed by a laboratory certified by DOH.
(3)   Sampling records. For each sampling event, an industrial user shall
record and maintain, in accordance with 40 CFR § 403.12(o)(i) through (o)(v),
the following information:
(A)   Date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the names of the
persons taking the samples;
(B)   Sample preservation used;
(C)   Dates analyses were performed;
(D)   Chain-of-custody of samples;
(E)   Names of those who performed the analyses;
(F)   Analytical techniques and methods used;
(G)   Results of such analyses; and
(H)   Any unusual observations or conditions (equipment sample) noted during
acquisition or analysis.
(b)   Baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical
standards, and periodic reports on continued compliance shall contain a
statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, as
defined in §
43-1.2, and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance or additional pretreatment, or
both, are required for the industrial user to meet the pretreatment standards
and requirements.
(c)   Any authorized representative of the industrial user, as defined in §
43-1.2, signing an application statement or report submitted pursuant to this
section shall make the following certification:
   I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gathered and evaluated the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and
belief true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.
(Sec. 11-5.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.); Sec. 14-5.5, R.O. 1990) (1990 Code, Ch. 14,
Art. 5, § 14-5.11) (Am. Ords. 91-93, 94-46, 21-28)
§ 43-5.12 Pretreatment of industrial wastewaters.
(a)   The director may require an industrial wastewater pretreatment system or
device to treat industrial wastewater, in complying with pretreatment
requirements, before discharge into the sewerage system. This may be necessary
to restrict or prevent the discharge of certain wastewater constituents, to
distribute more equally over a longer time period of any peak discharges, or to
achieve any pretreatment result required by the director.
(b)   All pretreatment systems or devices shall be approved by the director but
such approval shall not absolve the industrial user of the responsibility of
meeting any industrial effluent limitation required by the department.
(c)   The city shall annually publish in the largest daily newspaper a list of
industrial users who were in significant noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment requirements as defined in §
43-1.2 during the previous 12 months.
(d)   Slug control plan. Significant industrial users are required to notify
the POTW immediately of any changes at their facilities affecting potential for
a slug discharge. If the POTW decides that a slug control plan is needed, the
plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements:
(1)   A description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
(2)   A description of stored chemicals;
(3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug discharges,
including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under 40 CFR § 403.5
(b) with procedures for follow-up written notification within five days; and
(4)   If necessary, procedures to prevent any adverse impact from accidental
spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and
transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment,
measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and
measures and equipment for emergency response.
(e)   Dilution is prohibited as a substitute for pretreatment as stated in §
43-1.8(m).
(f)   If hazardous waste is discharged into the sewer system, the industrial
user shall notify, in writing, the director, DOH, and EPA. Notification shall
include but is not limited to the name of the hazardous waste, as set forth in
40 CFR Part 261; EPA hazardous waste number; and the type of discharge
(continuous, batch, or other).
(Sec. 11-5.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.); Sec. 14-5.6, R.O. 1990) (1990 Code, Ch. 14,
Art. 5, § 14-5.12) (Am. Ords. 91-93, 94-46, 96-58, 21-28)
§ 43-5.13 Liability for damage.
(a)   Any industrial wastewater user who discharges or causes a discharge in
violation of this chapter or as prohibited by law and regulations that damages
the sewer system resulting in costs to the department shall be liable to the
department for all such costs incurred thereby, including but not limited to
attorney fees.
(b)   Any person, whether or not doing work for the city or work on a city
project, shall provide notice to DOH and the city in accordance with city,
State, and federal laws and regulations of any leak, spill, or release of
sewage from the city’s sewer system caused by the person, its agents, or its
employees. This notice shall be provided as soon as the person becomes aware of
the leak, spill, or release of sewage from the city’s sewer system as a result
of the work of the person, its agents or its employees. The person shall also
be liable to the department for all fines incurred including but not limited to
attorney fees, in the event any monetary fines are levied against the city.
(Sec. 11-5.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.); Sec. 14-5.7, R.O. 1990) (1990 Code, Ch. 14,
Art. 5, § 14-5.13) (Am. Ords. 94-46, 94-73)
§ 43-5.14 Trade secrets.
(a)   With respect to trade secrets, it is determined that the public interest
served by not making the records public clearly outweighs the public interest
served by the disclosure of the records. Accordingly, any trade secrets
acquired by the department in the course of implementation or enforcement of
this chapter shall be confidential information and shall not be made public,
except to that extent necessary to enforce this chapter. Effluent data,
however, are not confidential information and shall always be made available to
the public.
(b)   Whenever the director makes a written request or issues an order for an
industrial user to furnish information, the request or order may contain, in
addition to the required information, the following:
(1)   That the industrial user may assert a confidential claim, including but
not limited to a trade secret claim covering specified information; and
(2)   That if no such claim accompanies the information received by the
director, the industrial user is deemed to have waived all confidential claims
that may exist, and the information may be made available to the public without
further notice to the industrial user.
(c)   For purposes of this section in determining confidential information, the
director shall determine whether the information is entitled by statute,
judicial order, or law to the confidential treatment as claimed by the
industrial user. In the absence of such finding, the director shall make the
information available for public disclosure.
(Sec. 11-5.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.); Sec. 14-5.8, R.O. 1990) (1990 Code, Ch. 14,
Art. 5, § 14-5.14) (Am. Ords. 91-93, 94-46)
§ 43-5.15 Administrative enforcement.
(a)   If the director determines that any industrial user is violating this
chapter, any rule adopted thereunder, or any permit issued pursuant thereto,
the director may have the user served by personal service, by registered or
certified mail or delivery, with a written notice of violation and order.
(b)   Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, or such shorter period as
may be provided in the notice of violation, an explanation of the violation and
plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted to the director. Submission of
this plan in no way relieves a person for any violations occurring before or
after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit
the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency actions
or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation,
or before the expiration of the time to respond with a plan.
(c)   The director is authorized to seek injunctive relief or impose
administrative civil penalties, or both, for violations of any federal
pretreatment standard, provision or condition in any permit, or any requirement
of the ordinance.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.15) (Added by Ord. 94-46)
§ 43-5.16 Judicial enforcement of order.
   The director may institute a civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the enforcement of any order issued. Where the civil action
has been instituted to enforce the civil fine imposed by the order, the
director need only show that the notice of violation and order was served, a
hearing was held or the time granted for requesting a hearing had expired
without such a request, the civil fine was imposed, and that the fine imposed
had not been paid.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.16) (Added by Ord. 94-46)
§ 43-5.17 Enforcement orders.
(a)   Consent orders. The director is authorized to enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with any industrial user responsible for noncompliance. The order
shall include specific action to be taken by the industrial user to correct the
noncompliance within a time period to be provided in the order. These orders
shall have the same force and effect as other administrative orders issued
pursuant to §
43-5.15 and shall be judicially enforceable.
(b)   Show cause orders. Whenever the director finds that a discharge of
wastewater is taking place or threatening to take place in violation of any
requirement imposed by ordinance, regulation, or other law, the director may
issue a notice of violation and show cause order requesting the industrial user
to meet with someone designated by the director. Notice shall be served on the
user specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement
action, the reasons for such action, and an order that the industrial user show
cause why this proposed enforcement action may not be taken. The notice of
hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return
receipt requested) at least 15 days before the hearing. The notice may be
served on any authorized representative of the industrial user.
This meeting is not a prerequisite to taking formal enforcement action against
the industrial user, and neither does this preclude in any way informal
meetings or discussions with the industrial user.
(c)   Compliance orders and compliance schedules. Upon a finding by the
director that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the
ordinance, a permit or an order issued herein, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the director may issue an order to the industrial user
responsible for the discharge requiring the user to come into compliance within
a period of time specified by the director. These orders may not extend the
deadline for compliance established for a federal pretreatment standard or
requirement, nor do they release the user from liability for any violation,
including a continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order or a
compliance schedule shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other enforcement
action against the industrial user.
(d)   Cease and desist orders. Whenever the director finds that a discharge of
wastewater is taking place or threatening to take place in violation of any
ordinance, order, regulation, or other law, the director shall issue an order
directing the industrial user to cease and desist such discharges and achieve
compliance in accordance with a detailed time schedule of specific actions the
user shall take to correct or prevent violations of this chapter, regulation,
order, or any other law. The director may order the revocation or suspension of
any permit. Any order issued by the director may require the industrial user to
provide information as the director deems necessary to explain the nature of
the discharge. The director may require in any cease and desist order that the
user pay to the city the costs of any extraordinary inspection or monitoring
which in the discretion of the director was deemed necessary as a result of the
violation, together with civil penalties. Issuance of a cease and desist order
shall not preclude any other enforcement action against the industrial user.
(e)   Cleanup and abatement orders.
(1)   Any industrial user who is in violation of this chapter, regulation,
order, or any other law, shall upon the director’s order and at the total
expense of the user, clean up the discharge and do whatever is necessary or
required by the director to abate the effects of the violation.
(2)   The industrial user may be required to initiate any cleanup, abatement,
or remedial work that the director deems necessary. Issuance of a cleanup and
abatement order shall not preclude any other enforcement action against the
user.
(3)   Any industrial user violating the ordinance, regulations, order, or any
other law shall be liable to the city for costs incurred in the cleanup,
abatement, or remedial actions undertaken by the director, including but not
limited to administrative costs, inspection costs, attorney fees and penalties
or other liability imposed upon the city by other agencies, persons, or
organizations, whether by way of court action, administrative action, or
settlement.
(f)   Termination of discharge. In addition to other remedies available and as
provided in this chapter or by law, when in the discretion of the director, the
industrial user has not demonstrated or cannot demonstrate satisfactory
progress toward compliance with the requirements of the ordinance, regulation,
order, or other laws, the director may, after providing written notice to the
user by certified mail 30 days in advance of any action, sever or plug the
connection from the user’s system to the city’s sewerage system or otherwise
prevent the discharge of wastewater from the user’s system to the city’s
sewerage system.
(g)   Administrative fines. In addition to other remedies available and as
provided in this chapter or by law, the director may impose administrative
penalties.
(h)   Other enforcement actions. Nothing herein shall preclude or limit in any
manner, State or federal regulatory agencies from undertaking enforcement
actions as appropriate as a result of violations pursuant to this chapter to
the extent these also constitute violations of applicable federal or State
laws, or other pertinent requirements.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.17) (Added by Ord. 94-46)
§ 43-5.18 Appeals.
(a)   The industrial user may petition to appeal the terms of a wastewater
discharge permit, its modification, revocation, suspension, or denial, or the
director’s order, including but not limited to enforcement within 30 days of
the director’s final action on the matter in accordance with the rules of the
department.
(b)   (1)   Failure to submit a timely petition for appeal shall be a waiver of
the administrative appeal.
(2)   In its petition, the appealing party shall indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to substitute for the provisions
objected to in the wastewater discharge permit, or the specific basis for its
objections to the permit modification, suspension, revocation, or denial, and
alternatives, if any, it suggests, or specific grounds for its objection to the
director’s order.
(3)   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit or the director’s
final action regarding the permit modification, suspension, revocation, or
denial, or the director’s order, including but not limited to enforcement,
shall not be stayed pending the appeal.
(4)   If the petition for appeal is not acted upon within 30 days by the
director, the petition shall be denied and the industrial user shall comply
with the terms of the permit or the director’s final action regarding the
permit modification, suspension, or revocation, or the terms of the director’s
order.
(5)   The director shall take final action on a permit denial, issuance,
modification, or renewal, or the order, including but not limited to
enforcement, by sending the permit or the director’s order to the applicant by
certified mail.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.18) (Added by Ord. 94-46)
§ 43-5.19 Violation provisions.
(a)   Administrative and civil penalties. Any person violating this chapter,
any order, or permit issued under this section, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, shall be liable for an administrative or civil penalty
of not less than $1,000 per violation per day, except that in cases where such
offense shall continue after written notice from the director of such
violation, each day’s continuance of the same shall constitute a separate
offense. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit,
penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. In
determining the amount of the fine, the director shall consider the seriousness
of the violation or violations, any history of such violations, any good-faith
efforts to comply with the applicable requirements, the economic impact of the
fine on the violator, and such other considerations, that the director
determines in the exercise of the director’s discretion, are relevant to the
amount of the fine. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may
recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporters’ fees, and other
expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to
have violated this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits under
this section.
(b)   Criminal penalties. Any person:
(1)   Who intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or negligently violates
Articles 1 through
5 or
6 through
10, any order or permit issued under one of those articles, or any other
pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not
less than $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both, except that
in cases where such offense shall continue after due notice, each day’s
continuance of the same shall constitute a separate offense; or
(2)   Who knowingly makes any false statement or misrepresentation in any
record, report plan, or other document filed with the director, or tampers with
or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or sampling and analysis
method required under this section or by other law, shall be punished by a fine
of not more than $2,000 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or
both.
Unless otherwise provided, this subsection shall be controlled by the Hawaii
Penal Code, Hawaii Revised Statutes.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.19) (Added by Ord. 94-46; Am. Ord. 02-14)
§ 43-5.20 Injunctive relief.
   Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment standard or requirement or
continues to violate
Articles 1 through
10, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued under this section, or any
other pretreatment requirement, the city may petition the Circuit Court of the
First Circuit, State of Hawaii, or the United States District Court, State of
Hawaii, through the city’s attorney for the issuance of a temporary or
permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement
imposed by this chapter on activities of the industrial user. Such other action
as appropriate for legal or equitable relief, or both, may also be sought by
the city. A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite
to taking any other action against a user.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.20) (Added by Ord. 94-46)
§ 43-5.21 Nonliability of department personnel.
   No member, employee, or officer of the department of environmental services
shall be civilly or criminally liable or responsible under this chapter for any
acts done under this chapter in the performance of their duties as a member, an
officer, or an employee of the city.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.21) (Added by Ord. 94-46; Am. Ord. 94-73)
ARTICLE 5A: COMMERCIAL FOG WASTE AND COMMERCIAL COOKING OIL WASTE
Sections
   
43-5A.1   Definitions
   
43-5A.2   Required transport of commercial FOG waste and commercial cooking oil
waste to recycling facility and required conversion to marketable product
   
43-5A.3   Penalties
§ 43-5A.1 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Biodiesel or Renewable Fuel. Has the same meaning as defined in §
2-34.1.
Commercial Cooking Oil Waste. Cooking oil, which because of prior use, potency
loss, or contamination, is no longer usable or salable by a business engaged in
cooking food or selling cooking oil. The term does not mean the residue
remaining after the conversion of commercial cooking oil waste into a
marketable product.
Commercial FOG Waste. Animal/vegetable fat, oil, and grease and other waste
that is retained in or removed from a commercial pretreatment device. The term
does not mean the residue remaining after the conversion into a marketable
product of grease and other waste removed from a commercial pretreatment
device.
Commercial Pretreatment Device. A pretreatment device that is installed by a
business pursuant to §
43-1.8(h).
Marketable Product. A salable, tradeable, serviceable, or otherwise valuable
product that is produced from the bioconversion, composting, or processing of
commercial FOG waste or commercial cooking oil waste.
Recycling Facility. A facility of a business or other operation engaged in the
conversion of commercial FOG waste, commercial cooking oil waste, or both into
biodiesel or renewable fuel, compost, or another marketable product. For the
purposes of this article, a publicly owned sewage treatment works or privately
owned sewage treatment plant shall not be deemed a recycling facility, even if
capable of converting commercial FOG waste or commercial cooking oil waste into
sewage sludge.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 5A, § 14-5A.1) (Added by Ord. 02-14)
§ 43-5A.2 Required transport of commercial FOG waste and commercial cooking oil
waste to recycling facility and required conversion to marketable product.
(a)   Any person who removes commercial FOG waste or commercial cooking oil
waste from a business shall transport the waste to a recycling facility and
unload the waste there.
(b)   Any person who comes into possession of commercial FOG waste or
commercial cooking oil waste at a recycling facility shall either:
(1)   Convert the waste into biodiesel or renewable fuel, compost, or another
marketable product; or
(2)   Transport the waste to another recycling facility and unload the waste
there.
(c)   The director may, on the director’s own initiative, suspend the
requirements of subsections (a) or (b), or both:
(1)   During the period of a work stoppage or any other interruption of
recycling transport service or recycling facility service; or
(2)   Whenever the director determines that there are inadequate recycling
facilities or there is inadequate recycling capacity to dispose of all
commercial FOG waste or commercial cooking oil waste in the city at a recycling
facility.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 5A, § 14-5A.2) (Added by Ord. 02-14)
§ 43-5A.3 Penalties.
(a)   A person shall not intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or negligently
dispose of or unload any commercial FOG waste or commercial cooking oil waste
at a place other than a recycling facility in violation of §
43-5A.2, or otherwise violate this article. “Intentionally,” “knowingly,”
“recklessly,” and “negligently” shall have the meanings ascribed to the terms
under HRS Chapter 702.
(b)   A person who violates subsection (a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
subject to a fine of not more than $2,000, imprisonment of not more than 30
days, or both, for each violation.
(c)   In lieu of or in addition to the criminal penalty under subsection (b), a
person who violates subsection (a) shall be subject to a civil fine of at least
$500 for each violation. In setting the fine amount, the director shall
consider the seriousness of the violation, cost incurred by the city to remedy
the negative impacts of the violation, any history of similar violations by the
person, any good faith effort to comply with the applicable requirement, and
such other factors determined necessary by the director.
To enforce an order by the director imposing a civil fine, the corporation
counsel, on behalf of the director, may institute a civil action in a court of
competent jurisdiction. This provision shall be deemed the council consent and
approval required by §
2-3.2(b) for bringing the action against a private person.
(d)   The penalties under this section are additional to any other penalty that
may be imposed on a person for a violation of this chapter.
For the purposes of Article 5, a violation of this article is a violation of
this chapter and a violation of
Articles 1 through
10 of this chapter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 5A, § 14-5A.3) (Added by Ord. 02-14)
ARTICLE 6: SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
Sections
   
43-6.1   Liability for payment
   
43-6.2   Customer classifications
   
43-6.3   Sewer service charge schedules
   
43-6.4   Determination of residential user discharge
   
43-6.5   Determination of discharge
   
43-6.6   Wastewater disposal charges for waste haulers
   
43-6.7   Payment of bills
   
Appendix 43-A: Sewer service charge schedules
§ 43-6.1 Liability for payment.
(a)   All customers who are connected, directly or indirectly, to the public
sewer system as defined herein shall pay a sewer service charge.
If a property within an improvement district served by an existing properly
functioning individual wastewater disposal system, other than a cesspool,
permitted by the DOH and constructed pursuant to §
43-1.6(c), is required to connect to the public sewer system, then the owner or
person legally responsible is not required to pay sewer service charges for a
period of 25 years following connection to the public sewer system; provided
that if such property is sold or otherwise transferred, except for a transfer
due to the death of the property owner, prior to the end of the 25-year period,
then the owner of the property, or person legally responsible following such
sale or other transfer, is required to pay a sewer service charge immediately
following the sale or other transfer.
(b)   Where a service contract/agreement exists between any user of the public
sewer system and the city that provides for free sewer service, the contract/
agreement shall be terminated or renegotiated to provide for payment of sewer
services in accordance with the requirements of § 204 (b)(1)(A) of the Clean
Water Act and 40 CFR § 35.2140.
(Sec. 11-6.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 6, § 14-6.1) (Am.
Ord. 20-36)
§ 43-6.2 Customer classifications.
(a)   “Residential” customers have been defined to include only the following:
(1)   Single-family dwellings;
(2)   Duplexes, apartment buildings, condominiums, and townhouses;
(3)   Retirement hotels (permanent guests);
(4)   Mobile homes and mobile home parks, if any;
(5)   Housing projects; or
(6)   Accessory dwelling units as defined in §
21-10.1.
(b)   “Nonresidential” customers have been defined to include all industrial,
commercial, agricultural, governmental, and miscellaneous services, plus the
following that have been specifically excluded from the above definition of
residential customers:
(1)   Military bases (excluding housing units);
(2)   Convalescent homes and sanitariums;
(3)   Hotels, motels, resorts, camps, lodges, and guest ranches (transient
guests);
(4)   School dormitories and fraternity houses; or
(5)   Boardinghouses.
(c)   Any customer with both residential and nonresidential usage and a common
meter shall be charged as follows: The department shall determine the
percentage of the total number of units that are nonresidential and the
percentage of the total number of units that are residential. The department
shall then apportion the total monthly water usage for the customer between
residential and nonresidential units based on these percentages. The customer’s
bill shall be computed by charging all residential units the applicable
residential sewer service charges, and by charging the nonresidential units the
applicable nonresidential sewer service charges. The charges shall be from
Column 1 or Column 2 of
Appendix 43-A, whichever applies. The means of determining the amount to charge
a customer with both residential and nonresidential usage established by this
subsection shall not preclude any customer from apportioning all or any portion
of the charge among the various users on any other basis.
(Sec. 11-6.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 6, § 14-6.3) (Am.
Ords. 89-80, 03-32, 25-2, 25-27)
Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to § 43-6.2 take effect on October 1, 2025, in accordance
with Ord. 25-27.
§ 43-6.3 Sewer service charge schedules.
(a)   Sewer service charge schedules are listed separately in
Appendix 43-A of this chapter.
(b)   The department shall review the sewer charge schedule as frequently as
may be necessary or proper to comply with any agreements with holders of bonds
of the city issued to finance facilities constituting part of the public
wastewater system, but not less frequently than annually, and recommend to the
council revisions, as necessary, to reflect the actual operation and
maintenance costs of the public wastewater system and debt service, reserve and
other coverage requirements on bonds of the city issued to finance facilities
constituting a part of the public wastewater system.
(c)   The department shall annually notify all users of the public sewer system
of their current sewer service charge rate and that portion of their rate that
is attributable to wastewater treatment services in accordance with 40 CFR §
35.2140(c). Notification may be in conjunction with a regular bill, newspaper
notice, or other means acceptable to the EPA regional administrator.
(Sec. 11-6.4, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 6, §
14-6.4) (Am. Ords. 96-58, 98-19, 01-52)
§ 43-6.4 Determination of residential user discharge.
   Residential users may, upon request to the director and the director’s
approval, be permitted to install and maintain at the user’s expense, a water
meter for submetering nonsewer water. The property owner shall, at the owner’s
expense, do any necessary plumbing, subject to departmental inspection, to
separate the types of water use and shall provide for the meter to be located
adjacent to the primary water meter and within the public right-of-way or at a
location approved by the director.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 6, §
14-6.4A) (Added by Ord. 97-07; Am. Ord. 98-06)
§ 43-6.5 Determination of discharge.
(a)   Dischargers using private wells or other private water sources will be
required to install, at their own expense, water meters approved by the
director for measuring the supplemental water quantity or, alternatively, they
will be required to install, at their own expense and at the appropriate
location, a calibrated flume, weir, flow meter, or similar device approved by
the director for measuring wastewater quantity. A flow recording and totalizing
register will also be required, and measurements to verify the quantities of
waste flows will be performed on a random basis by the department. Residential
users not served by the city water system shall be charged on the basis of the
monthly base charge rates provided for in
Appendix 43-A.
(b)   Because of landscape irrigation or consumptive usage, some nonresidential
users may discharge substantially less than 80 percent of their metered water
usage to the sanitary sewer system. Those users may, upon request to the
director, be permitted to have the amount of water being discharged to the
sewer determined by one of the methods listed below. The specific method to be
used will be selected by the director based on considerations of cost of
installation and anticipated accuracy of the method.
(1)   Method one. The user shall install and maintain at the user’s expense a
calibrated flume, weir, flow meter, or similar device approved by the director
as to type and location to measure the user’s wastewater discharge. In the
latter case, a flow meter and totalizing register will be required and
measurements to verify the quantity of wastewater flow will be performed on a
random basis by the director. The property owner shall install at the owner’s
expense a suitable vault for installing the flow meter. The vault shall be
located on the user’s sewer lateral or building sewer at a location approved by
the director, and the department shall be granted access rights.
(2)   Method two. The user shall install and maintain at the user’s expense a
water meter for submetering the water discharging to the public sewer. The
property owner shall at the owner’s expense do any necessary plumbing subject
to department inspection to separate the types of water use and provide for the
meter to be located adjacent to the primary water meter and within the public
right-of-way or at a location approved by the director.
(3)   Method three. If the director determines that it is impractical for a
user to employ method one or method two as a result of physical difficulty or
excessive cost, the director may permit the user to estimate the amount of
wastewater reasonably anticipated to be discharged to the public sewer. The
user’s estimate may be based upon average historical water use during wet
weather periods or upon any other reasonable basis, and may be based upon flow
meter tests if practical. The director shall review the data submitted by the
user and may modify the user’s estimate, where appropriate. The decision of the
director shall be final if method three is used. If a user is not satisfied
with the determination under method three, the user shall have the right to
require at the user’s expense use of method one or method two for determination
of the amount of wastewater discharge to the public sewer.
(Sec. 11-6.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 6, § 14-6.5) (Am.
Ord. 89-80)
§ 43-6.6 Wastewater disposal charges for waste haulers.
   Waste haulers transporting wastewater to a city facility for wastewater
disposal are subject to the wastewater disposal charges listed in Appendix 43-
A.
(Added by Ord. 25-27)
§ 43-6.7 Payment of bills.
(a)   All bills shall be due and payable upon deposit in the United States mail
or upon the presentation to the consumer. Payment shall be made to collectors
duly authorized by the city.
(b)   Any bill that is not paid within 30 days after presentation or deposit in
the United States mail shall be deemed delinquent and the water service by the
board of water supply may be discontinued five business days after written
notice is given to the consumer. For consumers not served by the board of water
supply, the department may use any reasonable means to effectively terminate
the discharge into the public sewer.
(c)   A service fee for handling a dishonored check may be made in accordance
with fees established by the department.
(Sec. 11-6.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 6, § 14-6.7)
APPENDIX 43-A: SEWER SERVICE CHARGE SCHEDULES
   These charges apply to all customers as specified in the following
schedules.
Residential Sewer Service Charges
 Effective :
Residential Sewer Service Charges
                                                                            Effective
                                                                            :
Single-family and duplex dwellings served by city water system per dwelling           
unit per month
                                                                            January   $63.55
                                                                            1, 2026
                                                                            July 1
                                                                            of:
   1.   Monthly base charge                                           2026      $48.27
                                                                            2027      $52.37
                                                                            2028      $57.08
                                                                            2029      $62.22
                                                                            2030      $67.82
                                                                            2031      $73.92
                                                                            January   $7.95
                                                                            1, 2026
   2.   Charge per 1,000 gallons of metered water consumed, the water July 1
consumed reduced by the water irrigation factor of 20 percent; provided     of:
that residential users who install and maintain a water meter for           2026      $11.83
submetering nonsewer water shall not have the water consumed reduced by the 2027      $12.83
water irrigation factor                                                     2028      $13.99
                                                                            2029      $15.24
                                                                            2030      $16.62
                                                                            2031      $18.11
 
Residential Sewer Service Charges
 Effective :
Residential Sewer Service Charges
                                                                            Effective
                                                                            :
                                                                            January   $120.82
                                                                            1, 2026
                                                                            July 1
                                                                            of:
Single-family and duplex dwellings not served by city water system per      2026      $133.42
dwelling unit per month                                                     2027      $144.76
                                                                            2028      $157.78
                                                                            2029      $171.98
                                                                            2030      $187.46
                                                                            2031      $204.33
Multiple-unit dwellings and accessory dwelling units served by city water             
system per dwelling unit per month
                                                                            January   $43.70
                                                                            1, 2026
                                                                            July 1
                                                                            of:
   1.   Monthly base charge                                           2026      $33.19
                                                                            2027      $36.01
                                                                            2028      $39.25
                                                                            2029      $42.78
                                                                            2030      $46.63
                                                                            2031      $50.83
                                                                            January   $7.95
                                                                            1, 2026
   2.   Charge per 1,000 gallons of metered water consumed, the water July 1
consumed reduced by the water irrigation factor of 20 percent; provided     of:
that residential users who install and maintain a water meter for           2026      $11.83
submetering nonsewer water shall not have the water consumed reduced by the 2027      $12.83
water irrigation factor                                                     2028      $13.99
                                                                            2029      $15.24
                                                                            2030      $16.62
                                                                            2031      $18.11
 
Residential Sewer Service Charges
 Effective :
Residential Sewer Service Charges
                                                      Effective :
                                                      January 1, 2026 $100.97
                                                      July 1 of:
Multiple-unit dwellings and accessory dwelling units  2026            $118.33
not served by city water system per dwelling unit per 2027            $128.39
month                                                 2028            $139.95
                                                      2029            $152.54
                                                      2030            $166.27
                                                      2031            $181.24
 
Nonresidential Sewer Service Charges
 Effective :
Nonresidential Sewer Service Charges
                                                                                Effective
                                                                                :
Domestic Strength Wastewater:                                                             
1.   Metered Water Usage
                                                                                January   $63.55
                                                                                1, 2026
                                                                                July 1
                                                                                of:
   (1)    Monthly base charge per equivalent single-family dwelling unit (2026)     $48.27
                                                                                2027      $52.37
                                                                                2028      $57.08
                                                                                2029      $62.22
                                                                                2030      $67.82
                                                                                2031      $73.92
 
Nonresidential Sewer Service Charges
 Effective :
Nonresidential Sewer Service Charges
                                                                              Effective
                                                                              :
                                                                              January   $7.95
                                                                              1, 2026
                                                                              July 1
                                                                              of:
   (2)    Charge per 1,000 gallons of metered water consumed, the water 2026      $11.83
consumed reduced by the water irrigation factor of 20 percent                 2027      $12.83
                                                                              2028      $13.99
                                                                              2029      $15.24
                                                                              2030      $16.62
                                                                              2031      $18.11
2.   Metered Wastewater Discharge                                                    
                                                                              January   $63.55
                                                                              1, 2026
                                                                              July 1
                                                                              of:
   (1)    Monthly base charge per equivalent single-unit dwelling unit (2026)     $48.27
                                                                              2027      $52.37
                                                                              2028      $57.08
                                                                              2029      $62.22
                                                                              2030      $67.82
                                                                              2031      $73.92
 
Nonresidential Sewer Service Charges
 Effective :
Nonresidential Sewer Service Charges
                                  Effective :
                                  January 1, 2026 $7.95
                                  July 1 of:
                                  2026            $11.83
   (2)   Charge per 1,000 ga2027s           $12.83
                                  2028            $13.99
                                  2029            $15.24
                                  2030            $16.62
                                  2031            $18.11
 
Wastewater Disposal Charges
                                                     Effective:
                                                     January 1, 2026 $16.78
                                                     July 1 of:
                                                     2026            $18.53
1.   Charge per 1,000 gallons of wastewater dispos2027            $20.10
                                                     2028            $21.91
                                                     2029            $23.89
                                                     2030            $26.04
                                                     2031            $28.38
 
   For fiscal year 2033 and every fiscal year thereafter, each of the sewer
service charges in this appendix will increase by 3 percent annually, effective
July 1 of each fiscal year.
   Customer assistance program. A customer assistance program is hereby
established within the department to provide relief to certain households
paying residential sewer charges. The director may adopt rules pursuant to HRS
Chapter 91 to implement and administer the customer assistance program.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, App. 14-B) (Added by Ord. 12-7) (Am. Ords. 25-2, 25-27)
Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to Appendix 43-A take effect on October 1, 2025, in
accordance with Ord. 25-27.
ARTICLE 7: PUMPING OR TREATING OF CESSPOOLS
Sections
   
43-7.1   Generally
   
43-7.2   Requirements
   
43-7.3   Service charge
   
43-7.4   Payment of bills
   
Appendix 43-B: Cesspool charge schedules
§ 43-7.1 Generally.
(a)   Services to be provided for.
(1)   Services under this article will be provided only to properties for which
a public sewer is not available or accessible and are classified as residential
under §
43-6.2(a) of this chapter.
(2)   Services will not be provided to properties classified as nonresidential.
Nonresidential properties are required to obtain service from private
establishments.
(b)   Procedure.
(1)   An occupant or owner of residential property may request to have a
cesspool serviced by the department.
(2)   The department may, at its option, use chemical treatment in lieu of
pumping.
(Sec. 11-7.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 7, § 14-7.1) (Am.
Ord. 02-60)
§ 43-7.2 Requirements.
(a)   Maintenance of cesspool. The owner shall maintain the owner’s cesspool in
a safe, serviceable condition and readily accessible to the department’s crew.
Failure to exercise reasonable care to minimize the frequency of servicing may
result in termination of pumping or treatment services by the department.
(b)   Replacement and rehabilitation of cesspools. Any cesspool requiring one
or more pumping per week for a period of three weeks shall be replaced or
rehabilitated within 90 days after the owner or person legally responsible has
been notified to do so by the director. Failure to take corrective action
required by the director may result in termination of pumping services by the
department.
(Sec. 11-7.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 7, § 14-7.2)
§ 43-7.3 Service charge.
(a)   Pumping.
(1)   A charge shall be made for pumping cesspools. The person requesting the
service shall have the choice of either paying on a per-call basis or on a
monthly contract basis. A person who elects to be serviced on a contract basis
must apply to the department. Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision,
no contract shall extend beyond June 30, 2004. After June 30, 2004, the charge
for pumping cesspools shall be on a per-call basis only; provided that any
owner or occupant whose property is included within a sewer improvement
district for which an assessment ordinance has been enacted before June 30,
2004, may elect to pay for service on a contract basis until the prescribed
deadline in the notice to connect to the sewer system or as may be allowed by
an extension to the deadline approved by the director.
(2)   An eligible household shall be entitled to pay reduced per-call cesspool
pumping service charges. For purposes of this section, an “eligible household”
is that which does not exceed the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) low-income limit adjusted for family size. The eligible
household must apply for a loan through the department of community services
housing rehabilitation loan program for wastewater disposal system
rehabilitation/reconstruction to rehabilitate or reconstruct their wastewater
disposal system. Only if the eligible household does not otherwise qualify for
a housing rehabilitation loan program will the eligible household be entitled
to pay reduced per-call cesspool pumping service charges, retroactive to the
date of initial application for the rehabilitation loan with the department of
community services.
(3)   No charge shall be made for pumping a cesspool that is being chemically
treated by the city and payment is being made for the service.
(b)   Chemical treatment. A monthly charge shall be made for any cesspool under
chemical treatment.
(c)   Cesspool service charge schedule. Cesspool service charge schedules are
listed in
Appendix 43-B of this chapter.
(Sec. 11-7.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 7, § 14-7.3) (Am.
Ords. 01-52, 02-60, 04-37)
§ 43-7.4 Payment of bills.
(a)   All bills shall be due and payable upon deposit in the United States mail
or upon other presentation to the consumer. Payment shall be made to collectors
duly authorized by the city.
(b)   Any bill that is not paid within 30 days after presentation or deposit in
the United States mail shall be deemed delinquent and the water service by the
board of water supply may be discontinued five business days after written
notice is given to the consumer. For consumers not served by the board of water
supply, the department may use any reasonable means to effectively terminate
the discharge into the public sewer.
(c)   A service fee for handling a dishonored check may be made in accordance
with fees established by the department.
(Sec. 11-7.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 7, § 14-7.4)
APPENDIX 43-B: CESSPOOL CHARGE SCHEDULES
A. Reserved
B. The following charges shall be effective from July 1, 2004:
   1. Pumping cesspool on a per-call basis:
      For a single truckload or fraction thereof:
      a.   Regular rate                                                              $132.90
      b.   Reduced rate for owners or occupants determined to be “low-income” by the
      director pursuant to §                                                           $86.50
      43-7.3(a)
   2. Chemically treated cesspool:
      a.   Single-family and duplex dwellings, per dwelling unit served per month    $55
      b.   Multiple-unit dwellings, per dwelling unit served per month               $38.50
 
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, App. 14-C) (Added by Ord. 01-52; Am. Ords. 02-60, 04-37,
25-2)
Editor’s note:
   For rebate of cesspool charges, see § 5 of Ord. 04-37.
ARTICLE 8: SEWER FUND
Sections
   
43-8.1   Creation
   
43-8.2   Purpose
   
43-8.3   Authority
   
43-8.4   Refunds
§ 43-8.1 Creation.
   There is created and established a special fund to be known as the “sewer
fund.”
(Sec. 11-8.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 8, § 14-8.1)
§ 43-8.2 Purpose.
(a)   All moneys received by the city pursuant to § 204 (b)(1)(B) of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972 (P.L. 92-500), §
6-47.1, and
Articles 1 through
10 shall be deposited into the sewer fund and shall be appropriated and
expended for the purposes authorized by federal or State law, the
implementation of
Articles 1 through
10, or other purposes specified by ordinance. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
except for moneys expended for: (1) debt service payments on reimbursable
general obligation bonds and other financings; or (2) repayments of interfund
transfers and loans, where the proceeds from such bonds, financings, interfund
transfers or loans were used to pay wastewater expenditures that are currently
paid for by the sewer fund or sewer revenue bond improvement fund, no moneys
shall be expended from the sewer fund to reimburse the general fund for
expenses incurred in prior fiscal years.
(b)   In addition, all moneys received by the city from the board of water
supply for the sale or long-term lease or rental of a city-owned treatment
works to the board shall be deposited into the sewer fund and shall be
appropriated and expended only for the following purposes:
(1)   Land acquisition, planning, design, engineering, construction,
inspection, relocation, or equipment necessary for the establishment of a new
city-owned treatment works or improvement of an existing city-owned treatment
works;
(2)   Payment of debt service on outstanding sewer revenue bonds;
(3)   Repayment of an outstanding loan from the State water pollution control
revolving fund that was used to construct or improve the sold, leased, or
rented city-owned treatment works; or
(4)   Reimbursement of the federal or State government when the sale or long-
term lease or rental to the board of water supply of the city-owned treatment
works has violated a term or condition of a federal or State grant that was
used to construct or improve the works.
For this subsection, “city-owned treatment works” means a publicly owned
treatment works, means the lease as defined under §
43-1.2, that is owned by the city and “long-term lease or rental of a city-
owned treatment works” means the lease or rental of all or a portion of a city-
owned treatment works that has been approved by the council pursuant to §
28-4.1.
(Sec. 11-8.2, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 8, § 14-8.2) (Am.
Ords. 94-32, 98-21, 02-14, 02-55, 05-006)
§ 43-8.3 Authority.
   The director of budget and fiscal services shall take any and all actions
necessary to effect compliance with this article.
(Sec. 11-8.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 8, § 14-8.3) (Am.
Ords. 93-04, 02-55)
§ 43-8.4 Refunds.
   Any payments heretofore made pursuant to the “in-lieu charges to tax exempt
users” before the effective date of this section shall be refunded.
(Sec. 11-8.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 8, § 14-8.4) (Am.
Ord. 93-04)
ARTICLE 9: TERMINATION OF WATER SERVICE
Section
   
43-9.1   Authorization
§ 43-9.1 Authorization.
   It has been determined that termination of water service to enforce payment
of sewer service charges is necessary and that termination of water service to
industrial users for violations pursuant to §
43-5.7(b) may be necessary. Therefore, the board of water supply is given the
authority to terminate water service for delinquency in payment of sewer
service charges or pursuant to §
43-5.7(b) when so directed by the director.
(Sec. 11-9.1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 9, § 14-9.1) (Am.
Ord. 94-73)
ARTICLE 10: WASTEWATER SYSTEM FACILITY CHARGES
Sections
   
43-10.1   Liability for payment of wastewater system facility charges
   
43-10.2   Time of payment
   
43-10.3   Residential wastewater system facility charges
   
43-10.4   Nonresidential wastewater system facility charges
   
43-10.5   Mixed residential and nonresidential wastewater system facility
charges
   
43-10.6   Reduction of wastewater system facility charges for low-income
housing projects
   
43-10.7   Waiver of wastewater system facility charges for accessory dwelling
unit projects
   
43-10.8   Waiver of wastewater system facility charges for affordable dwelling
units
   
Appendix 43-C: Wastewater system facility charges
§ 43-10.1 Liability for payment of wastewater system facility charges.
(a)   New applicants for service.
(1)   All applicants for structures to be completed after October 24, 1990*
shall be liable for the payment of wastewater system facility charges, provided
that they will be served directly or indirectly by the city’s wastewater
system.
(2)   Applicants for structures on any existing vacant, residential zoned
property shall be exempt from paying a system facility charge for connecting
one equivalent single-family dwelling unit to the city’s wastewater system. In
the event more than one equivalent single-family dwelling unit is connected to
the system, system facility charges shall be assessed for each additional
equivalent single-family dwelling unit connected.
(3)   Applicants for structures on any vacant residential zoned property that
is created in accordance with city subdivision rules after October 24, 1990*
shall be assessed system facility charges for each equivalent single-family
dwelling unit connected to the system.
(4)   Applicants for structures to be completed after October 24, 1990* that
will initially be served by either private individual wastewater disposal
systems or private wastewater treatment plants shall be subject to a deferred
wastewater system facility charge. Payment of the deferred charge shall not be
required until such time as connection is actually made either directly or
indirectly to the city’s wastewater system.
(5)   All other applicants for structures to be completed after October 24,
1990* that will be served either directly or indirectly by the city’s
wastewater system shall be subject to the wastewater system facility charge,
including federal, State, city, charitable, religious, or other tax-exempt
entities; except that the wastewater system facility charge shall be reduced
for low-income housing projects in accordance with §
43-10.6.
(b)   Existing structures.
(1)   All existing structures as of October 24, 1990* that are currently served
either directly or indirectly by the city’s wastewater system or by private
individual disposal systems or treatment plants, shall be exempt from the
wastewater system facility charge with respect to their existing wastewater
system capacity entitlement. Structures that are determined to be illegal by
the city shall not be entitled to any wastewater system facility charge
exemption.
(2)   The existing wastewater system capacity entitlement for residential
structures shall be based on the number and type of existing dwelling units.
(3)   The existing wastewater system capacity entitlement for nonresidential
structures shall be based on the size of the existing water meter serving the
existing structures as determined from board of water supply water service
records. For those structures served by a private water well, the water meter
size shall be determined from the State department of land and natural
resources records.
(4)   The owner of an existing residential or nonresidential structure shall be
liable for the wastewater system facility charge increment associated with any
enlargement of the existing structures or for any increase in the owner’s
wastewater system capacity entitlement.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 10, § 14-10.1) (Added by Ord. 90-80; Am. Ord. 04-12)
Editor’s note:
   * “October 24, 1990” is substituted for “the effective date of this
article.”
§ 43-10.2 Time of payment.
(a)   Residential service.
(1)   New residential applicants for service.
(A)   A wastewater system facility charge shall be paid by each new applicant
for service as a precondition to the issuance of a building permit by the city,
where the new applicant is subject to liability under §
43-10.1(a); provided that the director of planning and permitting may defer
payment of the facility charge for low-income housing projects and city or
city-sponsored, or State or State-sponsored housing projects, but in all
instances no connection to the city’s sewer system shall be allowed until the
facility charge is paid. The required payment shall be based on the number and
type of dwelling units to be constructed in accordance with §
43-10.3.
(B)   Wastewater system facility charges for subdivision or development
projects shall be paid as a precondition to issuance of building permits for
the subdivision by the city. The minimum required payment shall be based on one
equivalent single-family dwelling unit per lot. In the event more than one
equivalent single-family dwelling unit is constructed per lot, wastewater
system facility charges for each additional unit shall be paid as a
precondition to the issuance of a building permit by the city; provided that
the director of planning and permitting may defer payment of the facility
charge for low-income housing projects and city or city-sponsored, or State or
State-sponsored housing projects, but in all instances, no connection to the
city’s sewer system shall be allowed until the facility charge is paid.
Subdivision or development projects that have received final subdivision
approval before October 24, 1990* shall be exempt from paying the minimum one
equivalent single-family dwelling unit charge.
(2)   Existing residential structures.
(A)   An existing residential structure is exempt from liability under §
43-10.1 for its existing wastewater system capacity entitlement.
(B)   An applicant for a building permit to enlarge an existing residential
structure shall be liable for the wastewater system facility charge increment
associated with the enlargement project, based on the number and type of
dwelling units to be constructed in accordance with §
43-10.3. Payment of the charge shall be a precondition to the issuance of a
building permit by the city.
For the purposes of this subsection, “city or city-sponsored housing project”
means any one or more of the following: a housing project that is city-owned,
city-funded or developed pursuant to any one or more of the following: HRS §
46-15 or 46-15.2 or under HRS Chapter 201H as applicable to the city through
HRS § 46-15.1, “State or State-sponsored housing project” means a housing
project that is any one or more of the following: State-owned, State-funded, or
developed under HRS Chapter 201H, and “low-income housing project” has the same
meaning as defined in §
43-10.6; provided that a “city or city-sponsored housing project” and a “State
or State-sponsored housing project” may also be a “low-income housing project”
for purposes of the reduction of the wastewater system facility charges
pursuant to §
43-10.6.
(b)   Nonresidential service.
(1)   New nonresidential applicants for service. A wastewater system facility
charge shall be paid by each new nonresidential applicant for service as a
precondition to the issuance of a building permit by the city, where the new
applicant is subject to liability under §
43-10.1(a). The required payment shall be based on the procedures indicated in
§
43-10.4.
(2)   Existing nonresidential structures.
(A)   An existing nonresidential structure is exempt from liability under §
43-10.1(b) for its existing wastewater system capacity entitlement.
(B)   An applicant for a building permit to enlarge an existing nonresidential
structure shall be liable for the wastewater system facility charge increment
associated with the enlargement project, based on the procedures set forth in §
43-10.4. Payment of the charge shall be a precondition to the issuance of a
building permit by the city.
(C)   An applicant wishing to increase its wastewater system capacity
entitlement when no increase in structure size is required, shall be liable for
the wastewater system facility charge increment associated with the increase,
based on the procedures set forth in §
43-10.4. Payment of the charge shall be a precondition to the issuance of a
building permit by the city.
(c)   Mixed residential and nonresidential service.
(1)   New mixed applicants for service. A wastewater system facility charge
shall be paid by each new applicant for service as a precondition to the
issuance of a building permit by the city, where the applicant is subject to
liability under §
43-10.1(a); provided that the director of planning and permitting may defer
payment of the facility charge applicable to the residential portion of a city
or city-sponsored or State or state-sponsored housing project upon
consideration of the applicant’s financial situation, but in all instances no
connection to the city’s sewer system shall be allowed until the charge is
paid. The required payment shall be based on the procedures set forth in §
43-10.5.
(2)   Existing mixed structures.
(A)   An existing structure is exempt from liability under §
43-10.1(b) for its existing wastewater system capacity entitlement.
(B)   An applicant for a building permit to enlarge an existing structure shall
be liable for the wastewater system facility charge increment associated with
the enlargement project, based on the procedures set forth in §
43-10.5. Payment of that charge shall be a precondition to the issuance of a
building permit by the city.
(C)   An applicant wishing to increase its wastewater system capacity
entitlement to accommodate a change in use of the existing structure shall be
liable for the wastewater system facility charge increment associated with the
increase, based on the procedures set forth in §
43-10.5. Payment of that charge shall be a precondition to the issuance of a
building permit by the city.
For the purposes of this subsection, “city or city-sponsored housing project”
means any one or more of the following: a housing project that is city-owned,
city-funded, or developed pursuant to any one or more of the following: HRS §
46-15 or 46-15.2 or under HRS Chapter 201H as applicable to the city through
HRS § 46-15.1, and “State or State-sponsored housing project” means any one or
more of the following: a housing project that is State-owned, State-funded or
developed under HRS Chapter 201H.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 10, § 14-10.2) (Added by Ord. 90-80; Am. Ords. 95-11,
04-12, 12-7)
Editor’s note:
   * “October 24, 1990” is substituted for “the effective date of this
article.”
§ 43-10.3 Residential wastewater system facility charges.
(a)   Each applicant for a residential building permit for a new structure, or
for an enlargement of an existing structure, shall be required to pay a
wastewater system facility charge based on the total number of equivalent
single-family dwelling units in the project to be constructed, provided that
the director shall reduce the amount of the facility charge upon consideration
of the applicant’s financial contribution for backup facilities constructed or
to be constructed for the project and dedicated or to be dedicated to the city.
This requirement applies to those new applicants for service and to those
existing structures that are subject to liability under §
43-10.1.
(b)   The following weights are assigned to the various categories of
residential developments for wastewater system facility charge purposes:
 
Description                                        Number of ESDUs Per Unit
Single-family dwellings, duplex-unit dwellings,    1.0
triplexes, and quadraplexes
Multiple-family dwellings (five units or more),
condominiums, townhouses, retirement homes, mobile 0.7
homes, and housing projects
Accessory dwelling units                           0.7
 
(c)   The applicable wastewater system facility charge per ESDU is set forth in
Appendix 43-C of this chapter.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 10, § 14-10.3) (Added by Ord. 90-80; Am. Ords. 01-52,
25-2, 25-27)
Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to § 43-10.3 take effect on October 1, 2025, in accordance
with Ord. 25-27.
§ 43-10.4 Nonresidential wastewater system facility charges.
(a)   Each applicant for a nonresidential building permit for a new structure,
or for an enlargement of an existing structure, or for an increase in the
wastewater system entitlement shall be required to pay a wastewater system
facility charge based on the imputed number of equivalent single-family
dwelling units in the project to be constructed; provided that the director
shall reduce the amount of the facility charge upon consideration of the
applicant’s financial contribution for backup facilities constructed or to be
constructed for the project and dedicated or to be dedicated to the city.
This requirement applies to those new applicants for service and to those
existing structures that are subject to liability under §
43-10.1.
(b)   The new applicant for service, or an owner wishing to increase the
owner’s wastewater system capacity entitlement, shall be required to obtain
from the board of water supply, or from the State department of land and
natural resources in the case of private water wells, the size of the water
meter to be provided for the project to be constructed. The number of ESDUs is
determined from the following table based on the water meter size:
Meter Size (in inches) Number of ESDUs
Meter Size (in inches) Number of ESDUs
5/8                    1
3/4                    1
1                      2.4
1-1/2                  5.8
2                      13
3                      33
4                      57
6                      87
 
(c)   The applicable wastewater system facility charge per ESDU is set forth in
Appendix 43-C of this chapter.
(d)   All nonresidential applicants who are liable for payment under this
article may install a sub-water meter to monitor their sewage discharge.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 10, § 14-10.4) (Added by Ord. 90-80; Am. Ords. 01-52,
25-27)
Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to § 43-10.3 take effect on October 1, 2025, in accordance
with Ord. 25-27.
§ 43-10.5 Mixed residential and nonresidential wastewater system facility
charges.
(a)   Each applicant for a building permit for a new structure, or the owner of
an existing structure who wishes to increase the owner’s wastewater system
capacity entitlement, shall be required to pay a wastewater system facility
charge based on the number of equivalent single-family dwelling units in the
project to be constructed. This requirement shall be applicable to those new
applicants for service and to those existing structures that are subject to
liability under §
43-10.1.
(b)   The new applicant for service, or the owner of an existing structure who
wishes to increase the owner’s current wastewater system capacity entitlement,
shall be required to install a sub-water meter to monitor the water flow to the
nonresidential units. The number of ESDUs shall be determined in accordance
with §
43-10.3 for the residential units and §
43-10.4 for the nonresidential units.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 10, § 14-10.5) (Added by Ord. 90-80; Am. Ord. 12-7)
§ 43-10.6 Reduction of wastewater system facility charges for low-income
housing projects.
(a)   A developer of low-income housing may apply for a reduction of wastewater
system facility charges in accordance with this section.
(b)   An applicant for a reduction of wastewater system facility charges shall
provide the city with information, as prescribed by the director, to
demonstrate that the applicant is developing a low-income housing project and
otherwise qualifies for a reduction of the city’s wastewater system facility
charges.
(c)   If the city determines that an applicant qualifies for a reduction of the
wastewater system facility charges, the city shall reduce the charges only for
those housing units in the applicant’s housing project that are to be sold or
rented to low-income households. The reduced charges shall be as provided in
Appendix 43-C(2).
(d)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Director. The director of the department of environmental services.
Low-income. Has the same meaning as defined in §
8-10.17.
Low-Income Housing Project. A housing project in which at least 25 percent of
the units are reserved for rent for low-income housing pursuant to an agreement
with the county, State or federal government, or reserved for sale to low-
income households.
Low-Income Housing Unit. A housing unit in the applicant’s housing project that
is sold or rented to a low-income household.
(e)   If a developer to whom a reduction has been granted under this section
sells a low-income housing unit in a low-income housing project to other than a
low-income household, or rents a low-income housing unit in a low-income
housing project to other than a low-income household within any period in which
the sale or rental of the unit is prohibited by any agreement with the county,
State, or federal government, the developer shall notify the director of the
department of environmental services within 30 days of such sale or rental and
shall, within such 30-day period, pay to the city the difference between the
wastewater system facility charge that would have been applicable under
Appendix 43-C(1), and the reduced charge that was paid under
Appendix 43-C(2), plus interest on the difference at 8 percent per year from
the date of payment of the reduced wastewater system facility charge for the
housing unit.
(f)   In accordance with HRS Chapter 91, the director may adopt rules having
the force and effect of law for the implementation, administration and
enforcement of this section.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 10, § 14-10.6) (Added by Ord. 04-12)
§ 43-10.7 Waiver of wastewater system facility charges for accessory dwelling
unit projects.*
   The wastewater system facility charges, as set forth in
Appendix 43-C of this chapter, for the creation of an “accessory dwelling
unit,” as defined in §
21-10.1, will be waived. The wastewater system facility charges that were
collected for the creation of “accessory dwelling units” from September 14,
2015, will be reimbursed if requested by the permittee.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 10, § 14-10.7) (Added by Ord. 16-19; Am. Ords. 17-30,
20-20)
*Editor’s note:
   Section 43-10.7 will be repealed on June 30, 2025, in accordance with Ord.
17-30, as amended by Ord. 20-20.
§ 43-10.8 Waiver of wastewater system facility charges for affordable dwelling
units.**
(a)   Wastewater system facility charges, as set forth in
Appendix 43-C of this chapter will be waived for the following:
(1)   Affordable dwelling units as defined in and as provided on-site or off-
site pursuant to
Chapter 29;
(2)   Affordable dwelling units provided pursuant to a planned development-
transit permit pursuant to §
21-9.100-10, or an interim planned development-transit permit pursuant to §
21-9.100-5;
(3)   Affordable rental dwelling units developed in compliance with HRS § 201H-
36(a)(5);
(4)   Affordable rental housing units that:
(A)   Are rented to households earning 100 percent and below of the AMI; and
(B)   For a period of at least 15 years after a certificate of occupancy is
issued for the affordable rental housing project, the affordable units are
rented at or below the rental rate limits established by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development for households earning 100 percent
of the AMI for the applicable household size;
pursuant to
Chapter 32.
(b)   An applicant for a waiver of wastewater system facility charges under
this section must provide the city with information, as prescribed by the
director, to demonstrate that the applicant qualifies for the waiver.
(Added by Ord. 18-1; Am. Ords. 19-8, 20-11, 20-13)
**Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to § 43-10.8 in Ord. 18-1, as amended by Ords. 19-8 and 25-
25, will be repealed on June 1, 2030, in accordance with Ords. 18-1, 19-8, and
25-25.
APPENDIX 43-C: WASTEWATER SYSTEM FACILITY CHARGES
   The following wastewater system facility charges are established in
accordance with §§ 43-10.3, 43-10.4, 43-10.5, and 43-10.6:
(1)   Residential wastewater system facility charge per ESDU:
Effective: Amount (dollars)
Effective:      Amount (dollars)
January 1, 2026 $7,013
July 1 of:       
2026            $7,539
2027            $8,180
2028            $8,916
2029            $9,718
2030            $10,593
 
(2)   Low-income housing wastewater system facility charges per ESDU:
Effective: Amount (dollars)
Effective:      Amount (dollars)
January 1, 2026 $1,450
July 1 of:
2026            $1,559
2027            $1,691
2028            $1,844
2029            $2,009
2030            $2,190
 
(3)   Nonresidential wastewater system facility charge for domestic strength
wastewater per ESDU:
Effective: Amount (dollars)
Effective:      Amount (dollars)
January 1, 2026 $7,013
July 1 of:
2026            $7,539
2027            $8,180
2028            $8,916
2029            $9,718
2030            $10,593
 
   For fiscal year 2032 and every fiscal year thereafter, each of the
wastewater system facility charges in this appendix will increase by 3 percent
annually, effective July 1 of each fiscal year.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, App. 14-D) (Added by Ord. 01-52; Am. Ords. 03-11, 04-12,
05-019, 11-17, 25-27)
Editor’s note:
   Amendments made to Appendix 43-C take effect on October 1, 2025, in
accordance with Ord. 25-27.
ARTICLE 11: DRAINAGE, FLOOD, AND POLLUTION CONTROL
Sections
   
43-11.1   Legislative findings—Intent
   
43-11.2   Definitions
   
43-11.3   Adequacy of drainage
   
43-11.4   Considerations
   
43-11.5   Approval of drainage plans
   
43-11.6   Exceptions
   
43-11.7   Determination of boundary lines
   
43-11.8   Buildings adjacent to drainage facilities
   
43-11.9   Subdivision drainage facilities
   
43-11.10   Open drainways
   
43-11.11   Fences along improved channels
   
43-11.12   Connection to city-owned separate storm sewer system—Violation
   
43-11.13   Allocation of costs
   
43-11.14   Improvements under the improvement district assessment ordinance
   
43-11.15   Election by property owners to pay additional amounts
   
43-11.16   Land requirements and maintenance of drainage facilities
   
43-11.17   Exception
   
43-11.18   Inequities
   
43-11.19   Provisions subject to State statutes
   
43-11.20   Federal aid projects
   
43-11.21   Approval denied
   
43-11.22   Discharge of effluent other than stormwater runoff—Violation
   
43-11.23   Environmental quality control—Violation
   
43-11.24   Administrative enforcement
   
43-11.25   Judicial enforcement of order
   
43-11.26   Enforcement
   
43-11.27   Appeals
   
43-11.28   Violation provisions
   
43-11.29   Injunctive relief
   
43-11.30   Nonliability of department personnel
   
43-11.31   Rule-making powers
   
43-11.32   Decisions of the chief engineer
§ 43-11.1 Legislative findings—Intent.
(a)   The council finds that:
(1)   (A)   Heavy rain storms have periodically created destructive floods in
certain areas of the city threatening the lives of its inhabitants and causing
heavy damage to property;
(B)   The continued development of these areas without providing adequate
drainage and appropriate flood control measures would only aggravate the
conditions conducive to flooding; and
(C)   Every effort should be made to minimize flood damage potential and to
protect the lives and property of the inhabitants of the city.
(2)   There is a growing need to protect our city’s natural watercourses and
other vital water resources from contamination and pollution.
(3)   Natural methods of drainage and soil infiltration, which absorb and
slowly release runoff, are preferred methods of stormwater management.
(b)   Therefore, the council deems it necessary to enact the ordinance codified
in this article for the sound, economic development of the city and in the
interests of the health, safety, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the
city.
(Sec. 16-6.1, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12,
§ 14-12.1) (Am. Ord. 96-34)
§ 43-11.2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Best Management Practices or BMPs. Pollution control measures, applied to
nonpoint sources, on-site or off-site, to control erosion and the transport of
sediments and other pollutants that have an adverse impact on waters of the
State. BMPs may include a schedule of activities, the prohibition of practices,
maintenance procedures, treatment requirements, operating procedures, and
practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, or drainage from raw
material storage.
Chief Engineer. The director and chief engineer of facility maintenance, or the
director and chief engineer’s authorized representative.
City Standards. The storm drainage standards approved by the chief engineer, a
copy of which shall be on file in the stormwater quality branch, department of
facility maintenance. These standards are intended to be minimum standards only
and are not to be construed as a guarantee to property owners adjacent to a
drainage facility against flood or drainage damage.
Department. The department of facility maintenance of the City and County of
Honolulu.
Developer. One who causes land to be developed.
Development. Land that is being developed or developed lands.
Discharge. The deposit, disposal, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or
placing of any substance into a drainage facility or natural watercourse.
Domestic Wastewater. The water-carried wastes produced from noncommercial or
nonindustrial activities and that result from normal human living processes.
Drainage Facility. Any city drainage structure or separate storm sewer system,
including stream structures, constructed principally for the conveyance of
storm and surface waters, street wash, or drainage.
Drainage Problem. The discharge of effluent or a pollutant onto a public right-
of-way or into a drainage facility, or both, that causes the hydraulic capacity
of that drainage facility to be exceeded and results in flooding. This
definition includes the discharge of a pollutant that reduces the hydraulic
capacity of a drainage facility by the deposit of solids therein.
Effluent. Any substance other than stormwater runoff that is discharged onto a
public right-of-way or into a drainage facility, or both, including
nonstormwater discharges that are not sources of pollutants, and any NPDES-
permitted discharges.
Engineering Control Facility. Any drainage device such as a basin, well, pond,
ditch, dam, or excavation used for the temporary or permanent storage of
stormwater by means of detention, retention, divergence, or infiltration for
the purpose of reducing stormwater volume or peak storm discharge flows, or
both, and which may provide gravity settling of particulate pollutants. It
includes but is not limited to detention ponds, retention ponds, infiltration
wells or ditches, holding tanks, diversion ditches or swales, drainpipes, check
dams, and debris basins.
Flood or Flooding. The inundation to a depth of 3 inches or more of any
property not ordinarily covered by water. The terms shall not apply to
inundation caused by tsunami wave action.
Hazardous Substance. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 342D-38.
Industrial Wastewater. All water-carried wastes and wastewater, excluding
domestic wastewater.
Maximum Extent Practicable or MEP. Economically achievable measures for the
control of the addition of pollutants from existing and new categories and
classes of nonpoint sources of pollution, which reflect the greatest degree of
pollutant reduction achievable through the application of the best available
nonpoint source pollution control practices, technologies, processes, siting
criteria, operating methods, or other alternatives.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit or NPDES Permit. The
permit issued to the city pursuant to Title 40 CFR Part 122, Subpart B, §
122.26(a)(1)(iii), for stormwater discharge from the city’s separate storm
sewer systems; or the permit issued to a person or property owner for a
stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity pursuant to Title 40
CFR Part 122, Subpart B, § 122.26(a)(1)(ii), or other applicable sections of
Part 122; or the permit issued to a person or property owner for the discharge
of any pollutant from a point source into State waters through the city’s
separate storm sewer system pursuant to Hawaii Administrative Rules, Chapter
11-55, “Water Pollution Control.”
Person. Includes corporations, estates, associations, partnerships, and trusts,
as well as one or more individuals.
Pollutant. Any waste, cooking or fuel oil, waste milk, waste juice, pesticide,
paint, solvent, radioactive waste, hazardous substance, sewage, dredged spoils,
chemical waste, rock, sand, biocide, toxic substance, construction waste and
material, and soil sediment. The term also includes commercial FOG waste as
defined under §
43-5A.1.
Pollution Problem. The discharge of any pollutant into State waters directly or
by conveyance through a drainage facility that creates a nuisance or adversely
affects the public health, safety, or welfare, or causes a drainage facility to
violate the city National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit or
violates any State water quality standards.
Private Storm Drain Connection. Any conveyance of stormwater, including but not
limited to any drainage pipe, ditch, or swale connected to any drainage
facility or separate storm sewer system, including any curb or gutter.
Property Owner. The fee simple owner of record, lessee of record,
administrator, administratrix, executor, executrix, personal representative,
receiver, trustee, property management agent, or any other individual,
corporation, or unincorporated association who has the use, control or
occupation of land with claim of ownership, whether the owner’s interest be in
absolute fee or a lesser estate.
Redevelopment. Developed land which is subsequently subdivided or redeveloped
or renovated.
Relief Drain. An additional drainage facility or an enlarged facility
constructed in place of any existing drainage system.
Remedial Work. The construction or installation of catch basins or other
devices to resolve localized drainage problems.
Separate Storm Sewer. A conveyance or system of conveyance including city roads
and streets with drainage systems, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-
made channels, or storm drains owned by the city, and designated or used for
collecting or conveying stormwater.
State Waters. Has the same meaning as defined in HRS § 342D-1.
Stormwater. Stormwater runoff, surface runoff, street wash, or drainage, and
may include discharges from fire fighting activities.
Stormwater Runoff Associated with Industrial Activity. Stormwater discharge
associated with industrial activity as defined in Title 40 CFR Part 122,
Subpart B, § 122.26(b)(14).
Water Quality Standards. The State water quality standards adopted pursuant to
HRS § 342D-5.
(Sec. 16-6.2, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12,
§ 14-12.2) (Am. Ords. 92-122, 96-34, 02-14)
§ 43-11.3 Adequacy of drainage.
   No building permit shall be issued without the prior written approval of the
chief engineer as to the adequacy of drainage within the areas designated by
the shaded portions on the maps attached to the adopting ordinance and
incorporated by reference as: Exhibit A - Waimanalo; Exhibit B-1 - Kailua-
Kaneohe; Exhibit C - Kaneohe-Heeia; Exhibit D-1 - Heeia-Kahaluu; Exhibit E-1 -
Kaalaea-Kahaluu; Exhibit F - Waiahole-Kualoa; Exhibit G - Kaaawa-Kahana;
Exhibit I - Pupukea-Paumalu; Exhibit J - Waianae Kai-Makaha; Exhibit K -
Lualualei-Nanakuli; Exhibit L - Pearl City-Waimalu; and Exhibit M - Niu Valley.
(Sec. 16-6.3, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.3)
§ 43-11.4 Considerations.
   In making a determination as to the adequacy of drainage the chief engineer
shall consider topographic conditions, rainfall, runoff, land use, depth and
width of drainage channels, size of other drainage facilities, and past history
of flooding, including the extent of flooding.
(Sec. 16-6.4, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.4)
§ 43-11.5 Approval of drainage plans.
   Any applicant for a building permit for the construction of a structure
within the areas indicated in Exhibits A through M, mentioned in §
43-11.3, shall submit plans for the improvement or construction of drainage
facilities to the chief engineer for approval. Upon approval of such plans, the
applicant shall be entitled to the issuance of the building permit, if all
other requirements of law have been complied with.
(Sec. 16-6.5, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.5)
§ 43-11.6 Exceptions.
   If the application for a building permit otherwise qualifies under
Chapter 18 and under all other applicable laws and rules, §
43-11.3 does not apply to the issuance of a building permit for the following
work:
(1)   To perform work permitted under
Chapter 18 on a building or structure dislocated or damaged by floods or rains.
This exception does not extend to the moving or relocation of a building or
structure into another area within which the issuance of building permits is
prohibited, as designated in §
43-11.3;
(2)   To perform work permitted under
Chapter 18 necessary or required to make an existing building or structure
comply with applicable laws and rules;
(3)   To perform alterations or repairs to an existing structure or building
that will not increase the number of inhabitants in the structure or building;
and
(4)   To erect temporary structures, not for residential purposes, as permitted
by
Chapter 18.
(Sec. 16-6.6, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.6)
(Am. Ord. 96-58)
§ 43-11.7 Determination of boundary lines.
   In the event of a dispute as to whether the property or proposed work of an
applicant for a building permit falls within any area indicated by Exhibits A
through M mentioned in §
43-11.3, the chief engineer shall determine from the plot plan submitted by the
applicant the location of the property and the proposed work in relation to the
reference points on the applicable exhibit. The decision of the chief engineer
shall be final.
(Sec. 16-6.7, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.7)
§ 43-11.8 Buildings adjacent to drainage facilities.
   All applications for a building permit for buildings or structures that will
be located on property adjacent to any drainage facility shall be submitted to
the chief engineer for review.
(Sec. 16-6.8, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.8)
§ 43-11.9 Subdivision drainage facilities.
(a)   In the case of subdivisions, the owner shall dedicate and the city accept
the land or any interest in land necessary for the drainage facilities that are
constructed to city standards and that are to be maintained and repaired (and
operated as the case may be) by the city pursuant to HRS § 265A-1, by way of
easements or in fee simple as determined by the chief engineer. The land
document for stream improvements shall include the following covenant:
That the grantor shall include in all conveyances of its land in the vicinity
of the stream improvement area a statement that the drainage structure was
designed and constructed by the grantor or the grantor’s authorized agent or
developer to at least meet the minimum criteria set forth in the storm drainage
standards of the city, dated _____________, but that the city does not
guarantee that the drainage structure is adequate to confine all flood waters
to the stream improvement area.
(b)   In the case of subdivisions, drainage facilities that only serve private
properties shall have easements in favor of the affected property owners. This
includes interceptor ditches.
(c)   Before the subdivision of any land is approved by the chief engineer, the
chief engineer shall check the subdivision plans against the areas of possible
inundation in the watershed area as shown shaded on the maps incorporated by
reference in §
43-11.3. Such possible inundated areas are to be designated “possible flood
areas.” No subdivision shall be approved by the chief engineer, unless all lots
in a subdivision that are wholly or partially within the “possible flood area”
designation have been subjected to the following encumbrance and noted as a
legend on the subdivision map to the effect that:
This lot (Lots _____________) is(are) in a “possible flood area.” All existing
drainage structures have been designed and have been or are being constructed
to at least meet the minimum criteria set forth in the storm drainage standards
of the city; however, the city does not guarantee that the drainage structures
will confine all flood waters to the drainage facilities at all times.
(d)   The developer shall pay the entire cost of the drainage facilities to
satisfy the anticipated drainage requirements of all surface water that may
flow through or over the proposed subdivision.
(e)   Where city standards require drainage facilities of greater capacity than
necessary to serve the land being subdivided or developed, to dispose of water
diverted or concentrated by the city into such drainage system, the city may
pay the difference in costs of materials and excavation, if any. The cost of
materials to the city shall be based on the costs of the materials delivered at
the site. Upon a determination by the chief engineer that such larger
facilities are required, and if HRS Chapter 103, or any amendatory act thereto,
are applicable, the property owner shall deposit with the city an amount equal
to the cost of construction of the drainage facilities allocable to the
property owner’s land, based upon current city cost data for comparable
installations, but the amount paid by the property owner shall be adjusted, if
necessary, on the basis of final costs.
(f)   The chief engineer may require the construction of permanent detention or
retention drainage structures or other engineering control facilities to
contain or divert stormwater runoff to satisfy the anticipated drainage
requirement of all surface waters that may flow through or over the proposed
subdivision, or to meet any conditions of the city NPDES permit. When required,
such facilities will be constructed to provide gravity settling of sediments,
suspended solids, and other particulate pollutants.
(g)   The chief engineer shall, pursuant to federal requirements, establish
controls on the timing and rate of discharge of stormwater runoff from any new
development or redevelopment as may be appropriate to reduce stormwater runoff
pollution to the maximum extent practicable through the implementation of best
management practices (BMPs) and engineering control facilities, designed to
reduce the generation of pollutants. This may, where feasible and pursuant to
city standards, include limiting peak stormwater runoff rates for storms of
higher frequencies to predevelopment levels.
(Sec. 16-6.9, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.9)
(Am. Ords. 92-122, 96-34)
§ 43-11.10 Open drainways.
(a)   Open drainways, such as streams, ravines, channels, and ditches, shall
not be covered or modified, except when the chief engineer determines that such
covering or modification of the open drainways will not be dangerous to the
public health, safety, and welfare.
(b)   If a property owner desires, at the property owner’s own cost, that an
open drainway be covered or modified, the property owner shall submit all the
pertinent data to substantiate the desirability of covering or modifying such a
facility, including data showing that the function of the facility will not be
hampered. The construction plans for such covering or modification shall be
approved by the chief engineer.
(Sec. 16-6.10, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.10)
§ 43-11.11 Fences along improved channels.
(a)   The chief engineer may require that fences be constructed as part of any
channel improvement based upon a consideration of any one or more of the
following: the height of the wall or bank, or shape of the channel, or the land
use of the adjoining properties, or the depth of normal flow in the channel, or
the location of the channel improvement or the possibility of people injuring
themselves because of the channel improvement.
(b)   Fences, when required, shall generally be erected on or immediately
adjacent to the channel walls and they shall be maintained and repaired by the
city.
(c)   The minimum height of such fences shall be 42 inches.
(Sec. 16-6.11, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.11)
§ 43-11.12 Connection to city-owned separate storm sewer system—Violation.
(a)   Private storm drain connection licenses.
(1)   All connections from nonmunicipal and private drainage systems to the
city-owned separate storm sewer system shall require a storm drain connection
license issued by the chief engineer.
(2)   The license may require, if applicable, a description of the property
owner activity or standard industrial classification code, or both, that best
reflects the principal products or services, and a description or analysis, or
both, of the effluent to be discharged from the private drainage system into
the city-owned system. No license is transferrable without the prior written
consent of the chief engineer.
(3)   Nonstormwater discharge into the city-owned separate storm sewer system
may be allowed if the discharge has been issued an NPDES permit from the State
department of health or the United States Environmental Protection Agency,
subject to requirements herein.
(4)   The chief engineer, or the chief engineer’s authorized representative,
shall be authorized to enter any property, building, or premises in the
discharge of the chief engineer’s official duties to inspect or investigate,
measure, or test any effluent that is discharged in a private drainage system
connected, directly or indirectly, to the city-owned system.
(5)   Effluent, including NPDES-permitted discharges and nonstormwater
discharges, which are not sources of pollutants, may be allowed into a private
drainage system, connected directly or indirectly to the city-owned system.
(6)   All required analysis submitted by property owners on the characteristics
of the constituents in the discharge shall be performed by qualified personnel
in a laboratory acceptable to the chief engineer.
(7)   The chief engineer may condition the granting of the license with
requirements to prevent drainage or pollution problems, or both, or mitigative
measures which will meet any conditions of the city NPDES permit.
(8)   Where a private drainage system is common to one or more parcels and is
owned by more than one property owner, each property owner is required to have
a private drain connection license and be responsible for the maintenance of
the common private drainage system.
(9)   Failure of the property owner to obtain a license shall be a violation of
this article.
(b)   Private storm drain connection license agreement. A property owner may be
allowed to connect the property owner’s private drainage system to the city-
owned separate storm sewer system if the chief engineer determines that the
existing system is adequate to accommodate the potential peak-designed flows of
both systems, and if the property owner agrees to the following conditions:
(1)   That the property owner shall bear the entire cost of engineering,
construction, and maintenance of the private drainage system;
(2)   That the property owner shall indemnify and hold the city free and
harmless from all suits and actions caused by the property owner’s acts or
failure to act in connection to the city-owned system;
(3)   That the construction of the drain connection shall be made in accordance
with plans and specifications approved by the chief engineer, and subject to
compliance by the property owner with this section, including conditions of any
and all applicable statutes, ordinances, and rules of federal, State, or city
agencies having the effect of law;
(4)   That no additions or alterations to the private drainage system will be
made without the prior written consent of the city;
(5)   That the private drainage system shall remain the property owner’s
property;
(6)   That in the event the private drainage system within the public right-of-
way shall at any time interfere with any public use, the property owner shall
relocate the private drainage system at the property owner’s expense;
(7)   That in the event any portion of the city-owned separate storm sewer
system is damaged or destroyed during the construction of the private storm
drain connection, the property owner shall bear the entire cost of engineering
and construction, or replacement of the damaged facility;
(8)   That in the event the discharge into the city-owned system includes
stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity, the property owner
shall have an NPDES permit and provide data on the characteristics of the
constituents, quantity of the effluent and discharge at the property owner’s
expense within one year after the date of connection, and annually thereafter
or as the need may arise, as determined by the chief engineer; and
(9)   That any time the property owner or anyone using the property owner’s
property, discharges pollutants or other objectionable material that exceeds
applicable water quality standards into the city-owned system or otherwise
misuses the system, or causes a violation of the city NPDES permit, the
discharge shall be deemed a violation of this section and the city by written
notice may terminate this license.
(c)   Termination of license agreement.
(1)   The chief engineer may order a license to be terminated upon finding that
the property owner has violated the agreement or this section.
(2)   A property owner whose license has been terminated shall immediately stop
the discharge of any pollutant, if applicable, covered by the license into the
city-owned separate storm sewer system. The chief engineer may disconnect or
permanently block from the city-owned separate storm sewer system, the private
storm drain connection from any property owner whose license has been
terminated if such action is necessary to insure compliance with the order of
termination.
(3)   A property owner whose license has been terminated may apply for a new
license and pay all delinquent charges, penalties, and such other sums as may
be due to the city. Any cost that might be incurred by the city in terminating
the prior license and disconnecting the private storm drain connection shall be
paid by the property owner before issuance of a new license.
(d)   Private storm drain connections.
(1)   All licenses for private storm drain connections to the city-owned
separate storm sewer system issued to the property owner of record shall remain
in force. The city may reissue new license agreements for those connections
that are discharging nonstormwaters or any effluent that requires an NPDES
permit into the city-owned separate storm sewer system.
(2)   Any private storm drain system that is connected to the city-owned
separate storm sewer system without a license issued to the property owner of
record shall be considered an illegal storm drain connection.
(3)   Whenever a property owner is cited for an illegal private storm drain
connection to the city-owned separate storm sewer system, the property owner
shall be given 90 days after the date of the citation to obtain a connection
license. The city will issue a connection license to the property owner without
penalty within the 90-day period, provided no nonstormwater is being discharged
into the city-owned separate storm sewer system. After the 90-day period, the
property owner shall be in violation of this chapter.
(4)   Whenever a property owner caused or is causing a discharge of stormwater
runoff associated with industrial activity or polluted industrial process water
or other objectionable material into the city-owned separate storm sewer
system, the property owner, within 10 days after being notified by the city of
the violation, shall cease the discharges. If an NPDES permit is obtained by
the property owner for the discharge, the discharge may be resumed.
(e)   Any other storm drain connections to the city-owned separate storm sewer
system requires approval by the chief engineer in writing.
(f)   Private storm drain connection fee.
(1)   A license fee of $200 shall be collected before the issuance of a private
storm drain connection license. All license fees collected shall not be
refundable.
(2)   When the license is issued on behalf of the city, State, or federal
government, the chief engineer shall waive the collection of the license fee.
(3)   All license fees shall be deposited into the highway fund.
(Sec. 16-6.12, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.12)
(Am. Ords. 92-122, 96-34, 03-12, 14-4)
§ 43-11.13 Allocation of costs.
(a)   Except as otherwise provided, the city may pay the entire cost for the
following types of drainage facilities:
(1)   Public stream improvements;
(2)   Bridge to replace an existing bridge;
(3)   Relief drains that will take care of the drainage requirements of the
existing land use; provided that if a property owner desires the construction
of a larger facility to meet the drainage requirements attributable to a
proposed higher land use of such person’s property, the city may construct such
larger facility provided that the property owner bears the additional cost of
such enlarged facility; and
(4)   Remedial work for the disposal of water collected or accumulated on
public streets or remedial work necessitated by the disposal of such water over
land not heretofore subject to such disposal, or both.
(b)   Except as otherwise provided, the city may participate in remedial work
to existing private drainage facilities, situated in or abutting on private
properties, for the resolution of localized drainage problems to the extent of
the cost of engineering and 50 percent of the cost of construction. Examples of
such drainage facilities are:
(1)   Stream walls to minimize erosion or to prevent flooding where such walls
will show some public benefit; and
(2)   Drainage facilities to resolve seepage problems in the sidewalk area.
(Sec. 16-6.13, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.13)
§ 43-11.14 Improvements under the improvement district assessment ordinance.
   Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to affect the initiation
and construction of drainage improvements under the improvement district
assessment ordinance.
(Sec. 16-6.14, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.14)
§ 43-11.15 Election by property owners to pay additional amounts.
   Notwithstanding any provision above mentioned as to apportionment of costs,
owners of properties may pay more than the amounts required by such provisions
relating to apportionment of costs.
(Sec. 16-6.15, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.15)
§ 43-11.16 Land requirements and maintenance of drainage facilities.
(a)   Except as otherwise provided, the city shall acquire the land or any
interest in land necessary for the construction, maintenance, and repair (and
operation as the case may be) of drainage facilities that are to be constructed
by the city by way of easements or in fee simple. Nothing herein shall prevent
the city from acquiring easements for other improvements or for utilities or
other uses through the same land.
(b)   The city shall maintain and repair (and operate as the case may be) only
structures in improved drainage facilities that have been constructed to city
standards and have been accepted or constructed by the city.
(c)   The cleaning of debris from public or private drainways may be performed
as part of any general cleanup or beautification program of the city, but shall
not be performed as a part of maintenance and repair of drainage facilities;
however, the chief engineer may cause to be removed any potential obstruction
to the operation of any culvert, gate, bridge or drain opening, or similar
drainage structure that has been accepted or constructed by the city.
(Sec. 16-6.16, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.16)
§ 43-11.17 Exception.
   This article shall not apply to the construction of any drainage facility
for subdivisions, the final subdivision map of which has been approved by the
department of planning and permitting within 30 days of the approval date of
this article, nor to any drainage improvement where participation by the city
has been approved by the chief engineer before the approval date.
(Sec. 16-6.17, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.17)
§ 43-11.18 Inequities.
   Whenever the chief engineer finds that the apportionment of costs, as
proposed in this article, would result in inequities, the chief engineer is
authorized and directed to submit the chief engineer’s recommendations to the
council as to how such inequities may be corrected.
(Sec. 16-6.18, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.18)
§ 43-11.19 Provisions subject to State statutes.
(a)   Any drainage facility, open drainway or other similar facility that
extends to the shoreline may be subject to HRS Chapter 205A, Part III.
(b)   In such case, approval of the appropriate agency is required before
approval of any construction plans may be granted by the chief engineer.
(Sec. 16-6.19, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.19)
(Am. Ord. 96-58)
§ 43-11.20 Federal aid projects.
(a)   The contents of this article may be adjusted, modified, or deleted to
meet federal requirements under a federal aid project.
(b)   In the case of federal projects, the city may obtain the necessary
channel right-of-way in such form as required by federal regulations.
(Sec. 16-6.20, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.20)
§ 43-11.21 Approval denied.
   The chief engineer shall disapprove any drainage facilities, open drainways,
and other similar facilities that do not conform with this article.
(Sec. 16-6.21, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.21)
§ 43-11.22 Discharge of effluent other than stormwater runoff—Violation.
(a)   No person shall discharge any effluent other than stormwater runoff onto
any public right-of-way or into any drainage facility, or both, without first
obtaining a permit from the chief engineer. The chief engineer will only issue
a permit upon application when the chief engineer determines that such
discharge will not create a drainage or pollution problem or cause a violation
of the city NPDES permit. The chief engineer may condition the granting of the
permit with requirements to prevent drainage or pollution problems, or both, or
mitigative measures that will meet any conditions of the city NPDES permit.
Except for those nonstormwater discharges authorized by the city NPDES permit,
no discharge shall commence, unless an NPDES permit is first obtained from the
State department of health for the discharge of any pollutant into State waters
through the municipal separate storm sewer system.
(b)   Any person desiring the permit required under this section shall apply to
the chief engineer on forms prescribed by the chief engineer.
(c)   Any permit issued under this section shall be for the duration of the
effluent discharge, but shall not extend beyond the term of the city NPDES
permit. The permit shall meet any conditions of the city NPDES permit.
(d)   A fee of $200 shall be required for each permit application. All
application fees collected shall not be refundable. When the discharge is
performed by or on behalf of the city, State or federal government, the
collection of the permit fee shall be waived. All permit fees shall be
deposited into the highway fund.
(e)   Any discharge that violates any condition of the permit or the State
water quality standards in Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) Chapter 11-54,
shall also be a violation of this article and may result in a cease and desist
order. In addition, the city by written notice may terminate the permit for any
discharge that violates any condition of the permit or the State water quality
standards in HAR Chapter 11-54.
(f)   Failure to obtain a permit required under this section shall be a
violation of this article.
(Sec. 16-6.22, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12,
§ 14-12.22) (Am. Ords. 92-122, 96-34, 03-12, 14-4)
§ 43-11.23 Environmental quality control—Violation.
(a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be
discharged any pollutant into any drainage facility that causes a pollution
problem in State waters, or causes a violation of the city NPDES permit or
State water quality standards.
(b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be
discharged any stormwater runoff associated with industrial activity into any
drainage facility that causes a violation of the city NPDES permit.
(c)   It shall be unlawful to discharge domestic wastewater and industrial
wastewater into any drainage facility or any separate storm sewer system.
It also shall be unlawful to discharge commercial cooking oil waste and
commercial FOG waste, as defined under §
43-5A.1, into any drainage facility or any separate storm sewer system.
(d)   It shall be unlawful to discharge any stormwater on any public right-of-
way that creates a drainage problem or causes a nuisance.
(e)   This section is not applicable to employees of the city who, during the
performance of their duties or in cases of emergency or a hazardous substance
spill, may discharge sewage, other pollutants or wash water from cleanup
operation of a hazardous substance spill into any drainage facility.
(f)   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the chief engineer or the chief
engineer’s duly authorized representatives may enter at reasonable times any
building or premises in the City and County of Honolulu in the performance of
the chief engineer’s official duties, to inspect or investigate the discharge
of any pollutant or effluent into or onto a drainage facility; provided that
such entry shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible
inconvenience to the persons in possession; and provided further, that an order
of a court authorizing such entry shall be obtained in the event such entry is
denied or resisted.
(Sec. 16-6.23, R.O. 1978 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.) (1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12,
§ 14-12.23) (Am. Ords. 92-122, 96-34, 02-14)
§ 43-11.24 Administrative enforcement.
   If the chief engineer determines that any person is violating this article,
any rule adopted thereunder, or any permit or license issued pursuant thereto,
the chief engineer may have the person served, by mail or delivery, with a
notice of violation and order. Whenever a corporation violates this article,
the violation shall be also that of the individual directors, officers or
agents of such corporation who, in their capacity as directors, officers, or
agents of such corporation, have authorized, ordered, or done any of the acts
constituting in whole or in part such violation.
(a)   Contents of the notice of violation. The notice shall include at least
the following information:
(1)   Date of the notice;
(2)   The name and address of the person served with the notice and the
location of the violation;
(3)   The section number of the ordinance or rule, or other law that has been
violated;
(4)   The nature of the violation; and
(5)   The deadline for compliance with the notice.
(b)   Contents of the order. The order may require the person to do any or all
of the following:
(1)   Cease and desist from the violation;
(2)   Correct the violation at the person’s own expense before a date specified
in the order;
(3)   Payment of an administrative fine; or
(4)   Appear before the chief engineer or a person designated by the chief
engineer at a time and place specified in the order and answer the charges
specified in the notice of violation.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.24) (Added by Ord. 92-122)
§ 43-11.25 Judicial enforcement of order.
   The chief engineer may institute a civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the enforcement of any order issued. Where the civil action
has been instituted to enforce the civil fine imposed by the order, the chief
engineer need only show that the notice of violation and order was served, a
hearing was held or the time granted for requesting a hearing had expired
without such a request, the civil fine imposed, and that the fine imposed had
not been paid.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.25) (Added by Ord. 92-122)
§ 43-11.26 Enforcement.
(a)   Show cause order. Whenever the chief engineer finds that a discharge of
stormwater or effluent or any pollutant is taking place or threatening to take
place in violation of any requirement imposed by ordinance, regulation, or
other law, the chief engineer may issue a notice of violation and show cause
order requesting the property owner or permit holder or discharger to meet with
someone designated by the chief engineer to show why there should be no formal
enforcement action. This meeting is not a prerequisite to taking formal
enforcement action against the property owner or permit holder or discharger,
and neither does this preclude in any way informal meetings of discussions with
the property owner or permit holder or discharger.
(b)   Cease and desist order. Whenever the chief engineer finds that a
discharge of stormwater or effluent or any pollutant is taking place or
threatening to take place in violation of any ordinance, order, regulation, or
other law, the chief engineer may issue an order directing the property owner
or permit holder or discharger to cease and desist such discharges and
directing the property owner or permit holder or discharger to achieve
compliance in accordance with a detailed time schedule of specific actions the
property owner or permit holder or discharger must take to correct or prevent
violations of this ordinance, regulation, order, or any other law. The chief
engineer may order the revocation or suspension of any permit or license. Any
order issued by the chief engineer may require the property owner or permit
holder or discharger to provide information as the chief engineer deems
necessary to explain the nature of the discharge. The chief engineer may
require in any cease and desist order that the property owner or permit holder
or discharger pay to the city the costs of any extraordinary inspection or
monitoring that in the discretion of the chief engineer was necessary as a
result of the violation together with civil penalties.
(c)   Cleanup and abatement orders.
(1)   Any person who is in violation of this ordinance, regulation, order, or
any other law, shall, upon the chief engineer’s order and at the total expense
of the property owner or permit holder or discharger, clean up the discharge
and do whatever is necessary or required by the chief engineer to abate the
effects of the violation.
(2)   The chief engineer may initiate any cleanup, abatement, or remedial work
required that the chief engineer deems necessary as a result of the magnitude
of the violation or when necessary to prevent harm to public health or the
environment. The chief engineer may take this action, notwithstanding that
injunctive relief and this action may be in addition to any action taken by the
property owner or permit holder or discharger or other persons.
(3)   Any property owner or permit holder or discharger violating the
ordinance, regulations, order, or any other law shall be liable to the city for
costs incurred in the cleanup, abatement, or remedial actions undertaken by the
chief engineer, including but not limited to administrative costs, inspection
costs, attorney fees and penalties or other liability imposed upon the city by
other agencies, persons, or organizations whether by way of court action,
administrative action, or settlement.
(d)   Termination of discharge. In addition to other remedies available and as
provided in this article or by law, when in the discretion of the chief
engineer, the property owner or permit holder or discharger has not or cannot
demonstrate satisfactory progress toward compliance with the requirements of
this ordinance, regulation, order, or other law, the chief engineer, after
providing written notice to the property owner or permit holder or discharger
by certified mail 30 days in advance of any action, may sever or plug the
connection from the property owner’s or permit holder’s or discharger’s system
to the city-owned separate storm sewer system or otherwise prevent the
discharge of stormwater or effluent or any pollutant from the property owner’s
or permit holder’s or discharger’s system to the city-owned separate storm
sewer system.
(e)   Administration fines. In addition to other remedies available and as
provided in this article or by law, the chief engineer may impose
administrative penalties.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.26) (Added by Ord. 92-122)
§ 43-11.27 Appeals.
(a)   The property owner, permit holder, or discharger may petition to appeal
the terms of a permit or license issued herein by the city, its modification,
revocation, suspension, or denial, or the chief engineer’s order, including but
not limited to enforcement within 30 days of the chief engineer’s final action
on the matter in accordance with the rules of the department.
(b)   Failure to submit a timely petition for appeal shall be a waiver of the
administrative appeal.
(c)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the permit or license
provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and alternative
condition, if any, it seeks to place in the permit or license, or the specific
basis for its objections to the permit or license modification, suspension,
revocation, or denial and alternatives, if any, it suggests; its specific
grounds for its objection to the chief engineer’s order.
(d)   The effectiveness of the permit or license issued herein or the chief
engineer’s final action regarding the permit or license modification,
suspension, revocation, or denial; or regarding the chief engineer’s order,
including but not limited to enforcement, shall not be stayed pending the
appeal.
(e)   If the petition for appeal is not acted upon within 30 days by the chief
engineer, the petition shall be denied and the property owner or permit holder
or discharger shall comply with the terms of the permit, license, or the chief
engineer’s final action regarding the permit or license modification,
suspension, or revocation; or the terms of the chief engineer’s order.
(f)   The chief engineer shall take final action on a permit or license denial,
issuance, modification, or renewal, or the order, including but not limited to
enforcement, by sending the permit, license or the chief engineer’s order to
the applicant by certified mail.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.27) (Added by Ord. 92-122)
§ 43-11.28 Violation provisions.
(a)   Administrative and civil penalties. Any person violating this article,
any order, permit, or license issued under this section, or any other standard
or requirement shall be liable for an administrative or civil penalty of not
less than $1,000 nor more than $25,000 per violation per day, except that in
cases where such offense shall continue after due notice, each day’s
continuance of the same shall constitute a separate offense. In determining the
amount of the fine, the chief engineer shall consider the seriousness of the
violation or violations, any history of such violations, any good-faith efforts
to comply with the applicable requirements, the economic impact of the fine on
the violator, and such other considerations that have a bearing on the amount
of the fine. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover
reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporter’s fees, and other
expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to
have violated this ordinance or the orders, rules, regulations, permits, and
licenses under this section.
(b)   Criminal penalties. Any person:
(1)   Who wilfully, intentionally, recklessly, or negligently violates this
article, order, permit, or license issued under this section, or any other
requirement, shall upon conviction, be punished by a fine not less than $1,000
nor more than $25,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both, except
that in cases where such offense shall continue after due notice, each day’s
continuance of the same shall constitute a separate offense; or
(2)   Who knowingly makes any false statement or misrepresentation in any
record, report plan, or other document filed with the chief engineer, or
tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or sampling
and analysis method required under this article or by other law, shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $25,000 or by imprisonment for not more
than six months, or both.
      Unless otherwise provided, this section shall be controlled by HRS,
Hawaii Penal Code.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.28) (Added by Ord. 92-122)
§ 43-11.29 Injunctive relief.
   Whenever a property owner or permit holder or discharger has violated a
requirement or continues to violate this article, permits, licenses, or orders
issued under this section, the city may petition the Circuit Court of the First
Circuit, State of Hawaii, or the United States District Court, State of Hawaii,
through the city’s attorney, for the issuance of a temporary or permanent
injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance
of the permit, license, or order, or other requirement imposed by this article
on activities of the property owner or permit holder or discharger. Such other
action as appropriate for legal or equitable relief, or both, may also be
sought by the city. A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as a
prerequisite to taking any other action against a property owner or permit
holder or discharger.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.29) (Added by Ord. 92-122)
§ 43-11.30 Nonliability of department personnel.
   Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, no member, employee, or
officer of the department of facility maintenance shall be civilly or
criminally liable or responsible under this ordinance for any acts done by the
member, officer, or employee in their performance of the member’s, officer’s,
or employee’s duties.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.30) (Added by Ord. 92-122)
§ 43-11.31 Rule-making powers.
   The chief engineer shall be empowered to adopt rules pursuant to HRS Chapter
91, for the implementation of this article.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.31) (Added by Ord. 92-122)
§ 43-11.32 Decisions of the chief engineer.
   Decisions of the chief engineer made in accordance with this article, or
decisions involving variations from the standards referred to herein, or both,
shall be made a matter of record in the permit or license file.
(1990 Code, Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.32) (Added by Ord. 92-122)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Hawaii Revised Statutes
References to Hawaii Administrative Rules
   TABLES
   1.   Prior Code Cross-Reference Table
         
References to 1969 Code
         
References to 1978 Code
         
References to 1990 Code
   2.   Resolution and Ordinance Lists and Disposition Tables
         
Reference to Resolutions
         
References to Ordinances
   3.   
Reporting Requirements
REFERENCES TO HAWAII REVISED STATUTES
HRS Reference Code Section
HRS Reference           Code Section
1-19                    13-1.1
                        13-4.6,
                        13-4.7,
                        15-17.1,
                        16A-10.5,
1-28.5                  17-1.1,
                        18A-4.2,
                        18A-4.4,
                        21-2.150-2,
                        40-7.4,
                        40-7.5
Chapter 4E              22-9.5
6-80.1                  28-3.5
                        3-10.1,
Chapter 6E              21-10.1,
                        22-9.5
6E-5                    21-10.1
6E-15                   40-10.1
8-1                     10-5.1,
                        18-5.4
Chapter 8A              6-61.2
8A-1.1(2)               6-61.2,
                        6-61.3
Chapter 11              1-19.9
11-1                    10-2.8,
                        41-31.2
11-61                   1-19.6
11-109                  41-31.2
11-132                  41-31.2
                        1-19.4,
11-302                  1-19.6,
                        1-19.9
Chapter 12, Part I      1-19.9
Title 14                8-1.8
Chapter 27G             2-19.2
                        2-24.9,
Chapter 46              2-24.10,
                        2-24.12,
                        21A-1.2
Chapter 46, Part VII    33-1.2
                        40-7.1,
46-1.5                  41-12.1,
                        42-4.8
46-1.5(24)              1-19.5
46-1.5(24)(a)           8A-1.5
46-4(b)                 21-5.70-3
46-6                    22-7.1
46-6.5                  22-6.1
46-10                   Chapter 2, Article 11
46-11.5                 26-1.5,
                        40-2.1
46-12                   26-1.5
46-15                   43-10.2
46-15.1                 43-10.2
                        6-34.1,
46-15.2                 6-34.2,
                        43-10.2
46-16.8                 6-60.1,
                        6-60.2
46-19.8                 16-1.1
46-24                   Chapter 2, Article 2
46-45                   6-56.4
46-61                   37-1.4
46-74.1                 14-16.10
46-80                   27-3.8,
                        28-3.5
46-80.1                 27-1.2,
                        27-1.4
                        27-1.4,
46-80.5                 28-1.2,
                        28-2.2
46-85                   42-1.1
46-131                  33-1.2
46-141 through 46-148   33A-1.5
                        6-33.2,
                        6-34.1,
Chapter 47              14-12.1,
                        14-12.5,
                        14-13.5
Chapter 49              6-34.1
Chapter 51              15B-8.1
Chapter 53              6-32.1,
                        8-10.20
Chapter 53, Part II     8-7.1
53-38                   8-10.17,
                        8-10.34
53-51                   6-26.1
Chapter 56              14-8.1
Chapter 76              11-1.2
78-20                   42-2.2,
                        42-7.3
80-2                    Chapter 2, Article 2
Chapter 88              Chapter 2, Article 15
88-21                   Chapter 2, Article 11
88-45                   Chapter 2, Article 11
88-63                   Chapter 2, Article 11
                        4-7.2,
Chapter 89              4-7.4,
                        15B-8.3
89-2                    4-7.1
89-6                    1-19.5,
                        4-7.1
                        1-9.1,
                        1-14.1,
                        1-17.4,
                        1-17.5,
                        1-18.7,
                        1-19.4,
                        1-19.5,
                        1-24.2,
                        1-26.4,
                        1-28.3,
                        1-28.4,
                        2-8.3,
                        2-19.8,
                        2-24.13,
                        2-27.2,
                        2-37.8,
                        2-41.3,
                        2-47.7,
                        3-1.5,
                        3-6.3,
                        3-10.7,
                        3-13.7,
                        3-14.1,
                        6-34.2 ,
                        6-34.7,
                        6-44.5,
                        6-45.6,
                        6-55.6,
                        8-1.3,
                        8-8.4,
                        8-10.12,
                        8-10.19,
                        8-10.27,
                        8-13.4,
                        8A-1.5,
                        8A-1.23,
                        8-14.3,
                        9-2.1,
                        10-1.3,
                        10-1.4,
                        10-1.7,
                        10-2.1,
                        10-2.3,
                        10-2.9,
                        10-8.4,
                        10-10.2,
                        10-12.2,
                        12-5.2,
                        13-4.7,
                        13-6A.4,
                        13-10.3,
                        13-11.10,
                        13-11.15,
                        13-11.7,
                        13-14.4,
                        13-16.3,
                        13-16.4,
                        13-18.6,
                        13-20.3,
                        14-1.3,
                        14-17.4,
                        14-20.7,
                        14-20.9,
                        14-21.5,
                        15-3.3,
                        15-3.3,
                        15-13.13,
                        15-15.5,
                        15-19.43,
                        15-20.1,
                        15-22.8,
                        15-24.20,
                        15-27.3,
                        15-27.10,
                        15-28.1,
                        15-28.7,
                        15-29.3,
                        15-30.7,
                        15A-4.7,
                        15B-2.2,
                        15B-2.10,
                        15B-3.5,
                        15B-4.5,
Chapter 91              15B-4.6,
                        15B-5.3,
                        15B-12.5,
                        16-1.1,
                        16-10.4,
                        16A-10.4,
                        16A-10.6,
                        16C-1.9,
                        18-2.2,
                        18-5.4,
                        18A-2.1A,
                        18A-4.4,
                        18A-4.6,
                        20-2.8,
                        20-5.5,
                        21-2.60,
                        21-9.100-5,
                        22-7.9,
                        23-1.4,
                        24-1.7,
                        25-5.1,
                        25-9.2,
                        25-9.6,
                        25-9.7,
                        25-10.1,
                        25-11.1,
                        26-1.14,
                        26-1.16,
                        29-1.11,
                        30-4.2,
                        30-4.5,
                        31-2.5,
                        31-3.5,
                        32-5.1,
                        33-1.4,
                        34-5.5,
                        34-5.6,
                        34-8.7,
                        34-8.12,
                        34-11.2,
                        34-12.2,
                        34-13.7,
                        34-14.4,
                        34-18.14,
                        36-1.3,
                        36-1.9,
                        36-1.15,
                        36-5.13,
                        36-5.18,
                        36-6.2,
                        36-6.14,
                        37-2.4,
                        38-3.2,
                        38-6.11,
                        38-6.12,
                        38-7.6,
                        38-9.3,
                        38-12.2,
                        39-1.7,
                        39-1.9,
                        39-1.14,
                        39-1.9,
                        40-1.6,
                        40-2.14,
                        40-2.18,
                        40-3.2,
                        40-6.3,
                        40-6.4,
                        40-6.5,
                        40-8.8,
                        40-11.2,
                        40-11.6,
                        41-27.8,
                        41-33.2,
                        41-34.4,
                        42-1.12,
                        42-2.8,
                        42-3.5,
                        42-4.7,
                        42-7.4,
                        42-7.5,
                        Ch. 43, App. 43-A,
                        43-10.6,
                        43-11.31
91-9                    42-2.7
91-9.5                  42-2.7
                        18-5.4,
91-14                   34-5.6,
                        36-5.18,
                        42-2.7
                        1-14.1,
                        3-10.6,
Chapter 92              4-7.3,
                        6-34.7,
                        27-2.1
Chapter 92, Part I      3-12.1
92-1 to 92-6            2-2.3
92-5                    4-4.2
                        1-24.2,
                        2-19.2,
                        2-19.8,
Chapter 92F             2-30.5,
                        2-32.5,
                        3-6.3,
                        36-6.12,
                        36-6.13
92F-3                   1-24.1,
                        4-3.3
Chapter 101             14-10.4,
                        37-1.4
101-2                   37-1.4
101-13                  2-39.2
101-35 to 101-39        8-4.1
101-36                  8-10.14
101-38                  8-10.14
101-39                  8-4.1
101-39(B)               8-10.14
102-14                  38-3.2
                        43-1.6,
Chapter 103             43-2.3,
                        43-11.9
103-50                  16-1.1,
                        16-1.2
                        2-31.1,
Chapter 103D            2-34.2,
                        14-10.6,
                        27-2.16
103D-702                1-18.6
                        8-10.23,
Chapter 104             21-9.100-8,
                        32-5.2
104-3                   32-5.2
Chapter 107, Part II    16A-2.1
Chapter 127             25-7.1
Chapter 128             25-7.1
Chapter 132             2-11.1,
                        20-1.1
132-9                   20-3.1
                        34-3.1,
134-1                   41-11.1,
                        41-31.2
134-9                   41-31.3,
                        41-31.4
134-11                  41-31.3,
                        41-31.4
142-75                  12-2.2
Chapter 143             12-4.5,
                        12-4.6
149A-25                 15-27.1
                        30-1.1,
                        30-1.2,
                        30-2A.2,
Chapter 174C            30-2B.2,
                        30-2C.2,
                        30-2D.2,
                        30-2E.1
Chapter 180             18A-1.3
Chapter 183             8-10.20
183B-1                  21-10.1
Chapter 183C            21-5.20
                        41-10.3,
Chapter 183D            41-10.4,
                        41-11.2
Chapter 186             8-7.1,
                        8-7.3
196-6.5                 16B-1.1
196-61                  2-46.1
200-23                  13-1.1,
                        13-19.2
201                     8-10.25
                        29-1.2,
Chapter 201H            30-2.3,
                        43-10.2
                        8-10.33,
                        8-10.34,
201H-36(a)(5)           18-6.5,
                        22-7.3,
                        43-10.8
Chapter 205             21-5.30
205-3.1                 23-1.1
                        21-2.100,
205-4.5(a)(12)          21-5.40-4,
                        21-10.1
205-4.5(a)(16)          21-5.80-1
205-4.5(a)(17)          21-5.40-4
205-4.5(a)(19)          21-5.60-3
                        22-6.2,
                        25-1.1,
                        25-1.3,
Chapter 205A            26-1.1,
                        26-1.2,
                        25-9.6,
                        31-3.3
Chapter 205A, Part II   25-11.1
                        26-1.2,
Chapter 205A, Part III  26-1.16,
                        43-11.19
205A-2                  25-3.1
205A-23                 25-1.3
205A-26                 25-9.6
205A-26(1)              25-3.1
                        15-30.3,
205A-42                 25-1.3,
                        26-1.3
205A-71(b)              25-6.1
Chapter 209             18-6.5,
                        38-6.11
Chapter 209E            31-1.1,
                        31-2.2
209E-4(a)               31-1.1,
                        31-1.4
209E-12                 31-1.4
Chapter 231             8A-1.13
231-3(10)               8A-1.13
232-5                   8-12.5
232-8 through 232-14    8-12.8
232-16                  8-12.1
232-16 through 232-18   8-12.8
232-19 through 232-21   8-12.8
232-22 and 232-23       8-12.10
                        10-4.1,
235-1                   14-11.13,
                        15B-1.1
                        8-10.36,
Chapter 237             38-1.3,
                        38-6.2
237-9                   13-6.2
237-30.5                8A-1.11
                        8A-1.1,
Chapter 237D            8A-1.2,
                        8A-1.22
237D-2                  6-61.2,
                        6-61.3
237D-2(a)               8A-1.12
237D-3                  8A-1.4,
                        8A-1.19
237D-4                  8A-1.5
237D-4.5                8A-1.5
237D-7                  8A-1.7
237D-7.5                8A-1.10
237D-8.5                8A-1.11
237D-8.6                8A-1.12
248-2.6(d)              6-60.2
248-2.7                 6-61.2,
                        6-61.3
                        15-4.10,
                        15-22.8,
Chapter 249             15-22.9,
                        15-22.10,
                        15-28.6
249-1                   15-15.5
249-2                   15A-3.1
                        6-21.2,
249-14                  15A-1.3,
                        36-5.4
249-18                  6-3.1
                        15-15.5,
251-1                   15-28.1,
                        21-6.30
251-2.5                 15-16.6
251-3(a)                15-28.3
                        14-3.2,
264-1                   15-1.1,
                        15-2.23
264-1(c)                22-3.9
264-1(c)(1)             14-17.1
264-1(c)(2)             14-17.1
264-2                   37-1.4
264-3                   37-1.4
264-25                  15-3.1
Chapter 264-61          21-10.1
265A-1                  43-11.9
266-24                  2-41.1
Chapter 269             26-1.8
269-1                   16-1.1,
                        37-2.2
269-91                  16B-1.1
Chapter 271             10-1.2
271-4                   10-2.8
279G-1                  36-6.1
Chapter 281             34-9.1,
                        41-1.2
                        13-6A.3,
                        36-1.4,
281-1                   41-1.1,
                        41-2.1,
                        42-3.1
281-2                   41-2.1
281-31(c)               34-16.1
281-31(f)               34-16.1
281-31(i)               34-16.1
281-31(k)               34-16.1
281-31(n)               34-16.1
281-31(q)               41-1.2
281-31(r)               34-16.1
Chapter 286             15-4.10,
                        Chapter 15, Article 20
286-2                   15-18.10,
                        15A-6.1
286-21 to 286-30        Chapter 15, Article 20
286-26                  15-13.9
286-26(e)               15-20.2
286-27                  15-20.1
286-28                  15-20.1
286-46                  8-5.10
286-51                  6-20.2
286-85                  15A-6.3
286-102                 15A-2.1
286-110                 15A-2.1
Chapter 290             6-20.2
290-8                   13-4.4
290-10                  15-13.10,
                        15A-5.6
290-11                  15-29.3,
                        15-29.4
Chapter 291, Part III   15-29.2,
                        15-30.2
291-14                  15-19.40,
                        15-24.5
                        15A-5.1,
291-24.6                15A-5.4,
                        15A-5.7
291-34                  15-21.8
291-51                  15-29.1
                        15-2.1,
                        15-2.23,
Chapter 291C            15-2.26,
                        15-3.1,
                        15-5.1
                        13-1.1,
                        13-19.2,
                        14-17.1,
                        15-2.29,
                        15-2.33,
291C-1                  15-16.5,
                        15-23.2A,
                        15-24.24,
                        15-30.4,
                        15A-6.1,
                        41-1.1
291C-65                 15-6.7
291C-103(c)             15-24.7
291C-150(a)             15-18.14
291C-196(c)             15-13.11
291D-2                  36-6.5
302A-1132               8-10.9
321-15.1                16-1.1,
                        34-13.3
321-15.63(b)            34-13.3
Chapter 322             42-1.3
328-1(3)                41-3.1
                        41-13.4,
Chapter 328J            41-14.1,
                        41-14.9
328J-1                  41-32.2
Chapter 328K            41-14.1
Chapter 329             41-32.1
329-1                   41-27.1
Chapter 329D            41-32.1
329D-1                  41-31.2
329D-10(a)              41-32.1
339-1                   15B-3.1
339-8                   13-4.7
340A-3                  42-1.1
                        24-4.1,
341-3(c)                24-5.1,
                        24-7.1
Chapter 342D, Part III  43-2.1
342D-1                  18A-1.3,
                        43-11.2
342D-5                  43-11.2
342D-38                 43-11.2
Chapter 342G, Part III  42-1.13
342G-24                 42-1.13
342G-25                 42-1.13
342L-1                  40-11.1
342L-4                  40-11.3
Chapter 342J            2-23.2
342J-2                  15-18.10
                        24-1.12,
                        24-2.1,
                        24-2.7,
                        24-3.1,
                        24-3.7,
                        24-4.1,
                        24-4.7,
                        24-5.1,
                        24-5.8,
Chapter 343             24-6.1,
                        24-6.7,
                        24-7.1,
                        24-7.7,
                        24-8.1,
                        24-8.7,
                        24-9.1,
                        24-9.7,
                        25-1.3,
                        25-5.3
Chapter 346             11-1.4
346-151                 41-31.2
Chapter 346, Part VIII  8-10.9,
                        8-10.30
Chapter 356D            6-34.7
Chapter 396             15-19.37,
                        20-6.1
Chapter 397             17-1.1
412:1-109               2-46.1
Chapter 414D            13-1.1,
                        14-20.2
Chapter 421H            21-4.110
Chapter 432             8-10.8
Chapter 436E            41-4.1
                        16-1.1,
Chapter 444             16-10.1,
                        18-5.5
444-1                   16-10.4
444-2.5                 16-10.1,
                        18-4.1
444-9.1                 16-10.1
                        34-1.1,
                        34-1.4,
Chapter 445             34-1.5,
                        34-6.2,
                        34-7.2
Chapter 445, Part IV    2-8.2,
                        2-47.8
445-22                  34-1.1,
                        34-1.3
445-92                  20-2.2,
                        42-1.2
445-141                 38-11.2
445-161                 34-5.2
445-161 to 445-164      34-5.1
                        34-5.2,
445-161 to 445-165      34-5.4,
                        34-5.5,
                        34-5.8
445-162                 34-5.2
445-165                 34-5.7
445-231                 34-7.1
Chapter 448             41-4.1
Chapter 448E            17-1.1
Chapter 453             8-10.7,
                        41-4.1
Chapter 455             41-4.1
Chapter 463             34-10.6,
                        41-26.1
463-1                   41-31.2
Chapter 463E            41-4.1
464                     16-1.1,
                        16-1.2
                        1-19.2,
                        16-1.1,
Chapter 464             16B-1.1,
                        18-4.2,
                        19-1.1
Chapter 486K            34-2.1
Chapter 486M            34-6.2
486M-1                  34-6.1
Chapter 501             6-1.3,
                        8-5.10
501-33                  26-1.7
                        13-4.5,
Chapter 507, Part II    14-3.7,
                        14-7.2,
                        40-7.4
508D                    34-15.2
                        22-1.1,
Chapter 514B            32-1.1,
                        32-1.3,
                        39-1.1
Chapter 514E            8-7.1,
                        20-2.2
514E-1                  21-10.1
Chapter 516D            39-1.4
516D-12                 39-1.4
521                     41-34.1,
                        41-34.2
521-8                   41-34.1
Chapter 523A            13-1.1,
                        13-19.2
571-11(1)               41-23.3
603-23                  34-5.8,
                        41-17.3
                        8-5.1,
634-23 through 634-29   8-5.9,
                        16A-10.5
636-3                   40-2.10
Chapter 658A            39-1.8,
                        39-1.9
663-1.5(a)              34-16.5
663-1.5(e)              16-16.5
Chapter 667             8-5.1,
                        16A-10.5
Chapter 702             43-5A.3
702-206                 12-7.1
Chapter 706, Part II    12-2.10,
                        12-7.2
706-605(1)(d)           21-2.150-1
706-640 through 706-645 21-2.150-1
                        13-13.3,
                        13-15.2,
                        13-15A.3,
706-640                 13-15B.2,
                        13-21.2,
                        40-3.3,
                        41-20.4,
                        41-21.4
                        13-13.3,
                        13-15.2,
                        13-21.2 ,
706-663                 13-15A.3,
                        13-15B.2,
                        40-3.3,
                        41-20.4,
                        41-21.4
Chapter 707             34-3.1
707-700                 12-7.1
                        34-18.1,
708-800                 41-23.2,
                        41-34.1
708-814                 41-34.2
709-906                 41-30.2
                        1-19.3,
Chapter 710             18-2.1,
                        18-4.7
710-1060                1-19.3,
                        18-4.4
Chapter 711             34-3.1
Chapter 712             41-17.1
Chapter 712, Part I     41-34.1
Chapter 712, Part II    34-8.10,
                        41-34.1
Chapter 712, Part III   41-33.1,
                        41-34.1
Chapter 712, Part IV    41-34.1
                        41-17.1,
Chapter 712, Part V     41-17.3,
                        41-17.4,
                        41-33.1
                        41-17.4,
                        41-18.1,
712-1207                41-18.2,
                        41-18.3,
                        41-18.4
712-1210                34-8.1
712-1214                34-5.4
712-1215                34-5.4
712-1220                34-18.1
712-1231(a)             41-34.1
712-1249.6              15-13.15
                        20-6.11,
Chapter 712A            34-18.10,
                        41-27.7
Chapter 803             15-17.4
                        15-4.6,
                        15-24.2,
803-6                   34-10.9,
                        41-1.3,
                        41-15.3,
                        41-31.7
803-6(b)                41-2.4
                        
 
REFERENCES TO HAWAII ADMINISTRATIVE RULES
Hawaii Administrative Rules Reference Code Section
Hawaii Administrative Rules Reference Code Section
6-82-3                                38-12.2
Chapter 11-43                         18A-3.1
                                      14-2.3,
Chapter 11-54                         18A-3.1,
                                      43-11.22
                                      14-2.3,
Chapter 11-55                         18A-1.3,
                                      18A-3.1,
                                      43-11.2
Chapter 11-60                         18A-3.1
Title 11, Chapter 10                  16-7.3,
                                      16-7.5
11-90-2                               34-13.3
11-93-2                               34-13.3
11-94.1-2                             34-13.3
11-97-1                               34-13.3
11-100.1-2                            34-13.3
Title 11, Chapter 219                 15-29.2
11-219-4                              15-29.1
11-280.1-12                           40-11.1
11-700-2                              34-13.3
Title 12, Chapter 22                  8-10.35
15-6-4                                31-1.2
15-217-8                              8-10.31
15-217-57                             8-10.31,
                                      8-10.32
16-115-9                              20-1.1
Title 19, Chapter 129                 15-22.8
Chapter 62                            43-1.5
Chapter 82, Title 19                  38-3.2
                                      
 
TABLES
      1.   
Prior Code Cross-Reference Tables
            
References to 1969 Code
            
References to 1978 Code
            
References to 1990 Code
      2.   
Resolution and Ordinance Lists and Disposition Tables
            
Reference to Resolutions
            
References to Ordinances
      3.   
Reporting Requirements
PRIOR CODE CROSS-REFERENCE TABLES
REFERENCES TO 1969 CODE
 
1969 Code Section 2018 Code Section
3-5.1             2-21.1
3-5.2             2-21.2
3-5.3             2-21.3
 
REFERENCES TO 1978 CODE
Editor’s note:
Also included are references to the 1983 Edition and 1987 Supplement to the
1983 Edition.
1978 Code Section 2021 Code Section
1978 Code Section                   2021 Code Section
1-1.1                               1-1.1
1-2.1                               1-2.1
1-2.2                               1-2.2
1-2.3                               1-2.3
1-2.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      1-2.4
1-3.1                               1-3.1
1-3.3                               1-3.2
1-4.1                               1-4.1
1-5.1                               1-5.1
1-5.2                               1-5.2
1-5.3                               1-5.3
1-5.4                               1-5.4
1-5.5                               1-5.5
1-5.6                               1-5.6
1-6.1                               1-6.1
1-7.1                               1-23.1
1-7.2                               1-23.2
1-8.1                               1-7.1
1-8.2                               1-7.2
1-8.3                               1-7.3
1-8.4                               1-7.4
1-8.5                               1-7.5
1-8.6                               1-7.6
1-8.7                               1-7.7
1-8.8                               1-7.8
1-8.9                               1-7.9
1-9.1                               1-8.1
1-9.2                               1-8.2
1-9.3                               1-8.4
1-9.4                               1-8.5
1-10.1                              1-9.1
1-10.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     1-9.2
1-11.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     1-10.1
2-1.1                               2-1.1
2-2.1                               2-2.1
2-2.2                               2-2.2
2-2.3                               2-2.3
2-2.4                               2-2.4
2-2.5                               2-2.5
2-3.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      2-3.1
2-3.2                               2-3.2
2-3.3                               2-3.3
2-4.1                               2-4.1
2-4.2                               2-4.2
2-6.1                               2-6.1
2-6.2                               2-6.2
2-7.1                               2-7.1
2-8.1                               2-8.1
2-11.1                              2-11.1
2-12.1                              2-12.1
2-13.1                              2-13.1
2-15.1                              2-15.1
2-15.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     2-15.2
2-16.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     2-5.1
2-16.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     2-5.2
2-16.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     2-5.3
2-18.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     2-17.1
2-18.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     2-17.2
2-18.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     2-17.3
3-1.1                               3-1.1
3-1.2                               3-1.2
3-1.3                               3-1.3
3-1.4                               3-1.4
3-1.5                               3-1.6
3-2.1                               3-6.1
3-2.2                               3-6.2
3-2.3                               3-6.3
3-2.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      3-6.4
3-2.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      3-6.5
3-2.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      3-6.6
3-2.9 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      3-6.7
3-3.1                               3-2.1
3-3.2                               3-2.2
3-3.3                               3-2.3
3-3.4                               3-2.4
3-3.5                               3-2.5
3-3.6                               3-2.6
3-3.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      3-2.7
3-6.2                               3-5.2
3-6.3                               3-5.3
3-6.4                               3-5.4
4-2.1                               4-2.2
4-2.2                               4-2.4
4-2.3                               4-2.5
4-2.4                               4-2.6
4-3.1                               4-3.1
4-3.2                               4-3.2
4-4.1                               4-4.1
4-4.2                               4-4.2
4-4.3                               4-4.3
4-4.4                               4-4.4
4-4.5                               4-4.5
4-4.6                               4-4.6
4-4.7                               4-4.7
4-4.8                               4-4.8
4-4.9                               4-4.9
4-4.10                              4-4.10
4-4.11                              4-4.11
4-4.12                              4-4.12
4-4.13                              4-4.13
4-4.14                              4-4.14
4-4.15                              4-4.15
4-4.16                              4-4.16
5-3.1                               6-2.1
5-3.2                               6-2.2
5-4.1                               6-3.1
5-6.1                               6-4.1
5-6.2                               6-4.2
5-6.3                               6-4.3
5-6.4                               6-4.4
5-7.1                               6-5.1
5-7.2                               6-5.2
5-7.3                               6-5.3
5-7.4                               6-5.4
5-8.1                               6-6.1
5-8.2                               6-6.2
5-9.1                               6-7.1
5-9.2                               6-7.2
5-9.3                               6-7.3
5-9.4                               6-7.4
5-10.1                              6-8.1
5-10.2                              6-8.2
5-14.1                              6-10.1,
                                    6-10.2
5-15.1                              6-11.1
5-15.2                              6-11.2
5-15.3                              6-11.3
5-15.4                              6-11.4
5-15.5                              6-11.5
5-16.1                              1-24.1
5-16.2                              1-24.2
5-17.1                              6-13.1
5-17.2                              6-13.2
5-18.1                              6-14.1
5-18.2                              6-14.2
5-19.1                              6-15.1
5-19.2                              6-15.2
5-19.3                              6-15.3
5-19.4                              6-15.4
5-19.5                              6-15.5
5-19.6                              6-15.6
5-20.1                              6-16.1
5-20.2                              6-16.2
5-20.3                              6-16.3
5-21.1                              6-17.1
5-21.2                              6-17.2
5-21.3                              6-17.3
5-23.1                              6-18.1
5-23.2                              6-18.2
5-24.1                              6-19.1
5-24.2                              6-19.2
5-24.3                              6-19.3
5-25.1                              6-20.1
5-25.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-20.2
5-25.3                              6-20.3
5-25.4                              6-20.4
5-26.1                              6-21.1
5-26.2                              6-21.2
5-26.3                              6-21.3
5-26.4                              6-21.4
5-27.1                              6-22.1
5-27.2                              6-22.2
5-27.3                              6-22.3
5-29.1                              6-23.1
5-29.2                              6-23.2
5-29.3                              6-23.3
5-32.1                              6-25.1
5-32.2                              6-25.2
5-32.3                              6-25.3
5-33.1                              6-26.1
5-33.2                              6-26.2
5-33.3                              6-26.3
5-33.4                              6-26.4
5-33.5                              6-26.5
5-34.1                              6-27.1
5-36.1                              6-29.1
5-36.2                              6-29.2
5-36.3                              6-29.3
5-36.4                              6-29.4
5-37.1                              6-30.1
5-37.2                              6-30.2
5-37.3                              6-30.3
5-39.1                              6-32.1
5-40.1                              6-33.1
5-40.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-33.2
5-41.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-39.1
5-41.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-39.2
5-42.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-35.2
5-44.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-36.1
5-44.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-36.2
5-45.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-37.1
5-45.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-37.2
5-47.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-40.1
5-47.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-40.2
5-48.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-41.1
5-49.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-42.1
5-49.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-42.2
5-49.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-42.3
5-50.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-43.1
5-50.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-43.2
5-51.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-45.1
5-51.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-45.2
5-51.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-45.3
5-51.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-45.4
5-51.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-45.5
5-51.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-45.6
5-52.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-44.1
5-52.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-44.2
5-52.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-44.3
5-52.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-44.4
5-52.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-44.5
6-1.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      1-19.1
6-1.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      1-19.2
6-1.3                               1-19.3
6-1.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      1-19.4
6-1.5                               1-19.5
6-2.1                               5-1.1
6-2.2                               5-1.2
6-2.3                               5-1.3
6-2.4                               5-1.4
6-3.1                               5-2.1
6-3.2                               5-2.2
6-4.1                               5-3.1
6-4.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      5-3.2
6-4.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      5-3.3
8-1.1                               8-1.2
8-1.2                               8-1.3
8-1.3                               8-1.4
8-1.4                               8-1.5
8-1.5                               8-1.6
8-1.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      8-1.7
8-1.7                               8-1.8
8-1.8 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      8-1.9
8-1.9                               8-1.10
8-1.10                              8-1.11
8-1.15                              8-1.12
8-1.16                              8-1.13
8-1.17                              8-1.14
8-1.18                              8-1.15
8-1.19                              8-1.16
8-1.20                              8-1.17
8-1.21                              8-1.18
8-1.22                              8-1.19
8-1.24                              8-1.20
8-1.25                              8-1.21
8-1.26                              8-1.22
8-2.1                               8-2.1
8-2.2                               8-2.2
8-2.3                               8-2.3
8-3.1                               8-3.1
8-3.2                               8-3.2
8-3.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      8-3.3
8-3.4                               8-3.4
8-3.5                               8-3.5
8-4.1                               8-4.1
8-4.2                               8-4.2
8-5.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      8-5.1
8-5.2                               8-5.2
8-5.3                               8-5.3
8-5.4                               8-5.4
8-5.5                               8-5.5
8-5.6                               8-5.6
8-5.7                               8-5.7
8-5.8                               8-5.8
8-5.9                               8-5.9
8-6.1                               8-6.1
8-6.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      8-6.2
8-6.3                               8-6.3
8-6.4                               8-6.4
8-6.5                               8-6.5
8-6.6                               8-6.6
8-6.7                               8-6.7
8-7.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      8-7.1
8-7.2                               8-7.2
8-7.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      8-7.4
8-7.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      8-7.5
8-8.1                               8-8.1
8-8.2                               8-8.2
8-8.3                               8-8.3
8-8.4                               8-8.4
8-8.5                               8-8.5
8-8.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      8-8.6
8-8.7                               8-8.7
8-8.8                               8-8.8
8-9.1                               8-9.1
8-10.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     8-10.1
8-10.2                              8-10.2
8-10.4                              8-10.3
8-10.5                              8-10.4
8-10.6                              8-10.5
8-10.7                              8-10.6
8-10.8                              8-10.7
8-10.9                              8-10.8
8-10.10                             8-10.9
8-10.12                             8-10.10
8-10.13 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    8-10.11
8-10.15                             8-10.12
8-10.16                             8-10.13
8-10.17                             8-10.14
8-10.18 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    8-10.15
8-10.19                             8-10.16
8-10.20                             8-10.17
8-10.21                             8-10.18
8-10.22 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    8-10.19
8-10.23                             8-10.20
8-11.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     8-11.1
8-12.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     8-12.1
8-12.2                              8-12.2
8-12.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     8-12.3
8-12.4                              8-12.4
8-12.5                              8-12.5
8-12.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     8-12.6
8-12.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     8-12.7
8-12.8                              8-12.8
8-12.9                              8-12.9
8-12.10                             8-12.10
8-12.11                             8-12.11
8-12.12 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    8-12.12
8-12.13                             8-12.13
8-13.1 (1983 Ed.)                   8-15.1
8-13.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     8-13.1
8-13.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     8-13.2
8-13.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     8-13.4
8-13.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     8-13.5
8-14.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     8-15.1
9-1.0 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      42-1.1
9-1.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      42-1.2
9-1.2                               42-1.3
9-1.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      42-1.4
9-1.4                               42-1.5
9-1.5                               42-1.6
9-1.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      42-1.7
9-1.7                               42-1.8
9-2.1                               42-2.1
9-2.2                               42-2.2
9-2.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      42-2.3
9-2.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      42-2.4
9-2.5                               42-2.5
9-2.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      42-2.6
9-2.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      42-2.7
9-2.8 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      42-2.8
9-2.9 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      42-2.9
9-2.10 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     42-2.10
9-3.1                               42-3.1
9-3.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      42-3.2
9-3.3                               42-3.3
9-3.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      42-3.4
9-4.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      42-4.1
9-4.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      42-4.2
9-4.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      42-4.3
9-4.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      42-4.4
9-4.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      42-4.5
9-4.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      42-4.6
9-5.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)      42-5.1
9-5.2                               42-5.2
9-6.1                               42-6.1
9-6.2                               42-6.2
10-1.1                              6-12.1
10-2.1                              6-12.2
11-1.1                              43-1.1
11-1.2                              43-1.2
11-1.3                              43-1.5
11-1.4                              43-1.6
11-1.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     43-1.7
11-1.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     43-1.9
11-2.1                              43-2.1
11-2.2                              43-2.2
11-2.3                              43-2.3
11-3.1                              43-3.1
11-3.2                              43-3.2
11-4.1                              43-4.1
11-4.2                              43-4.2
11-5.1                              43-5.1
11-5.2                              43-5.3
11-5.3                              43-5.4
11-5.4                              43-5.5
11-5.5                              43-5.11
11-5.6                              43-5.12
11-5.7                              43-5.13
11-5.8                              43-5.14
11-6.1                              43-6.1
11-6.3                              43-6.2
11-6.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     43-6.3
11-6.5                              43-6.5
11-6.8                              43-6.7
11-7.1                              43-7.1
11-7.2                              43-7.2
11-7.3                              43-7.3
11-7.4                              43-7.4
11-8.1                              43-8.1
11-8.2                              43-8.2
11-8.4                              43-8.3
11-8.5                              43-8.4
11-9.1                              43-9.1
12-1.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     36-1.1
12-1.3                              36-1.2
12-1.4                              36-1.3
12-1.5                              36-1.4
12-1.6                              36-1.5
12-1.7                              36-1.6
12-1.8                              36-1.7
12-1.9                              36-1.8
12-1.11 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    36-1.9
12-1.12                             36-1.10
12-1.13                             36-1.11
12-1.14                             36-1.12
12-1.15                             36-1.13
12-1.17                             36-1.14
12-1.18                             36-1.15
12-1.20                             36-1.16
12-5.1                              36-5.1
12-5.2                              36-5.2
12-5.3                              36-5.3
12-5.4                              36-5.4
12-5.5                              36-5.5
12-5.6                              36-5.6
12-5.7                              36-5.7
12-5.8                              36-5.8
12-5.9                              36-5.9
12-5.10                             36-5.10
12-5.11                             36-5.11
12-5.12                             36-5.12
12-5.13                             36-5.13
12-5.14                             36-5.14
12-5.15                             36-5.15
12-5.16                             36-5.16
12-5.17                             36-5.17
12-5.18                             36-5.18
12-5.19                             36-5.19
13-1.1                              34-1.1
13-1.2                              34-1.2
13-1.3                              34-1.3
13-1.4                              34-1.7
13-1.5                              34-1.8
13-1.6                              34-1.9
13-1.7                              34-1.10
13-1.8                              34-1.11
13-1.9                              34-1.12
13-2.1                              12-1.1
13-2.2                              12-1.2
13-2.3                              12-1.3
13-4.1                              41-1.1
13-4.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     41-1.2
13-4.3                              41-1.3
13-5.1                              41-25.1
13-5.2                              41-25.2
13-5.3                              41-25.3
13-5.4                              41-25.4
13-11.1                             34-2.1
13-12.1                             41-7.1
13-12.2                             41-7.2
13-14.1                             10-1.1
13-14.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    10-1.2
13-14.3                             10-1.3
13-14.4                             10-1.4
13-14.5                             10-1.5
13-14.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    10-1.6
13-15.1                             34-3.1
13-15.2                             34-3.2
13-15.3                             34-3.3
13-15.4                             34-3.4
13-15.5                             34-3.5
13-15.6                             34-3.6
13-15.7                             34-3.7
13-15.8                             34-3.8
13-16.1                             41-12.1
13-16.2                             41-12.2
13-16.3                             41-12.3
13-16.4                             41-12.4
13-16.5                             41-12.5
13-16.6                             41-12.6
13-16.7                             41-12.7
13-16.8                             41-12.8
13-16.9                             41-12.9
13-16.10                            41-12.10
13-17.1                             16-8.1
13-17.2                             16-8.2
13-17.3                             16-8.3
13-17.4                             16-8.4
13-17.5                             16-8.5
13-18.1                             34-4.1
13-19.1                             41-10.1
13-19.2                             41-10.2
13-19.3                             41-10.3
13-19.4                             41-10.4
13-19.5                             41-10.5
13-19.6                             41-10.6
13-20.1                             16-6.1
13-20.2                             16-6.2
13-20.3                             16-6.3
13-20.4                             16-6.4
13-20.5                             16-6.5
13-20.6                             16-6.6
13-21.1                             40-4.1
13-21.2                             40-4.2
13-21.3                             40-4.3
13-21.4                             40-4.4
13-22.1                             41-22.1
13-22.2                             41-22.2
13-22.3                             41-22.3
13-23.1                             12-4.1
13-23.2                             12-4.2
13-23.3                             12-4.3
13-23.4                             12-4.4
13-23.5                             12-4.5
13-23.6                             12-4.6
13-23.7                             12-4.7
13-23.8                             12-4.8
13-23.9                             12-4.9
13-23.10                            12-4.10
13-23.11                            12-4.11
13-25.1                             41-3.1
13-25.2                             41-3.2
13-25.3                             41-3.3
13-25.4                             41-3.4
13-25.5                             41-3.5
13-25.6                             41-3.6
13-26.1                             20-3.1
13-26.3                             20-3.2
13-28.1                             15A-2.1
13-28.2                             15A-2.2
13-28.3                             15A-2.3
13-29.1                             40-7.1
13-29.2                             40-7.2
13-29.3                             40-7.3
13-29.4                             40-7.4
13-30.1                             2-25A.1
13-30.2                             2-25A.2
13-30.3                             2-25A.3
13-30.4                             2-25A.4
13-30.5                             2-25A.5
13-31.1                             15A-1.1
13-31.2                             15A-1.2
13-31.3                             15A-1.3
13-31.4                             15A-1.4
13-31.5                             15A-1.5
13-31.6                             15A-1.6
13-31.7                             15A-1.7
13-31.8                             15A-1.8
13-31.9                             15A-1.9
13-32.1                             41-28.1
13-32.2                             41-28.2
13-35.1                             41-9.1
13-35.2                             41-9.2
13-35.3                             41-9.3
13-35.4                             41-9.4
13-36.1                             40-8.1
13-36.2                             40-8.2
13-36.3                             40-8.3
13-36.4                             40-8.4
13-36.5                             40-8.5
13-36.6                             40-8.6
13-36.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    40-8.7
13-36.8 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    40-8.8
13-36.9 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    40-8.9
13-36.9                             40-8.10
13-36.10                            40-8.11
13-36.11                            40-8.11,
                                    40-8.12
13-36.12                            40-8.12
13-37.1                             41-29.1
13-37.2                             41-29.2
13-37.3                             41-29.3
13-37.4                             41-29.4
13-38.1                             34-5.1
13-38.2                             34-5.2
13-38.3                             34-5.3
13-38.4                             34-5.4
13-38.5                             34-5.5
13-38.6                             34-5.6
13-38.7                             34-5.7
13-38.8                             34-5.8
13-39.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    12-5.1
13-42.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    41-14.1
13-42.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    41-14.2
13-42.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    41-14.3
13-42.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    41-14.4
13-42.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    41-14.5
13-42.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    41-14.6
13-42.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    41-14.7
13-42.8 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    41-14.8
13-43.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    14-20.1
13-43.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    14-20.2
13-43.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    14-20.3
13-43.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    14-20.4
13-43.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    14-20.5
13-43.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    14-20.6
13-43.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    14-20.7
13-43.8 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    14-20.8
13-43.9                             14-20.9
13-44.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    14-21.1
13-44.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    14-21.2
13-44.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    14-21.3
13-44.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    14-21.4
13-44.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    14-21.5
14-1.1                              15A-3.1
14-1.2                              15A-3.2
14-2.1                              15A-4.1
14-2.3                              15A-4.2
14-2.4                              15A-4.3
14-2.6                              15A-4.4
14-2.7                              15A-4.5
14-2.8                              15A-4.6
15-1.1                              15-1.1
15-2.1                              15-2.1
15-2.2                              15-2.2
15-2.3                              15-2.3
15-2.4                              15-2.4
15-2.5                              15-2.5
15-2.6                              15-2.6
15-2.7                              15-2.7
15-2.8                              15-2.8
15-2.9                              15-2.9
15-2.10                             15-2.10
15-2.11                             15-2.12
15-2.12                             15-2.13
15-2.13                             15-2.14
15-2.14                             15-2.15
15-2.15                             15-2.16
15-2.16                             15-2.17
15-2.18                             15-2.19
15-2.19                             15-2.20
15-2.20                             15-2.21
15-2.21                             15-2.22
15-2.22                             15-2.23
15-2.23                             15-2.24
15-2.24                             15-2.25
15-2.25                             15-2.26
15-2.26                             15-2.27
15-2.27                             15-2.28
15-2.28                             15-2.29
15-2.29                             15-2.30
15-3.1                              15-3.1
15-3.2                              15-3.2
15-3.3                              15-3.3
15-4.1                              15-4.1
15-4.3                              15-4.2
15-4.4                              15-4.3
15-4.5                              15-4.4
15-4.6                              15-4.5
15-4.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     15-4.6
15-4.9                              15-4.8
15-5.1                              15-5.1
15-5.2                              15-5.2
15-5.3                              15-5.3
15-5.4                              15-5.4
15-5.5                              15-5.5
15-6.1                              15-6.1
15-6.2                              15-6.2
15-6.3                              15-6.3
15-6.4                              15-6.4
15-6.5                              15-6.5
15-6.6                              15-6.6
15-6.7                              15-6.7
15-7.1                              15-7.1
15-7.2                              15-7.2
15-7.3                              15-7.3
15-7.4                              15-7.4
15-7.5                              15-7.5
15-7.6                              15-7.6
15-7.7                              15-7.7
15-7.8                              15-7.8
15-8.1                              15-8.1
15-8.2                              15-8.2
15-8.3                              15-8.3
15-8.4                              15-8.4
15-8.5                              15-8.5
15-8.6                              15-8.6
15-9.1                              15-9.1
15-9.2                              15-9.2
15-10.1                             15-10.1
15-11.2                             15-11.2
15-11.3                             15-11.3
15-12.1                             15-12.1
15-12.2                             15-12.2
15-12.3                             15-12.3
15-13.1                             15-13.1
15-13.2                             15-13.2
15-13.3                             15-13.3
15-13.4                             15-13.4
15-13.5                             15-13.5
15-13.6                             15-13.6
15-13.8                             15-13.7
15-13.9                             15-13.8
15-13.10 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)   15-13.9
15-13.11                            15-13.10
15-13.12                            15-13.11
15-13.13                            15-13.12
15-14.1                             15-14.1
15-14.2                             15-14.2
15-14.3                             15-14.3
15-14.4                             15-14.4
15-14.5                             15-14.5
15-14.6                             15-14.6
15-14.7                             15-14.7
15-14.8 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    15-14.8
15-15.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    15-15.1
15-15.2                             15-15.2
15-15.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    15-15.3
15-15.4                             15-15.4
15-15.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    15-15.5
15-15.6                             15-15.6
15-16.1                             15-16.1
15-16.2                             15-16.2
15-16.3                             15-16.3
15-16.4                             15-16.4
15-16.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    15-16.5
15-16.6                             15-16.6
15-16.7                             15-16.7
15-17.1                             15-17.1
15-17.2                             15-17.2
15-17.3                             15-17.3
15-17.4                             15-17.4
15-17.5                             15-17.5
15-17.6                             15-17.6
15-17.7                             15-17.7
15-17.9                             15-17.8
15-18.1                             15-18.1
15-18.2                             15-18.2
15-18.3                             15-18.3
15-18.4                             15-18.4
15-18.5                             15-18.5
15-18.6                             15-18.6
15-18.7                             15-18.7
15-18.8                             15-18.8
15-18.10                            15-18.10
15-18.11                            15-18.11
15-19.1                             15-19.1
15-19.2                             15-19.2
15-19.3                             15-19.3
15-19.4                             15-19.4
15-19.5                             15-19.5
15-19.6                             15-19.6
15-19.7                             15-19.7
15-19.8                             15-19.8
15-19.9                             15-19.9
15-19.10                            15-19.10
15-19.11                            15-19.11
15-19.12                            15-19.12
15-19.13                            15-19.13
15-19.14                            15-19.14
15-19.15                            15-19.15
15-19.16                            15-19.16
15-19.17                            15-19.17
15-19.18                            15-19.18
15-19.19                            15-19.19
15-19.20                            15-19.20
15-19.21                            15-19.21
15-19.22                            15-19.22
15-19.23                            15-19.23
15-19.24                            15-19.24
15-19.26                            15-19.26
15-19.27                            15-19.27
15-19.28                            15-19.28
15-19.29                            15-19.29
15-19.30 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)   15-19.30
15-19.31                            15-19.31
15-19.32                            15-19.32
15-19.33                            15-19.33
15-19.35                            15-19.35
15-19.36                            15-19.36
15-19.37                            15-19.37
15-19.39                            15-19.39
15-19.40                            15-19.40
15-19.41                            15-19.41
15-19.42                            15-19.42
15-19.43                            15-19.43
15-20.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    15-20.1
15-20.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    15-20.2
15-21.2                             15-21.2
15-21.3                             15-21.3
15-21.5                             15-21.5
15-21.6                             15-21.6
15-21.7                             15-21.7
15-21.8                             15-21.8
15-21.10                            15-21.10
15-21.11                            15-21.11
15-21.12                            15-21.12
15-21.13                            15-21.13
15-21.15                            15-21.15
15-22.1                             15-22.1
15-22.2                             15-22.2
15-22.3                             15-22.3
15-22.5                             15-22.5
15-22.6                             15-22.6
15-22.7                             15-22.7
15-22.8                             15-22.8
15-22.9                             15-22.9
15-22.10                            15-22.10
15-22.11                            15-22.11
15-23.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    15-23.1
15-23.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    15-23.2
15-23.3                             15-23.3
15-23.4                             15-23.4
15-23.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    15-23.5
15-23.6                             15-23.6
15-24.1                             15-24.1
15-24.2                             15-24.2
15-24.3                             15-24.3
15-24.4                             15-24.4
15-24.5                             15-24.5
15-24.6                             15-24.6
15-24.9                             15-24.8
15-24.11-A (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.) 15-24.11
15-24.12                            15-24.12
15-24.13                            15-24.13
15-24.14                            15-24.14
15-24.15                            15-24.15
15-24.16                            15-24.16
15-24.17                            15-24.17
15-24.18                            15-24.18
15-24.19                            15-24.19
15-24.20                            15-24.20
15-25.1                             15-25.1
15-25.2                             15-25.2
15-26.1                             15-26.1
15-26.2                             15-26.2
15-26.3                             15-26.3
15-26.4                             15-26.4
15-26.6                             15-26.5
15-26.7                             15-26.6
15-26.8                             15-26.7
15-26.9                             15-26.8
15-26.10                            15-26.9
15-26.11                            15-26.11
15-26.12                            15-26.12
16-2.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-2.1
16-2.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-2.2
16-2.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-2.3
16-2.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-2.4
16-2.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-2.5
16-2.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-2.6
16-2.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-2.7
16-2.8 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-2.8
16-2.9 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-2.9
16-2.10 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    16-2.10
16-2.11 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    16-2.11
16-2.12 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    16-2.12
16-2.13 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    16-2.13
16-2.14 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    16-2.14
16-3.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-3.1
16-3.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-3.2
16-3.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-3.3
16-3.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-3.4
16-3.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-3.5
16-3.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-3.6
16-3.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-3.7
16-3.8 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-3.8
16-3.9 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-3.10
16-4.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-4.1
16-4.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-4.2
16-4.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-4.3
16-4.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-4.4
16-5.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-11.1
16-5.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-11.2
16-5.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-11.3
16-5.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-11.4
16-5.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     16-11.5
16-6.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     43-11.1
16-6.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     43-11.2
16-6.3                              43-11.3
16-6.4                              43-11.4
16-6.5                              43-11.5
16-6.6                              43-11.6
16-6.7                              43-11.7
16-6.8                              43-11.8
16-6.9                              43-11.9
16-6.10                             43-11.10
16-6.11                             43-11.11
16-6.12                             43-11.12
16-6.13                             43-11.13
16-6.14                             43-11.14
16-6.15                             43-11.15
16-6.16                             43-11.16
16-6.17                             43-11.17
16-6.18                             43-11.18
16-6.19                             43-11.19
16-6.20                             43-11.20
16-6.21                             43-11.21
16-6.22 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    43-11.22
16-6.23 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    43-11.23
16-7.1                              16-11.1
16-7.2                              16-11.2
16-7.3                              16-11.3
16-7.4                              16-11.4
16-7.5                              16-11.5
18-1.1                              18-1.1
18-2.1                              18-2.1
18-3.1                              18-3.1
18-3.2                              18-3.2
18-3.3                              18-3.3
18-3.4                              18-3.4
18-4.1                              18-4.1
18-4.2                              18-4.2
18-4.3                              18-4.3
18-4.4                              18-4.4
18-4.5                              18-4.5
18-5.1                              18-5.1
18-5.2                              18-5.2
18-5.3                              18-5.3
18-5.4                              18-5.4
18-5.5                              18-5.5
18-5.6                              18-5.6
18-5.7                              18-5.7
18-6.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     18-6.1
18-6.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     18-6.2
18-6.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     18-6.3
18-6.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     18-6.4
18-6.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     18-6.5
18-7.1                              18-7.1
18-7.2                              18-7.3
Table 18-A                          Table 18-A
19A-2.1                             20-2.1
19A-2.2                             20-2.2
19A-2.3                             20-2.3
19A-2.4                             20-2.4
19A-2.5                             20-2.5
19A-2.6                             20-2.6
19A-2.7                             20-2.7
19A-2.8                             20-2.8
20-1.1                              14-2.1
20-1.2                              14-2.2
20-1.3                              14-2.3
20-1.4                              14-2.4
20-1.5                              14-2.5
20-1.6                              14-2.6
20-1.7                              14-2.7
20-2.1                              14-3.1
20-2.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-3.2
20-2.3                              14-3.3
20-2.4                              14-3.4
20-2.5                              14-3.5
20-2.6                              14-3.6
20-2.7                              14-3.7
20-2.8 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-3.8
20-2.9                              14-3.9
20-2.10                             14-3.10
20-2.11                             14-3.11
20-2.12                             14-3.12
20-2.13                             14-3.13
20-2.14                             14-3.14
20-2.15                             14-3.15
20-3.1                              14-4.1
20-3.2                              14-4.2
20-4.1                              14-5.1
20-4.2                              14-5.2
20-4.3                              14-5.3
20-5.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-6.1
20-5.2                              14-6.2
20-5.3                              14-6.3
20-5.4                              14-6.4
20-5.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-6.5
20-5.6                              14-6.6
20-6.1                              14-7.1
20-6.2                              14-7.2
20-6.3                              14-7.3
20-6.4                              14-7.4
20-6.5                              14-7.5
21-13B.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)   App. 21-F, §
                                    21-F.1
21-13B.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)   App. 21-F, §
                                    21-F.2
21-13B.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)   App. 21-F, §
                                    21-F.3
21-13B.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)   App. 21-F, §
                                    21-F.4
21-13B.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)   App. 21-F, §
                                    21-F.5
21-13B.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)   App. 21-F, §
                                    21-F.6
21-13B.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)   App. 21-F, §
                                    21-F.7
21-13B.8 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)   App. 21-F, §
                                    21-F.8
21-13B.9 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)   App. 21-F, §
                                    21-F.9
21-13B.10 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)  App. 21-F, §
                                    21-F.10
21-13B.11 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)  App. 21-F, §
                                    21-F.11
21-13B.12 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)  App. 21-F, §
                                    21-F.12
21-13B.13 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)  App. 21-F, §
                                    21-F.13
21-13B.14 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)  App. 21-F, §
                                    21-F.14
22-1.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     22-1.1
22-1.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     22-1.2
22-1.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     22-1.3
22-1.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     22-1.4
22-2.1                              22-2.1
22-2.2                              22-2.2
22-2.3                              22-2.3
22-2.4                              22-2.4
22-2.5                              22-2.5
22-2.6                              22-2.6
22-3.1                              22-3.1
22-3.2                              22-3.2
22-3.3                              22-3.3
22-3.4                              22-3.4
22-3.5                              22-3.5
22-3.6                              22-3.6
22-3.7                              22-3.7
22-3.8                              22-3.8
22-3.9                              22-3.9
22-3.10                             22-3.10
22-3.12                             22-3.11
22-4.1                              22-4.1
22-4.2                              22-4.2
22-5.1                              22-5.1
22-5.2                              22-5.2
22-5.3                              22-5.3
22-5.4                              22-5.4
22-5.5                              22-5.5
22-5.6                              22-5.6
22-5.7                              22-5.7
22-6.1                              22-6.1
22-6.2                              22-6.2
22-6.3                              22-6.3
22-6.4                              22-6.4
22-6.5                              22-6.5
22-7.1                              22-7.1
22-7.2                              22-7.2
22-7.3                              22-7.3
22-7.4                              22-7.4
22-7.5                              22-7.5
22-7.6                              22-7.6
22-7.7                              22-7.7
22-7.8                              22-7.8
22-7.9                              22-7.9
22-7.10                             22-7.10
22-7.11                             22-7.11
22-7.12                             22-7.12
22-8.1                              22-8.1
22-8.2                              22-8.2
22-8.3                              22-8.3
22-8.4                              22-8.4
22-8.5                              22-8.5
23-1.1                              18A-1.1
23-1.2                              18A-1.2
23-1.3                              18A-1.3
23-1.4                              18A-1.4
23-1.5                              18A-1.5
23-2.1                              18A-2.1
23-2.2                              18A-2.2
23-2.3                              18A-2.3
23-2.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     18A-2.4
23-2.5                              18A-2.5
23-2.6                              18A-2.6
23-2.7                              18A-2.7
23-2.8                              18A-2.8
23-2.9                              18A-2.9
23-3.1                              18A-3.1
23-3.2                              18A-3.2
23-4.1                              18A-4.1
23-4.2                              18A-4.5
23-4.3                              18A-4.6
23-4.4                              18A-4.7
24-1.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-8.1
24-1.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-8.2
24-1.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-8.3
24-2.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-9.1
24-2.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-9.2
24-3.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-10.1
24-3.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-10.2
24-3.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-10.3
24-3.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-10.4
24-3.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-10.5
24-3.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-10.6
24-3.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-10.7
24-3.8 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-10.8
24-4.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-11.1
24-4.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed       14-11.2
24-4.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-11.3
24-4.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-11.4
24-4.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-11.5
24-4.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-11.6
24-4.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-11.7
24-4.8 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-11.8
24-4.9 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-11.9
24-4.10 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    14-11.10
24-4.11 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    14-11.11
24-4.12 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    14-11.12
24-4.13 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    14-11.13
24-4.14 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    14-11.14
24-5.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-12.1
24-5.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-12.2
24-5.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-12.3
24-5.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-12.4
24-5.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-12.5
24-6.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-13.1
24-6.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-13.2
24-6.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-13.3
24-6.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-13.4
24-6.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-13.5
24-6.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-13.6
24-6.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-13.7
24-6.8 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-13.8
24-6.9 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-13.9
24-7.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-14.1
24-8.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     14-15.1
25-1.1                              16A-1.1
25-1.2                              16A-1.2
25-1.3                              16A-1.3
25-2.1                              16A-2.1
25-3.1                              16A-3.1
25-4.1                              16A-4.1
25-4.2                              16A-4.2
25-4.3                              16A-4.3
25-4.4                              16A-4.4
25-4.5                              16A-4.5
25-5.1                              16A-5.1
25-6.1                              16A-6.1
25-7.1                              16A-7.1
25-8.1                              16A-8.1
25-11.1                             16A-10.1
25-11.2                             16A-10.2
25-11.3                             16A-10.3
25-11.4                             16A-10.4
25-11.5                             16A-10.5
25-12.1                             16A-11.1
26-1.1                              13-1.1
26-1.2                              13-1.2
26-2.1                              13-2.1
26-2.2                              13-2.2
26-5.1                              13-5.1
26-5.2                              13-5.2
26-6.1                              13-6.1
26-6.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     13-6.2
26-6.3                              13-6.3
26-6.4                              13-6.4
26-8.1                              13-8.1
26-8.2                              13-8.2
26-8.4                              13-8.4
26-8.6                              13-8.6
26-8.7                              13-8.7
26-8.8                              13-8.8
26-8.9                              13-8.9
26-8.10                             13-8.10
26-8.11                             13-8.11
26-9.1                              13-9.1
26-9.2 (1983 Ed.))                  13-9.2
26-10.1 (1983 Ed)                   13-10.1
26-10.2                             13-10.2
26-10.3                             13-10.3
26-10.4                             13-10.4
26-10.5                             13-10.5
26-10.6                             13-10.6
26-11.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    13-4.1
26-11.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    13-4.2
26-11.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    13-4.3
26-11.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    13-4.4
26-11.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    13-4.5
26-11.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    13-4.6
26-11.8 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    13-4.7
27-1.1                              10-4.1
27-1.2                              10-4.2
27-1.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     10-4.3
27-1.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     10-4.4
27-1.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     10-4.5
27-2.1                              10-3.1
27-2.3                              10-3.2
27-3.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     10-2.1
27-4.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     10-2.2
27-4.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     10-2.3
28-2.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     15B-2.1
28-2.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     15B-2.2
28-2.3                              15B-2.3
28 2.4                              15B-2.4
28-2.5                              15B-2.5
28-2.6                              15B-2.6
28-2.7                              15B-2.7
28-3.1                              15B-3.1
28-3.2                              15B-3.2
28-3.3                              15B-3.3
28-3.5                              15B-3.5
28-4.1                              15B-4.1
28-4.2                              15B-4.2
28 4.3                              15B-4.3
28-4.4                              15B-4.4
28-4.5                              15B-4.5
28-4.6                              15B-4.6
28-4.7                              15B-4.7
29-1.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-6.1
29-1.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-6.2
29-1.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-6.3
29-1.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-6.4
29-1.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-6.5
29-1.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-6.6
29-1.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-6.7
29-1.8 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-6.8
29-1.9 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-6.9
29-1.10 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    38-6.10
29-2.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-7.1
29-2.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-7.2
29-2.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-7.3
29-2.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-7.4
29-2.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-7.5
29-2.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-7.6
29-3.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-8.1
29-4.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-9.1
29-4.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-9.2
29-4.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-9.3
29-4.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-9.4
29-4.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-9.5
29-4.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-9.6
29-4.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-9.7
29-5.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-10.1
30-1.1                              38-1.1
30-1.2                              38-1.2
30-1.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     38-1.3
30-2.1                              38-2.1
30-2.2                              38-2.2
30-2.3                              38-2.3
30-2.4                              38-2.4
30-2.5                              38-2.5
30-2.6                              38-2.6
30-2.7                              38-2.7
30-2.8                              38-2.8
30-2.9                              38-2.9
30-2.10                             38-2.10
30-2.11                             38-2.11
30-2.12                             38-2.12
30-2.13                             38-2.13
30-2.14                             38-2.14
30-3.1 (1983 Ed.)                   38-3.1
30-3.3                              38-3.2
30-4.1                              38-4.1
30-5.1                              38-5.1
30-6.1                              38-10.1
31-1.1                              6-34.1
31-2.1                              6-34.2
31-2.2                              6-34.3
31-2.3                              6-34.4
31-2.4                              6-34.5
31-3.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-34.6
31-3.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     6-34.7
32-1.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     24-1.1
32-1.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     24-1.2
32-1.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     24-1.3
32-1.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     24-1.4
32-1.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     24-1.5
32-1.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     24-1.6
32-1.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     24-1.7
32-1.8 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     24-1.8
32-1.9 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     24-1.9
32-1.10 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    24-1.10
32-1.12 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    24-1.11
32-1.13 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    24-1.12
32-1.14 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    24-1.13
32-10.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    24-10.1
32-10.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    24-10.2
32-10.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    24-10.3
32-10.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    24-10.4
33-1.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     25-1.1
33-1.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     25-1.2
33-1.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     25-1.3
33-2.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     25-2.1
33-2.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     25-2.2
33-3.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     25-3.1
33-5.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     25-5.2
33-7.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     25-7.1
33-8.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     25-8.1
33-8.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     25-8.2
33-9.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     25-9.1
33-9.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     25-9.2
33-9.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     25-9.3
33-9.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     25-9.4
33-9.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     25-9.5
33-10.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)    25-10.1
34-1.1 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     23-1.1
34-1.2 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     23-1.2
34-1.3 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     23-1.3
34-1.4 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     23-1.4
34-1.5 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     23-1.5
34-1.6 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     23-1.6
34-1.7 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     23-1.7
34-1.8 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     23-1.8
34-1.9 (1987 Supp. to 1983 Ed.)     23-1.9
 
 
REFERENCES TO 1990 CODE
1990 Code Section 2021 Code Section
1990 Code Section                2021 Code Section
Ch. 1, Art. 1, § 1-1.1          1-1.1
Ch. 1, Art. 2, § 1-2.1          1-2.1
Ch. 1, Art. 2, § 1-2.2          1-2.2
Ch. 1, Art. 2, § 1-2.3          1-2.3
Ch. 1, Art. 2, § 1-2.4          1-2.4
Ch. 1, Art. 2, § 1-2.5          1-2.5
Ch. 1, Art. 3, § 1-3.1          1-3.1
Ch. 1, Art. 3, § 1-3.2          1-3.2
Ch. 1, Art. 3, § 1-3.3          1-3.3
Ch. 1, Art. 4, § 1-4.1          1-4.1
Ch. 1, Art. 5, § 1-5.1          1-5.1
Ch. 1, Art. 5, § 1-5.2          1-5.2
Ch. 1, Art. 5, § 1-5.3          1-5.3
Ch. 1, Art. 5, § 1-5.4          1-5.4
Ch. 1, Art. 5, § 1-5.5          1-5.5
Ch. 1, Art. 5, § 1-5.6          1-5.6
Ch. 1, Art. 6, § 1-6.1          1-6.1
Ch. 1, Art. 7, § 1-7.1          1-7.1
Ch. 1, Art. 7, § 1-7.2          1-7.2
Ch. 1, Art. 7, § 1-7.3          1-7.3
Ch. 1, Art. 7, § 1-7.4          1-7.4
Ch. 1, Art. 7, § 1-7.5          1-7.5
Ch. 1, Art. 7, § 1-7.6          1-7.6
Ch. 1, Art. 7, § 1-7.7          1-7.7
Ch. 1, Art. 7, § 1-7.8          1-7.8
Ch. 1, Art. 7, § 1-7.9          1-7.9
Ch. 1, Art. 7, § 1-7.10         1-7.10
Ch. 1, Art. 8, § 1-8.1          1-8.1
Ch. 1, Art. 8, § 1-8.2          1-8.2
Ch. 1, Art. 8, § 1-8.3          1-8.3
Ch. 1, Art. 8, § 1-8.4          1-8.4
Ch. 1, Art. 8, § 1-8.5          1-8.5
Ch. 1, Art. 8, § 1-8.6          1-8.6
Ch. 1, Art. 9, § 1-9.1          1-9.1
Ch. 1, Art. 9, § 1-9.2          1-9.2
Ch. 1, Art. 10, § 1-10.1        1-10.1
Ch. 1, Art. 11, § 1-11.1        1-11.1
Ch. 1, Art. 11, § 1-11.2        1-11.2
Ch. 1, Art. 11, § 1-11.3        1-11.3
Ch. 1, Art. 12, § 1-12.1        1-12.1
Ch. 1, Art. 12, § 1-12.3        1-12.2
Ch. 1, Art. 13, § 1-13.1        1-13.1
Ch. 1, Art. 13, § 1-13.2        1-13.2
Ch. 1, Art. 14, § 1-14.1        1-14.1
Ch. 1, Art. 14, § 1-14.2        1-14.2
Ch. 1, Art. 14, § 1-14.3        1-14.3
Ch. 1, Art. 14, § 1-14.4        1-14.4
Ch. 1, Art. 15, § 1-15.1        1-15.1
Ch. 1, Art. 15, § 1-15.2        1-15.2
Ch. 1, Art. 16, § 1-16.1        1-16.1
Ch. 1, Art. 16, § 1-16.2        1-16.2
Ch. 1, Art. 16, § 1-16.3        1-16.3
Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.1        1-17.1
Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.2        1-17.2
Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.3        1-17.3
Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.4        1-17.4
Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.5        1-17.5
Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.6        1-17.6
Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.7        1-17.7
Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.8        1-17.8
Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.9        1-17.9
Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.10       1-17.10
Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.11       1-17.11
Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.12       1-17.12
Ch. 1, Art. 17, § 1-17.13       1-17.13
Ch. 1, Art. 18, § 1-18.1        1-18.1
Ch. 1, Art. 18, § 1-18.2        1-18.2
Ch. 1, Art. 18, § 1-18.3        1-18.3
Ch. 1, Art. 18, § 1-18.4        1-18.4
Ch. 1, Art. 18, § 1-18.5        1-18.5
Ch. 1, Art. 18, § 1-18.6        1-18.6
Ch. 1, Art. 18, § 1-18.7        1-18.7
Ch. 1, Art. 19, § 1-19.1        6-1.1
Ch. 1, Art. 19, § 1-19.2        6-1.2
Ch. 1, Art. 19, § 1-19.3        6-1.3
Ch. 1, Art. 19, § 1-19.4        6-1.4
Ch. 1, Art. 19, § 1-19.5        6-1.5
Ch. 1, Art. 20, § 1-20.1        1-20.1
Ch. 1, Art. 20, § 1-20.2        1-20.2
Ch. 1, Art. 20, § 1-20.3        1-20.3
Ch. 1, Art. 21, § 1-21.1        1-21.1
Ch. 1, Art. 21, § 1-21.2        1-21.2
Ch. 1, Art. 21, § 1-21.3        1-21.3
Ch. 1, Art. 21, § 1-22.1        1-22.1
Ch. 1, Art. 21, § 1-22.2        1-22.2
Ch. 2, Art. 1, § 2-1.1          2-1.1
Ch. 2, Art. 2, § 2-2.1          2-2.1
Ch. 2, Art. 2, § 2-2.2          2-2.2
Ch. 2, Art. 2, § 2-2.3          2-2.3
Ch. 2, Art. 2, § 2-2.4          2-2.4
Ch. 2, Art. 2, § 2-2.5          2-2.5
Ch. 2, Art. 3, § 2-3.1          2-3.1
Ch. 2, Art. 3, § 2-3.2          2-3.2
Ch. 2, Art. 3, § 2-3.3          2-3.3
Ch. 2, Art. 3, § 2-3.4          2-3.4
Ch. 2, Art. 4, § 2-4.1          2-4.1
Ch. 2, Art. 4, § 2-4.2          2-4.2
Ch. 2, Art. 5, § 2-5.1          2-5.1
Ch. 2, Art. 5, § 2-5.2          2-5.2
Ch. 2, Art. 5, § 2-5.3          2-5.3
Ch. 2, Art. 6, § 2-6.1          2-6.1
Ch. 2, Art. 6, § 2-6.2          2-6.2
Ch. 2, Art. 7, § 2-7.1          2-7.1
Ch. 2, Art. 8, § 2-8.1          2-8.1
Ch. 2, Art. 8, § 2-8.3          2-8.2
Ch. 2, Art. 8, § 2-8.4          2-8.3
Ch. 2, Art. 11, § 2-11.1        2-11.1
Ch. 2, Art. 12, § 2-12.1        2-12.1
Ch. 2, Art. 13, § 2-13.1        2-13.1
Ch. 2, Art. 13, § 2-13.2        2-13.2
Ch. 2, Art. 15, § 2-15.1        2-15.1
Ch. 2, Art. 15, § 2-15.2        2-15.2
Ch. 2, Art. 16, § 2-16.1        2-16.1
Ch. 2, Art. 17, § 2-17.1        2-17.1
Ch. 2, Art. 17, § 2-17.2        2-17.2
Ch. 2, Art. 17, § 2-17.3        2-17.3
Ch. 2, Art. 17, § 2-17.4        2-17.4
Ch. 2, Art. 18, § 2-18.1        2-18.1
Ch. 2, Art. 18, § 2-18.2        2-18.2
Ch. 2, Art. 18, § 2-18.3        2-18.3
Ch. 2, Art. 18, § 2-18.4        2-18.4
Ch. 2, Art. 18, § 2-18.5        2-18.5
Ch. 2, Art. 18, § 2-18.6        2-18.6
Ch. 2, Art. 18, § 2-18.7        2-18.7
Ch. 2, Art. 18, § 2-18.8        2-18.8
Ch. 2, Art. 19, § 2-19.1        2-19.1
Ch. 2, Art. 19, § 2-19.2        2-19.2
Ch. 2, Art. 19, § 2-19.3        2-19.3
Ch. 2, Art. 19, § 2-19.4        2-19.4
Ch. 2, Art. 19, § 2-19.5        2-19.8
Ch. 2, Art. 23, § 2-23.1        2-23.1
Ch. 2, Art. 23, § 2-23.2        2-23.2
Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.1        2-24.1
Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.2        2-24.2
Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.3        2-24.3
Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.4        2-24.4
Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.5        2-24.5
Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.6        2-24.6
Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.7        2-24.7
Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.8        2-24.8
Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.9        2-24.9
Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.10       2-24.10
Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.11       2-24.11
Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.12       2-24.12
Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.13       2-24.13
Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.14       2-24.14
Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.15       2-24.15
Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.16       2-24.16
Ch. 2, Art. 24, § 2-24.17       2-24.17
Ch. 2, Art. 25, § 2-25.1        2-25.1
Ch. 2, Art. 26, § 2-26.1        2-26.1
Ch. 2, Art. 26, § 2-26.2        2-26.2
Ch. 2, Art. 26, § 2-26.3        2-26.3
Ch. 2, Art. 26, § 2-26.4        2-26.4
Ch. 2, Art. 26, § 2-26.5        2-26.5
Ch. 2, Art. 26, § 2-26.6        2-26.6
Ch. 2, Art. 26, § 2-26.7        2-26.7
Ch. 2, Art. 27, § 2-27.1        2-27.1
Ch. 2, Art. 27, § 2-27.2        2-27.2
Ch. 2, Art. 27, § 2-27.3        2-27.3
Ch. 2, Art. 27, § 2-27.4        2-27.4
Ch. 2, Art. 27, § 2-27.5        2-27.5
Ch. 2, Art. 27, § 2-27.6        2-27.6
Ch. 2, Art. 27, § 2-27.7        2-27.7
Ch. 2, Art. 28, § 2-28.1        2-28.1
Ch. 2, Art. 28, § 2-28.2        2-28.2
Ch. 2, Art. 28, § 2-28.3        2-28.3
Ch. 2, Art. 29, § 2-29.1        2-29.1
Ch. 2, Art. 29, § 2-29.2        2-29.2
Ch. 2, Art. 30, § 2-30.1        2-30.1
Ch. 2, Art. 30, § 2-30.2        2-30.2
Ch. 2, Art. 30, § 2-30.3        2-30.3
Ch. 2, Art. 30, § 2-30.4        2-30.4
Ch. 2, Art. 30, § 2-30.5        2-30.5
Ch. 2, Art. 31, § 2-31.1        2-31.1
Ch. 2, Art. 31, § 2-31.2        2-31.2
Ch. 2, Art. 32, § 2-32.1        2-32.1
Ch. 2, Art. 32, § 2-32.2        2-32.2
Ch. 2, Art. 32, § 2-32.3        2-32.3
Ch. 2, Art. 32, § 2-32.4        2-32.4
Ch. 2, Art. 32, § 2-32.5        2-32.5
Ch. 2, Art. 32, § 2-32.6        2-32.6
Ch. 2, Art. 34, § 2-34.1        2-34.1
Ch. 2, Art. 34, § 2-34.2        2-34.2
Ch. 2, Art. 35, § 2-35.1        2-35.1
Ch. 2, Art. 35, § 2-35.2        2-35.2
Ch. 2, Art. 36, § 2-36.1        2-36.1
Ch. 2, Art. 36, § 2-36.2        2-36.2
Ch. 2, Art. 37, § 2-37.1        2-37.1
Ch. 2, Art. 37, § 2-37.2        2-37.2
Ch. 2, Art. 37, § 2-37.3        2-37.3
Ch. 2, Art. 37, § 2-37.4        2-37.4
Ch. 2, Art. 37, § 2-37.5        2-37.5
Ch. 2, Art. 37, § 2-37.6        2-37.6
Ch. 2, Art. 37, § 2-37.7        2-37.7
Ch. 2, Art. 37, § 2-37.8        2-37.8
Ch. 2, Art. 38, § 2-38.1        2-38.1
Ch. 2, Art. 39, § 2-39.1        2-39.1
Ch. 2, Art. 39, § 2-39.2        2-39.2
Ch. 2, Art. 39, § 2-39.3        2-39.3
Ch. 3, Art. 1, § 3-1.1          3-1.1
Ch. 3, Art. 1, § 3-1.2          3-1.2
Ch. 3, Art. 1, § 3-1.3          3-1.3
Ch. 3, Art. 1, § 3-1.4          3-1.4
Ch. 3, Art. 1, § 3-1.5          3-1.5
Ch. 3, Art. 1, § 3-1.6          3-1.6
Ch. 3, Art. 2, § 3-2.1          3-2.1
Ch. 3, Art. 2, § 3-2.2          3-2.2
Ch. 3, Art. 2, § 3-2.3          3-2.3
Ch. 3, Art. 2, § 3-2.4          3-2.4
Ch. 3, Art. 2, § 3-2.5          3-2.5
Ch. 3, Art. 2, § 3-2.6          3-2.6
Ch. 3, Art. 2, § 3-2.7          3-2.7
Ch. 3, Art. 2, § 3-2.8          3-2.8
Ch. 3, Art. 5, § 3-5.1          3-5.1
Ch. 3, Art. 5, § 3-5.2          3-5.2
Ch. 3, Art. 5, § 3-5.3          3-5.3
Ch. 3, Art. 5, § 3-5.4          3-5.4
Ch. 3, Art. 5, § 3-5.5          3-5.5
Ch. 3, Art. 6, § 3-6.1          3-6.1
Ch. 3, Art. 6, § 3-6.2          3-6.2
Ch. 3, Art. 6, § 3-6.3          3-6.3
Ch. 3, Art. 6, § 3-6.5          3-6.4
Ch. 3, Art. 6, § 3-6.6          3-6.5
Ch. 3, Art. 6, § 3-6.7          3-6.6
Ch. 3, Art. 6, § 3-6.9          3-6.7
Ch. 3, Art. 6, § 3-6.10         3-6.8
Ch. 3, Art. 6, § 3-6.11         3-6.9
Ch. 3, Art. 6, § 3-6.12         3-6.10
Ch. 3, Art. 7, § 3-7.1          3-7.1
Ch. 3, Art. 7, § 3-7.2          3-7.2
Ch. 3, Art. 8, § 3-8.1          1-19.1
Ch. 3, Art. 8, § 3-8.2          1-19.2
Ch. 3, Art. 8, § 3-8.3          1-19.3
Ch. 3, Art. 8, § 3-8.4          1-19.4
Ch. 3, Art. 8, § 3-8.5          1-19.5
Ch. 3, Art. 8, § 3-8.6          1-19.6
Ch. 3, Art. 8, § 3-8.7          1-19.7
Ch. 3, Art. 8, § 3-8.9          1-19.9
Ch. 3, Art. 9, § 3-9.1          3-9.1
Ch. 3, Art. 9, § 3-9.2          3-9.2
Ch. 3, Art. 9, § 3-9.3          3-9.3
Ch. 3, Art. 9, § 3-9.4          3-9.4
Ch. 3, Art. 9, § 3-9.5          3-9.5
Ch. 3, Art. 9, § 3-9.6          3-9.6
Ch. 3, Art. 10, § 3-10.1        3-10.1
Ch. 3, Art. 10, § 3-10.2        3-10.2
Ch. 3, Art. 10, § 3-10.3        3-10.3
Ch. 3, Art. 10, § 3-10.4        3-10.4
Ch. 3, Art. 10, § 3-10.5        3-10.5
Ch. 3, Art. 10, § 3-10.6        3-10.6
Ch. 3, Art. 10, § 3-10.7        3-10.7
Ch. 3, Art. 10, § 3-10.10       3-10.10
Ch. 3, Art. 10, § 3-10.11       3-10.11
Ch. 3, Art. 11, § 3-11.1        3-11.1
Ch. 3, Art. 11, § 3-11.2        3-11.2
Ch. 3, Art. 11, § 3-11.3        3-11.3
Ch. 3, Art. 11, § 3-11.4        3-11.4
Ch. 3, Art. 12, § 3-12.1        3-12.1
Ch. 3, Art. 12, § 3-12.2        3-12.2
Ch. 3, Art. 12, § 3-12.3        3-12.3
Ch. 3, Art. 12, § 3-12.4        3-12.4
Ch. 3, Art. 12, § 3-12.5        3-12.5
Ch. 3, Art. 13, § 3-13.1        3-13.1
Ch. 3, Art. 13, § 3-13.2        3-13.2
Ch. 3, Art. 13, § 3-13.3        3-13.3
Ch. 3, Art. 13, § 3-13.4        3-13.4
Ch. 3, Art. 13, § 3-13.5        3-13.5
Ch. 3, Art. 13, § 3-13.6        3-13.6
Ch. 3, Art. 13, § 3-13.7        3-13.7
Ch. 3, Art. 13, § 3-13.8        3-13.8
Ch. 3, Art. 13, § 3-13.9        3-13.9
Ch. 3, Art. 14, § 3-14.1        3-14.1
Ch. 3, Art. 14, § 3-14.2        3-14.2
Ch. 3, Art. 14, § 3-14.3        3-14.3
Ch. 3, Art. 15, § 3-15.1        3-15.1
Ch. 3, Art. 15, § 3-15.2        3-15.2
Ch. 3, Art. 15, § 3-15.3        3-15.3
Ch. 3, Art. 15, § 3-15.4        3-15.4
Ch. 3, Art. 15, § 3-15.5        3-15.5
Ch. 3, Art. 15, § 3-15.6        3-15.6
Ch. 4, Art. 2, § 4-2.1          4-2.1
Ch. 4, Art. 2, § 4-2.2          4-2.2
Ch. 4, Art. 2, § 4-2.3          4-2.3
Ch. 4, Art. 2, § 4-2.4          4-2.4
Ch. 4, Art. 2, § 4-2.5          4-2.5
Ch. 4, Art. 2, § 4-2.6          4-2.6
Ch. 4, Art. 3, § 4-3.1          4-3.1
Ch. 4, Art. 3, § 4-3.2          4-3.2
Ch. 4, Art. 3, § 4-3.3          4-3.3
Ch. 4, Art. 3, § 4-3.4          4-3.4
Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.1          4-4.1
Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.2          4-4.2
Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.3          4-4.3
Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.4          4-4.4
Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.5          4-4.5
Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.6          4-4.6
Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.7          4-4.7
Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.8          4-4.8
Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.9          4-4.9
Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.10         4-4.10
Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.11         4-4.11
Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.12         4-4.12
Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.13         4-4.13
Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.14         4-4.14
Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.15         4-4.15
Ch. 4, Art. 4, § 4-4.16         4-4.16
Ch. 4, Art. 5, § 4-5.1          4-5.1
Ch. 4, Art. 5, § 4-5.2          4-5.2
Ch. 4, Art. 6, § 4-6.1          4-6.1
Ch. 4, Art. 6, § 4-6.2          4-6.2
Ch. 4, Art. 6, § 4-6.3          4-6.3
Ch. 4, Art. 6, § 4-6.4          4-6.4
Ch. 4, Art. 6, § 4-6.5          4-6.5
Ch. 4, Art. 7, § 4-7.1          4-7.1
Ch. 4, Art. 7, § 4-7.3          4-7.2
Ch. 4, Art. 7, § 4-7.4          4-7.3
Ch. 4, Art. 7, § 4-7.5          4-7.4
Ch. 4, Art. 7, § 4-7.6          4-7.5
Ch. 4, Art. 8, § 4-8.1          4-8.1
Ch. 4, Art. 8, § 4-8.2          4-8.2
Ch. 4, Art. 8, § 4-8.3          4-8.3
Ch. 4, Art. 8, § 4-8.4          4-8.4
Ch. 4, Art. 9, § 4-9.1          4-9.1
Ch. 4, Art. 10, § 4-10.1        4-10.1
Ch. 4, Art. 11, § 4-11.1        4-11.1
Ch. 5, Art. 1, § 5-1.1          5-1.1
Ch. 5, Art. 1, § 5-1.2          5-1.2
Ch. 5, Art. 1, § 5-1.3          5-1.3
Ch. 5, Art. 1, § 5-1.4          5-1.4
Ch. 5, Art. 2, § 5-2.1          5-2.1
Ch. 5, Art. 2, § 5-2.2          5-2.2
Ch. 5, Art. 3, § 5-3.1          5-3.1
Ch. 5, Art. 3, § 5-3.2          5-3.2
Ch. 5, Art. 3, § 5-3.3          5-3.3
Ch. 5, Art. 3, § 5-3.4          5-3.4
Ch. 6, Art. 2, § 6-2.1          6-2.1
Ch. 6, Art. 2, § 6-2.2          6-2.2
Ch. 6, Art. 3, § 6-3.1          6-3.1
Ch. 6, Art. 4, § 6-4.1          6-4.1
Ch. 6, Art. 4, § 6-4.2          6-4.2
Ch. 6, Art. 4, § 6-4.3          6-4.3
Ch. 6, Art. 4, § 6-4.4          6-4.4
Ch. 6, Art. 5, § 6-5.1          6-5.1
Ch. 6, Art. 5, § 6-5.2          6-5.2
Ch. 6, Art. 5, § 6-5.3          6-5.3
Ch. 6, Art. 5, § 6-5.4          6-5.4
Ch. 6, Art. 6, § 6-6.1          6-6.1
Ch. 6, Art. 6, § 6-6.2          6-6.2
Ch. 6, Art. 7, § 6-7.1          6-7.1
Ch. 6, Art. 7, § 6-7.2          6-7.2
Ch. 6, Art. 7, § 6-7.3          6-7.3
Ch. 6, Art. 7, § 6-7.4          6-7.4
Ch. 6, Art. 8, § 6-8.1          6-8.1
Ch. 6, Art. 8, § 6-8.2          6-8.2
Ch. 6, Art. 10, § 6-10.1        6-10.1
Ch. 6, Art. 10, § 6-10.2        6-10.2
Ch. 6, Art. 11, § 6-11.1        6-11.1
Ch. 6, Art. 11, § 6-11.2        6-11.2
Ch. 6, Art. 11, § 6-11.3        6-11.3
Ch. 6, Art. 11, § 6-11.4        6-11.4
Ch. 6, Art. 11, § 6-11.5        6-11.5
Ch. 6, Art. 12, § 6-12.1        1-24.1
Ch. 6, Art. 12, § 6-12.2        1-24.2
Ch. 6, Art. 13, § 6-13.1        6-13.1
Ch. 6, Art. 13, § 6-13.2        6-13.2
Ch. 6, Art. 14, § 6-14.1        6-14.1
Ch. 6, Art. 14, § 6-14.2        6-14.2
Ch. 6, Art. 15, § 6-15.1        6-15.1
Ch. 6, Art. 15, § 6-15.2        6-15.2
Ch. 6, Art. 15, § 6-15.3        6-15.3
Ch. 6, Art. 15, § 6-15.4        6-15.4
Ch. 6, Art. 15, § 6-15.5        6-15.5
Ch. 6, Art. 15, § 6-15.6        6-15.6
Ch. 6, Art. 16, § 6-16.1        6-16.1
Ch. 6, Art. 16, § 6-16.2        6-16.2
Ch. 6, Art. 16, § 6-16.3        6-16.3
Ch. 6, Art. 17, § 6-17.1        6-17.1
Ch. 6, Art. 17, § 6-17.2        6-17.2
Ch. 6, Art. 17, § 6-17.3        6-17.3
Ch. 6, Art. 18, § 6-18.1        6-18.1
Ch. 6, Art. 18, § 6-18.2        6-18.2
Ch. 6, Art. 19, § 6-19.1        6-19.1
Ch. 6, Art. 19, § 6-19.2        6-19.2
Ch. 6, Art. 19, § 6-19.3        6-19.3
Ch. 6, Art. 20, § 6-20.1        6-20.1
Ch. 6, Art. 20, § 6-20.2        6-20.2
Ch. 6, Art. 20, § 6-20.3        6-20.3
Ch. 6, Art. 20, § 6-20.4        6-20.4
Ch. 6, Art. 21, § 6-21.1        6-21.1
Ch. 6, Art. 21, § 6-21.2        6-21.2
Ch. 6, Art. 21, § 6-21.3        6-21.3
Ch. 6, Art. 21, § 6-21.4        6-21.4
Ch. 6, Art. 22, § 6-22.1        6-22.1
Ch. 6, Art. 22, § 6-22.2        6-22.2
Ch. 6, Art. 22, § 6-22.3        6-22.3
Ch. 6, Art. 23, § 6-23.1        6-23.1
Ch. 6, Art. 23, § 6-23.2        6-23.2
Ch. 6, Art. 23, § 6-23.3        6-23.3
Ch. 6, Art. 24, § 6-24.1        6-24.1
Ch. 6, Art. 24, § 6-24.2        6-24.2
Ch. 6, Art. 24, § 6-24.3        6-24.3
Ch. 6, Art. 25, § 6-25.1        6-25.1
Ch. 6, Art. 25, § 6-25.2        6-25.2
Ch. 6, Art. 25, § 6-25.3        6-25.3
Ch. 6, Art. 26, § 6-26.1        6-26.1
Ch. 6, Art. 26, § 6-26.2        6-26.2
Ch. 6, Art. 26, § 6-26.3        6-26.3
Ch. 6, Art. 26, § 6-26.4        6-26.4
Ch. 6, Art. 26, § 6-26.5        6-26.5
Ch. 6, Art. 27, § 6-27.1        6-27.1
Ch. 6, Art. 28, § 6-28.1        6-28.1
Ch. 6, Art. 28, § 6-28.2        6-28.2
Ch. 6, Art. 28, § 6-28.3        6-28.3
Ch. 6, Art. 29, § 6-29.1        6-29.1
Ch. 6, Art. 29, § 6-29.2        6-29.2
Ch. 6, Art. 29, § 6-29.3        6-29.3
Ch. 6, Art. 29, § 6-29.4        6-29.4
Ch. 6, Art. 30, § 6-30.1        6-30.1
Ch. 6, Art. 30, § 6-30.2        6-30.2
Ch. 6, Art. 30, § 6-30.3        6-30.3
Ch. 6, Art. 31, § 6-31.1        6-31.1
Ch. 6, Art. 31, § 6-31.2        6-31.2
Ch. 6, Art. 31, § 6-31.3        6-31.3
Ch. 6, Art. 32, § 6-32.1        6-32.1
Ch. 6, Art. 33, § 6-33.1        6-33.1
Ch. 6, Art. 33, § 6-33.2        6-33.2
Ch. 6, Art. 34, § 6-34.1        6-34.1
Ch. 6, Art. 34, § 6-34.2        6-34.2 
Ch. 6, Art. 34, § 6-34.3        6-34.3
Ch. 6, Art. 34, § 6-34.4        6-34.4
Ch. 6, Art. 34, § 6-34.5        6-34.5
Ch. 6, Art. 34, § 6-34.6        6-34.6
Ch. 6, Art. 34, § 6-34.7        6-34.7
Ch. 6, Art. 36, § 6-36.1        6-36.1
Ch. 6, Art. 36, § 6-36.2        6-36.2
Ch. 6, Art. 37, § 6-37.1        6-37.1
Ch. 6, Art. 37, § 6-37.2        6-37.2
Ch. 6, Art. 39, § 6-39.1        6-39.1
Ch. 6, Art. 39, § 6-39.2        6-39.2
Ch. 6, Art. 39, § 6-39.3        6-39.3
Ch. 6, Art. 40, § 6-40.1        6-40.1
Ch. 6, Art. 40, § 6-40.2        6-40.2
Ch. 6, Art. 41, § 6-41.1        6-41.1
Ch. 6, Art. 42, § 6-42.1        6-42.1
Ch. 6, Art. 42, § 6-42.2        6-42.2
Ch. 6, Art. 42, § 6-42.3        6-42.3
Ch. 6, Art. 43, § 6-43.1        6-43.1
Ch. 6, Art. 43, § 6-43.2        6-43.2
Ch. 6, Art. 44, § 6-44.1        6-44.1
Ch. 6, Art. 44, § 6-44.2        6-44.2
Ch. 6, Art. 44, § 6-44.3        6-44.3
Ch. 6, Art. 44, § 6-44.4        6-44.4
Ch. 6, Art. 44, § 6-44.5        6-44.5
Ch. 6, Art. 44, § 6-44.6        6-44.6
Ch. 6, Art. 45, § 6-45.1        6-45.1
Ch. 6, Art. 45, § 6-45.2        6-45.2
Ch. 6, Art. 45, § 6-45.3        6-45.3
Ch. 6, Art. 45, § 6-45.4        6-45.4
Ch. 6, Art. 45, § 6-45.5        6-45.5
Ch. 6, Art. 45, § 6-45.6        6-45.6
Ch. 6, Art. 46, § 6-46.1        6-46.1
Ch. 6, Art. 46, § 6-46.2        6-46.2
Ch. 6, Art. 46, § 6-46.3        6-46.3
Ch. 6, Art. 46, § 6-46.4        6-46.4
Ch. 6, Art. 47, § 6-47.1        6-47.1
Ch. 6, Art. 48, § 6-48.1        6-48.1
Ch. 6, Art. 48, § 6-48.2        6-48.2
Ch. 6, Art. 48, § 6-48.3        6-48.3
Ch. 6, Art. 49, § 6-49.1        6-49.1
Ch. 6, Art. 49, § 6-49.2        6-49.2
Ch. 6, Art. 49, § 6-49.3        6-49.3
Ch. 6, Art. 49, § 6-49.4        6-49.4
Ch. 6, Art. 51, § 6-51.1        6-51.1
Ch. 6, Art. 51, § 6-51.2        6-51.2
Ch. 6, Art. 51, § 6-51.3        6-51.3
Ch. 6, Art. 51, § 6-51.4        6-51.4
Ch. 6, Art. 52, § 6-52.1        6-52.1
Ch. 6, Art. 52, § 6-52.2        6-52.2
Ch. 6, Art. 52, § 6-52.3        6-52.3
Ch. 6, Art. 52, § 6-52.4        6-52.4
Ch. 6, Art. 52, § 6-52.5        6-52.5
Ch. 6, Art. 52, § 6-52.6        6-52.6
Ch. 6, Art. 53, § 6-53.1        6-53.1
Ch. 6, Art. 53, § 6-53.2        6-53.2
Ch. 6, Art. 53, § 6-53.3        6-53.3
Ch. 6, Art. 54, § 6-54.1        6-54.1
Ch. 6, Art. 54, § 6-54.2        6-54.2
Ch. 6, Art. 54, § 6-54.3        6-54.3
Ch. 6, Art. 54, § 6-54.4        6-54.4
Ch. 6, Art. 55, § 6-55.1        6-55.1
Ch. 6, Art. 55, § 6-55.2        6-55.2
Ch. 6, Art. 55, § 6-55.3        6-55.3
Ch. 6, Art. 55, § 6-55.4        6-55.4
Ch. 6, Art. 56, § 6-56.1        6-56.1
Ch. 6, Art. 56, § 6-56.2        6-56.2
Ch. 6, Art. 56, § 6-56.3        6-56.3
Ch. 6, Art. 56, § 6-56.4        6-56.4
Ch. 6, Art. 56, § 6-56.5        6-56.5
Ch. 6, Art. 57, § 6-57.1        6-57.1
Ch. 6, Art. 57, § 6-57.2        6-57.2
Ch. 6, Art. 57, § 6-57.3        6-57.3
Ch. 6, Art. 58, § 6-58.1        6-58.1
Ch. 6, Art. 58, § 6-58.2        6-58.2
Ch. 6, Art. 58, § 6-58.3        6-58.3
Ch. 6, Art. 58, § 6-58.4        6-58.4
Ch. 6, Art. 58, § 6-58.5        6-58.5
Ch. 6, Art. 59, § 6-59.1        6-59.1
Ch. 6, Art. 59, § 6-59.2        6-59.2
Ch. 6, Art. 59, § 6-59.3        6-59.3
Ch. 6, Art. 60, § 6-60.1        6-60.1
Ch. 6, Art. 60, § 6-60.2        6-60.2
Ch. 6, Art. 60, § 6-60.3        6-60.3
Ch. 6, Art. 61, § 6-61.1        6-61.1
Ch. 6, Art. 61, § 6-61.2        6-61.2
Ch. 6, Art. 61, § 6-61.3        6-61.3
Ch. 6, Art. 61, § 6-61.4        6-61.4
Ch. 6, Art. 61, § 6-61.5        6-61.5
Ch. 6, Art. 62, § 6-62.1        6-62.1
Ch. 6, Art. 62, § 6-62.2        6-62.2
Ch. 6, Art. 62, § 6-62.3        6-62.3
Ch. 6, Art. 62, § 6-62.4        6-62.4
Ch. 6, Art. 62, § 6-62.5        6-62.5
Ch. 6, Art. 62, § 6-62.6        6-62.6
Ch. 6, Art. 63, § 6-63.1        6-63.1
Ch. 6, Art. 63, § 6-63.2        6-63.2
Ch. 6, Art. 63, § 6-63.3        6-63.3
Ch. 6, Art. 63, § 6-63.4        6-63.4
Ch. 6, Art. 63, § 6-63.5        6-63.5
Ch. 6, Art. 63, § 6-63.6        6-63.6
Ch. 6, Art. 65, § 6-65.1        6-65.1
Ch. 6, Art. 65, § 6-65.2        6-65.2
Ch. 6, Art. 65, § 6-65.3        6-65.3
Ch. 6, Art. 65, § 6-65.4        6-65.4
Ch. 7, Art. 1, § 7-1.1          12-1.1
Ch. 7, Art. 1, § 7-1.2          12-1.2
Ch. 7, Art. 1, § 7-1.3          12-1.3
Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.1          12-2.1
Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.2          12-2.2
Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.3          12-2.3
Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.4          12-2.4
Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.5          12-2.5
Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.6          12-2.6
Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.7          12-2.7
Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.8          12-2.8
Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.9          12-2.9
Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.10         12-2.10
Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.11         12-2.11
Ch. 7, Art. 2, § 7-2.12         12-2.12 
Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.1          12-4.1
Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.2          12-4.2
Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.3          12-4.3
Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.4          12-4.4
Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.5          12-4.5
Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.6          12-4.6
Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.7          12-4.7
Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.8          12-4.8
Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.9          12-4.9
Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.10         12-4.10
Ch. 7, Art. 4, § 7-4.11         12-4.11
Ch. 7, Art. 5, § 7-5.1          12-5.1
Ch. 7, Art. 6, § 7-6.1          12-6.1
Ch. 7, Art. 6, § 7-6.2          12-6.2
Ch. 7, Art. 6, § 7-6.3          12-6.3
Ch. 7, Art. 6, § 7-6.4          12-6.4
Ch. 7, Art. 6, § 7-6.5          12-6.5
Ch. 7, Art. 6, § 7-6.6          12-6.6
Ch. 7, Art. 6, § 7-6.7          12-6.7
Ch. 7, Art. 6, § 7-6.8          12-6.8
Ch. 7, Art. 7, § 7-7.1          12-7.1
Ch. 7, Art. 7, § 7-7.2          12-7.2
Ch. 7, Art. 7, § 7-7.3          12-7.3
Ch. 7, Art. 7, § 7-7.4          12-7.4
Ch. 7, Art. 7, § 7-7.5          12-7.5
Ch. 7, Art. 7, § 7-7.6          12-7.6
Ch. 7, Art. 7, § 7-7.7          12-7.7
Ch. 7, Art. 7, § 7-7.8          12-7.8
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.1          8-1.1
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.2          8-1.2
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.3          8-1.3
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.4          8-1.4
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.5          8-1.5
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.6          8-1.6
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.7          8-1.7
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.8          8-1.8
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.9          8-1.9
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.10         8-1.10
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.11         8-1.11
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.12         8-1.12
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.13         8-1.13
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.14         8-1.14
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.15         8-1.15
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.16         8-1.16
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.17         8-1.17
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.18         8-1.18
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.19         8-1.19
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.20         8-1.20
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.21         8-1.21
Ch. 8, Art. 1, § 8-1.22         8-1.22
Ch. 8, Art. 2, § 8-2.1          8-2.1
Ch. 8, Art. 2, § 8-2.2          8-2.2
Ch. 8, Art. 2, § 8-2.3          8-2.3
Ch. 8, Art. 3, § 8-3.1          8-3.1
Ch. 8, Art. 3, § 8-3.2          8-3.2
Ch. 8, Art. 3, § 8-3.3          8-3.3
Ch. 8, Art. 3, § 8-3.4          8-3.4
Ch. 8, Art. 3, § 8-3.5          8-3.5
Ch. 8, Art. 4, § 8-4.1          8-4.1
Ch. 8, Art. 4, § 8-4.2          8-4.2
Ch. 8, Art. 4, § 8-4.3          8-4.3
Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.1          8-5.1
Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.2          8-5.2
Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.3          8-5.3
Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.4          8-5.4
Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.5          8-5.5
Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.6          8-5.6
Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.7          8-5.7
Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.8          8-5.8
Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.9          8-5.9
Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.10         8-5.10
Ch. 8, Art. 5, § 8-5.11         8-5.11
Ch. 8, Art. 6, § 8-6.1          8-6.1
Ch. 8, Art. 6, § 8-6.2          8-6.2
Ch. 8, Art. 6, § 8-6.3          8-6.3
Ch. 8, Art. 6, § 8-6.4          8-6.4
Ch. 8, Art. 6, § 8-6.5          8-6.5
Ch. 8, Art. 6, § 8-6.6          8-6.6
Ch. 8, Art. 6, § 8-6.7          8-6.7
Ch. 8, Art. 7, § 8-7.1          8-7.1
Ch. 8, Art. 7, § 8-7.2          8-7.2
Ch. 8, Art. 7, § 8-7.3          8-7.3
Ch. 8, Art. 7, § 8-7.4          8-7.4
Ch. 8, Art. 7, § 8-7.5          8-7.5
Ch. 8, Art. 7, § 8-7.6          8-7.6
Ch. 8, Art. 8, § 8-8.1          8-8.1
Ch. 8, Art. 8, § 8-8.2          8-8.2
Ch. 8, Art. 8, § 8-8.3          8-8.3
Ch. 8, Art. 8, § 8-8.4          8-8.4
Ch. 8, Art. 8, § 8-8.5          8-8.5
Ch. 8, Art. 8, § 8-8.6          8-8.6
Ch. 8, Art. 8, § 8-8.7          8-8.7
Ch. 8, Art. 8, § 8-8.8          8-8.8
Ch. 8, Art. 9, § 8-9.1          8-9.1
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.1        8-10.1
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.2        8-10.2
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.4        8-10.3
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.5        8-10.4
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.6        8-10.5
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.7        8-10.6
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.8        8-10.7
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.9        8-10.8
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.10       8-10.9
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.12       8-10.10
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.13       8-10.11
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.15       8-10.12
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.16       8-10.13
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.17       8-10.14
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.18       8-10.15
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.19       8-10.16
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.20       8-10.17
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.21       8-10.18
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.22       8-10.19
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.23       8-10.20
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.24       8-10.21
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.25       8-10.22
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.26       8-10.23
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.27       8-10.24
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.28       8-10.25
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.29       8-10.26
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.30       8-10.27
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.31       8-10.28
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.32       8-10.29
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.33       8-10.30
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.34       8-10.31
Ch. 8, Art. 10, § 8-10.35       8-10.32
Ch. 8, Art. 11, § 8-11.1        8-11.1
Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.1        8-12.1
Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.2        8-12.2
Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.3        8-12.3
Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.4        8-12.4
Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.5        8-12.5
Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.6        8-12.6
Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.7        8-12.7
Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.8        8-12.8
Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.9        8-12.9
Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.10       8-12.10
Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.11       8-12.11
Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.12       8-12.12
Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.13       8-12.13
Ch. 8, Art. 12, § 8-12.14       8-12.14
Ch. 8, Art. 13, § 8-13.1        8-13.1
Ch. 8, Art. 13, § 8-13.2        8-13.2
Ch. 8, Art. 13, § 8-13.3        8-13.3
Ch. 8, Art. 13, § 8-13.4        8-13.4
Ch. 8, Art. 13, § 8-13.5        8-13.5
Ch. 8, Art. 13, § 8-13.6        8-13.6
Ch. 8, Art. 15, § 8-15.1        8-15.1
Ch. 8, Art. 16, § 8-16.1        8-16.1
Ch. 8, Art. 16, § 8-16.2        8-16.2
Ch. 8, Art. 16, § 8-16.3        8-16.3
Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.1          42-1.1
Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.2          42-1.2
Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.3          42-1.3
Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.4          42-1.4
Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.5          42-1.5
Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.6          42-1.6
Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.7          42-1.7
Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.8          42-1.8
Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.9          42-1.9
Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.10         42-1.10
Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.11         42-1.11
Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.12         42-1.12
Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.13         42-1.13
Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.14         42-1.14
Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9-1.15         42-1.15
Ch. 9, Art. 2, § 9-2.1          42-2.1
Ch. 9, Art. 2, § 9-2.2          42-2.2
Ch. 9, Art. 2, § 9-2.3          42-2.3
Ch. 9, Art. 2, § 9-2.4          42-2.4
Ch. 9, Art. 2, § 9-2.5          42-2.5
Ch. 9, Art. 2, § 9-2.6          42-2.6
Ch. 9, Art. 2, § 9-2.7          42-2.7
Ch. 9, Art. 2, § 9-2.8          42-2.8
Ch. 9, Art. 2, § 9-2.9          42-2.9
Ch. 9, Art. 2, § 9-2.10         42-2.10
Ch. 9, Art. 3, § 9-3.1          42-3.1
Ch. 9, Art. 3, § 9-3.2          42-3.2
Ch. 9, Art. 3, § 9-3.3          42-3.3
Ch. 9, Art. 3, § 9-3.4          42-3.4
Ch. 9, Art. 3, § 9-3.5          42-3.5
Ch. 9, Art. 4, § 9-4.1          42-4.1
Ch. 9, Art. 4, § 9-4.2          42-4.2
Ch. 9, Art. 4, § 9-4.3          42-4.3
Ch. 9, Art. 4, § 9-4.4          42-4.4
Ch. 9, Art. 4, § 9-4.5          42-4.5
Ch. 9, Art. 4, § 9-4.6          42-4.6
Ch. 9, Art. 4, § 9-4.7          42-4.7
Ch. 9, Art. 4, § 9-4.8          42-4.8
Ch. 9, Art. 5, § 9-5.1          42-5.1
Ch. 9, Art. 5, § 9-5.2          42-5.2
Ch. 9, Art. 5, § 9-5.3          42-5.3
Ch. 9, Art. 5, § 9-5.4          42-5.4
Ch. 9, Art. 6, § 9-6.1          42-6.1
Ch. 9, Art. 6, § 9-6.2          42-6.2
Ch. 9, Art. 7, § 9-7.1          42-7.1
Ch. 9, Art. 7, § 9-7.2          42-7.2
Ch. 9, Art. 7, § 9-7.3          42-7.3
Ch. 9, Art. 7, § 9-7.4          42-7.4
Ch. 9, Art. 7, § 9-7.5          42-7.5
Ch. 9, Art. 7, § 9-7.6          42-7.6
Ch. 9, Art. 7, § 9-7.7          42-7.7
Ch. 9, Art. 8, § 9-8.1          14-19.1
Ch. 9, Art. 8, § 9-8.2          14-19.2
Ch. 9, Art. 8, § 9-8.3          14-19.3
Ch. 9, Art. 9, § 9-9.1          34-14.1
Ch. 9, Art. 9, § 9-9.2          34-14.2
Ch. 9, Art. 9, § 9-9.3          34-14.3
Ch. 9, Art. 9, § 9-9.4          34-14.4
Ch. 10, Art. 1, § 10-1.1        10-1.1
Ch. 10, Art. 1, § 10-1.2        10-1.2
Ch. 10, Art. 1, § 10-1.3        10-1.3
Ch. 10, Art. 1, § 10-1.4        10-1.4
Ch. 10, Art. 1, § 10-1.5        10-1.5
Ch. 10, Art. 1, § 10-1.6        10-1.6
Ch. 10, Art. 1, § 10-1.7        10-1.7
Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 10-2.1        10-2.1
Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 10-2.5        10-2.2
Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 10-2.6        10-2.3
Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 10-2.7        10-2.4
Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 10-2.8        10-2.5
Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 10-2.9        10-2.6
Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 10-2.10       10-2.7
Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 10-2.11       10-2.8
Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 10-2.12       10-2.9
Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 10-2.13       10-2.10
Ch. 10, Art. 3, § 10-3.1        10-3.1
Ch. 10, Art. 3, § 10-3.2        10-3.2
Ch. 10, Art. 4, § 10-4.1        10-4.1
Ch. 10, Art. 4, § 10-4.2        10-4.2
Ch. 10, Art. 4, § 10-4.3        10-4.3
Ch. 10, Art. 4, § 10-4.4        10-4.4
Ch. 10, Art. 4, § 10-4.5        10-4.5
Ch. 10, Art. 4, § 10-4.6        10-4.6
Ch. 10, Art. 4, § 10-4.7        10-4.7
Ch. 10, Art. 4, § 10-4.9        10-4.8
Ch. 10, Art. 4, § 10-4.10       10-4.9
Ch. 10, Art. 4, § 10-4.11       10-4.10
Ch. 10, Art. 5, § 10-5.1        10-5.1
Ch. 10, Art. 5, § 10-5.2        10-5.2
Ch. 10, Art. 5, § 10-5.3        10-5.3
Ch. 10, Art. 5, § 10-5.4        10-5.4
Ch. 10, Art. 6, § 10-6.1        10-6.1
Ch. 10, Art. 6, § 10-6.2        10-6.2
Ch. 10, Art. 7, § 10-7.1        10-7.1
Ch. 10, Art. 8, § 10-8.1        10-8.1
Ch. 10, Art. 8, § 10-8.2        10-8.2
Ch. 10, Art. 8, § 10-8.3        10-8.3
Ch. 10, Art. 8, § 10-8.4        10-8.4
Ch. 10, Art. 9, § 10-9.1        10-9.1
Ch. 10, Art. 9, § 10-9.2        10-9.2
Ch. 10, Art. 9, § 10-9.3        10-9.3
Ch. 10, Art. 9, § 10-9.4        10-9.4
Ch. 10, Art. 10, § 10-10.1      10-10.1
Ch. 10, Art. 10, § 10-10.2      10-10.2
Ch. 10, Art. 10, § 10-10.3      10-10.3
Ch. 10, Art. 12, § 10-12.1      10-12.1
Ch. 10, Art. 12, § 10-12.2      10-12.2
Ch. 10A, Art. 1, § 10A-1.1      9-1.1
Ch. 10A, Art. 2, § 10A-2.1      9-2.1
Ch. 10A, Art. 2, § 10A-2.2      9-2.2
Ch. 10A, Art. 3, § 10A-3.1      9-3.1
Ch. 10A, Art. 3, § 10A-3.2      9-3.2
Ch. 10A, Art. 3, § 10A-3.3      9-3.3
Ch. 11, Art. 1, § 11-1.1        11-1.1
Ch. 11, Art. 1, § 11-1.2        11-1.2
Ch. 11, Art. 1, § 11-1.4        11-1.4
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.1        36-1.1
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.2        36-1.2
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.3        36-1.3
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.4        36-1.4
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.5        36-1.5
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.6        36-1.6
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.7        36-1.7
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.8        36-1.8
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.10       36-1.9
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.11       36-1.10
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.12       36-1.11
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.13       36-1.12
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.14       36-1.13
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.16       36-1.14
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.17       36-1.15
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.19       36-1.16
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.20       36-1.17
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.21       36-1.18
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.23       36-1.19
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.24       36-1.20
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.25       36-1.21
Ch. 12, Art. 1, § 12-1.26       36-1.22
Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.1        36-5.1
Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.2        36-5.2
Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.3        36-5.3
Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.4        36-5.4
Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.5        36-5.5
Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.6        36-5.6
Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.7        36-5.7
Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.8        36-5.8
Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.9        36-5.9
Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.10       36-5.10
Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.11       36-5.11
Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.12       36-5.12
Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.13       36-5.13
Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.14       36-5.14
Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.15       36-5.15
Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.16       36-5.16
Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.17       36-5.17
Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.18       36-5.18
Ch. 12, Art. 5, § 12-5.19       36-5.19
Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.1        36-6.1
Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.2        36-6.2
Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.3        36-6.3
Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.4        36-6.4
Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.5        36-6.5
Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.6        36-6.6
Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.7        36-6.7
Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.8        36-6.8
Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.9        36-6.9
Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.10       36-6.10
Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.11       36-6.11
Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.12       36-6.12
Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.13       36-6.13
Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.14       36-6.14
Ch. 12, Art. 6, § 12-6.15       36-6.15
Ch. 13, Art. 1, § 13-1.1        15B-1.1
Ch. 13, Art. 2, § 13-2.1        15B-2.1
Ch. 13, Art. 2, § 13-2.2        15B-2.2
Ch. 13, Art. 2, § 13-2.3        15B-2.3
Ch. 13, Art. 2, § 13-2.4        15B-2.4
Ch. 13, Art. 2, § 13-2.5        15B-2.5
Ch. 13, Art. 2, § 13-2.6        15B-2.6
Ch. 13, Art. 2, § 13-2.7        15B-2.7
Ch. 13, Art. 2, § 13-2.9        15B-2.9
Ch. 13, Art. 2, § 13-2.10       15B-2.10
Ch. 13, Art. 3, § 13-3.1        15B-3.1
Ch. 13, Art. 3, § 13-3.2        15B-3.2
Ch. 13, Art. 3, § 13-3.3        15B-3.3
Ch. 13, Art. 3, § 13-3.5        15B-3.5
Ch. 13, Art. 4, § 13-4.1        15B-4.1
Ch. 13, Art. 4, § 13-4.2        15B-4.2
Ch. 13, Art. 4, § 13-4.3        15B-4.3
Ch. 13, Art. 4, § 13-4.4        15B-4.4
Ch. 13, Art. 4, § 13-4.5        15B-4.5
Ch. 13, Art. 4, § 13-4.6        15B-4.6
Ch. 13, Art. 4, § 13-4.7        15B-4.7
Ch. 13, Art. 5, § 13-5.1        15B-5.1
Ch. 13, Art. 5, § 13-5.2        15B-5.2
Ch. 13, Art. 5, § 13-5.3        15B-5.3
Ch. 13, Art. 6, § 13-6.1        15B-6.1
Ch. 13, Art. 6, § 13-6.2        15B-6.2
Ch. 13, Art. 6, § 13-6.12       15B-6.7
Ch. 13, Art. 8, § 13-8.1        15B-8.1
Ch. 13, Art. 8, § 13-8.2        15B-8.2
Ch. 13, Art. 8, § 13-8.3        15B-8.3
Ch. 13, Art. 8, § 13-8.4        15B-8.4
Ch. 13, Art. 8, § 13-8.4A       15B-8.4A
Ch. 13, Art. 8, § 13-8.5        15B-8.5
Ch. 13, Art. 8, § 13-8.6        15B-8.6
Ch. 13, Art. 8, § 13-8.7        15B-8.7
Ch. 13, Art. 8, § 13-8.8        15B-8.8
Ch. 13, Art. 8, § 13-8.9        15B-8.9
Ch. 14, Art. 1, § 14-1.1        43-1.1
Ch. 14, Art. 1, § 14-1.2        43-1.2
Ch. 14, Art. 1, § 14-1.3        43-1.3
Ch. 14, Art. 1, § 14-1.4        43-1.4
Ch. 14, Art. 1, § 14-1.6        43-1.5
Ch. 14, Art. 1, § 14-1.7        43-1.6
Ch. 14, Art. 1, § 14-1.8        43-1.7
Ch. 14, Art. 1, § 14-1.9        43-1.8
Ch. 14, Art. 1, § 14-1.10       43-1.9
Ch. 14, Art. 1, § 14-1.11       43-1.10
Ch. 14, Art. 2, § 14-2.1        43-2.1
Ch. 14, Art. 2, § 14-2.2        43-2.2
Ch. 14, Art. 2, § 14-2.3        43-2.3
Ch. 14, Art. 3, § 14-3.1        43-3.1
Ch. 14, Art. 3, § 14-3.2        43-3.2
Ch. 14, Art. 4, § 14-4.1        43-4.1
Ch. 14, Art. 4, § 14-4.2        43-4.2
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.1        43-5.1
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.2        43-5.2
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.3        43-5.3
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.4        43-5.4
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.5        43-5.5
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.6        43-5.6
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.7        43-5.7
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.8        43-5.8
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.9        43-5.9
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.10       43-5.10
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.11       43-5.11
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.12       43-5.12
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.13       43-5.13
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.14       43-5.14
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.15       43-5.15
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.16       43-5.16
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.17       43-5.17
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.18       43-5.18
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.19       43-5.19
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.20       43-5.20
Ch. 14, Art. 5, § 14-5.21       43-5.21
Ch. 14, Art. 5A, § 14-5A.1      43-5A.1
Ch. 14, Art. 5A, § 14-5A.2      43-5A.2
Ch. 14, Art. 5A, § 14-5A.3      43-5A.3
Ch. 14, Art. 6, § 14-6.1        43-6.1
Ch. 14, Art. 6, § 14-6.3        43-6.2
Ch. 14, Art. 6, § 14-6.4        43-6.3
Ch. 14, Art. 6, § 14-6.4A       43-6.4
Ch. 14, Art. 6, § 14-6.5        43-6.5
Ch. 14, Art. 6, § 14-6.7        43-6.7
Ch. 14, Art. 7, § 14-7.1        43-7.1
Ch. 14, Art. 7, § 14-7.2        43-7.2
Ch. 14, Art. 7, § 14-7.3        43-7.3
Ch. 14, Art. 7, § 14-7.4        43-7.4
Ch. 14, Art. 8, § 14-8.1        43-8.1
Ch. 14, Art. 8, § 14-8.2        43-8.2
Ch. 14, Art. 8, § 14-8.3        43-8.3
Ch. 14, Art. 8, § 14-8.4        43-8.4
Ch. 14, Art. 9, § 14-9.1        43-9.1
Ch. 14, Art. 10, § 14-10.1      43-10.1
Ch. 14, Art. 10, § 14-10.2      43-10.2
Ch. 14, Art. 10, § 14-10.3      43-10.3
Ch. 14, Art. 10, § 14-10.4      43-10.4
Ch. 14, Art. 10, § 14-10.5      43-10.5
Ch. 14, Art. 10, § 14-10.6      43-10.6
Ch. 14, Art. 10, § 14-10.7      43-10.7
Ch. 14, Art. 11, § 14-11.1      14-1.1
Ch. 14, Art. 11, § 14-11.2      14-1.2
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.1      43-11.1
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.2      43-11.2
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.3      43-11.3
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.4      43-11.4
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.5      43-11.5
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.6      43-11.6
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.7      43-11.7
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.8      43-11.8
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.9      43-11.9
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.10     43-11.10
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.11     43-11.11
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.12     43-11.12
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.13     43-11.13
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.14     43-11.14
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.15     43-11.15
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.16     43-11.16
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.17     43-11.17
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.18     43-11.18
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.19     43-11.19
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.20     43-11.20
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.21     43-11.21
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.22     43-11.22
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.23     43-11.23
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.24     43-11.24
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.25     43-11.25
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.26     43-11.26
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.27     43-11.27
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.28     43-11.28
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.29     43-11.29
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.30     43-11.30
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.31     43-11.31
Ch. 14, Art. 12, § 14-12.32     43-11.32
Ch. 14, Art. 13, § 14-13.1      18A-1.1
Ch. 14, Art. 13, § 14-13.2      18A-1.2
Ch. 14, Art. 13, § 14-13.3      18A-1.3
Ch. 14, Art. 13, § 14-13.4      18A-1.4
Ch. 14, Art. 13, § 14-13.5      18A-1.5
Ch. 14, Art. 13, § 14-13.6      18A-1.6
Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.1      18A-2.1
Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.1A     18A-2.1A
Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.2      18A-2.2
Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.2A     18A-2.2A
Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.2B     18A-2.2B
Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.3      18A-2.3
Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.4      18A-2.4
Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.4A     18A-2.4A
Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.5      18A-2.5
Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.6      18A-2.6
Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.7      18A-2.7
Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.8      18A-2.8
Ch. 14, Art. 14, § 14-14.9      18A-2.9
Ch. 14, Art. 15, § 14-15.1      18A-3.1
Ch. 14, Art. 15, § 14-15.2      18A-3.2
Ch. 14, Art. 16, § 14-16.1      18A-4.1
Ch. 14, Art. 16, § 14-16.2      18A-4.2
Ch. 14, Art. 16, § 14-16.3      18A-4.3
Ch. 14, Art. 16, § 14-16.4      18A-4.4
Ch. 14, Art. 16, § 14-16.5      18A-4.5
Ch. 14, Art. 16, § 14-16.6      18A-4.6
Ch. 14, Art. 16, § 14-16.7      18A-4.7
Ch. 14, Art. 16, § 14-16.8      18A-4.8
Ch. 14, Art. 17, § 14-17.1      14-2.1
Ch. 14, Art. 17, § 14-17.2      14-2.2
Ch. 14, Art. 17, § 14-17.3      14-2.3
Ch. 14, Art. 17, § 14-17.4      14-2.4
Ch. 14, Art. 17, § 14-17.5      14-2.5
Ch. 14, Art. 17, § 14-17.6      14-2.6
Ch. 14, Art. 17, § 14-17.7      14-2.7
Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.1      14-3.1
Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.2      14-3.2
Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.3      14-3.3
Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.4      14-3.4
Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.5      14-3.5
Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.6      14-3.6
Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.7      14-3.7
Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.8      14-3.8
Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.9      14-3.9
Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.10     14-3.10
Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.11     14-3.11
Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.12     14-3.12
Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.13     14-3.13
Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.14     14-3.14
Ch. 14, Art. 18, § 14-18.15     14-3.15
Ch. 14, Art. 19, § 14-19.1      14-4.1
Ch. 14, Art. 19, § 14-19.2      14-4.2
Ch. 14, Art. 20, § 14-20.1      14-5.1
Ch. 14, Art. 20, § 14-20.2      14-5.2
Ch. 14, Art. 20, § 14-20.3      14-5.3
Ch. 14, Art. 21, § 14-21.1      14-6.1
Ch. 14, Art. 21, § 14-21.2      14-6.2
Ch. 14, Art. 21, § 14-21.3      14-6.3
Ch. 14, Art. 21, § 14-21.4      14-6.4
Ch. 14, Art. 21, § 14-21.5      14-6.5
Ch. 14, Art. 21, § 14-21.6      14-6.6
Ch. 14, Art. 21, § 14-21.7      14-6.7
Ch. 14, Art. 21, § 14-21.8      14-6.8
Ch. 14, Art. 22, § 14-22.1      14-7.1
Ch. 14, Art. 22, § 14-22.2      14-7.2
Ch. 14, Art. 22, § 14-22.3      14-7.3
Ch. 14, Art. 22, § 14-22.4      14-7.4
Ch. 14, Art. 22, § 14-22.5      14-7.5
Ch. 14, Art. 23, § 14-23.1      14-8.1
Ch. 14, Art. 23, § 14-23.2      14-8.2
Ch. 14, Art. 23, § 14-23.3      14-8.3
Ch. 14, Art. 23, § 14-23.4      14-8.4
Ch. 14, Art. 24, § 14-24.1      14-9.1
Ch. 14, Art. 24, § 14-24.2      14-9.2
Ch. 14, Art. 25, § 14-25.1      14-10.1
Ch. 14, Art. 25, § 14-25.2      14-10.2
Ch. 14, Art. 25, § 14-25.3      14-10.3
Ch. 14, Art. 25, § 14-25.4      14-10.4
Ch. 14, Art. 25, § 14-25.5      14-10.5
Ch. 14, Art. 25, § 14-25.6      14-10.6
Ch. 14, Art. 25, § 14-25.7      14-10.7
Ch. 14, Art. 25, § 14-25.8      14-10.8
Ch. 14, Art. 25, § 14-25.9      14-10.9
Ch. 14, Art. 26, § 14-26.1      14-11.1
Ch. 14, Art. 26, § 14-26.2      14-11.2
Ch. 14, Art. 26, § 14-26.3      14-11.3
Ch. 14, Art. 26, § 14-26.4      14-11.4
Ch. 14, Art. 26, § 14-26.5      14-11.5
Ch. 14, Art. 26, § 14-26.6      14-11.6
Ch. 14, Art. 26, § 14-26.7      14-11.7
Ch. 14, Art. 26, § 14-26.8      14-11.8
Ch. 14, Art. 26, § 14-26.9      14-11.9
Ch. 14, Art. 26, § 14-26.10     14-11.10
Ch. 14, Art. 26, § 14-26.11     14-11.11
Ch. 14, Art. 26, § 14-26.12     14-11.12
Ch. 14, Art. 26, § 14-26.13     14-11.13
Ch. 14, Art. 26, § 14-26.14     14-11.14
Ch. 14, Art. 26, § 14-26.15     14-11.15
Ch. 14, Art. 27, § 14-27.1      14-12.1
Ch. 14, Art. 27, § 14-27.2      14-12.2
Ch. 14, Art. 27, § 14-27.3      14-12.3
Ch. 14, Art. 27, § 14-27.4      14-12.4
Ch. 14, Art. 27, § 14-27.5      14-12.5
Ch. 14, Art. 28, § 14-28.1      14-13.1
Ch. 14, Art. 28, § 14-28.2      14-13.2
Ch. 14, Art. 28, § 14-28.3      14-13.3
Ch. 14, Art. 28, § 14-28.4      14-13.4
Ch. 14, Art. 28, § 14-28.5      14-13.5
Ch. 14, Art. 28, § 14-28.6      14-13.6
Ch. 14, Art. 28, § 14-28.7      14-13.7
Ch. 14, Art. 28, § 14-28.8      14-13.8
Ch. 14, Art. 28, § 14-28.9      14-13.9
Ch. 14, Art. 29, § 14-29.1      14-14.1
Ch. 14, Art. 30, § 14-30.1      14-15.1
Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.1      14-16.1
Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.2      14-16.2
Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.3      14-16.3
Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.4      14-16.4
Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.5      14-16.5
Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.6      14-16.6
Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.7      14-16.7
Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.8      14-16.8
Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.9      14-16.9
Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.10     14-16.10
Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.11     14-16.11
Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.12     14-16.12
Ch. 14, Art. 31, § 14-31.13     14-16.13 
Ch. 14, Art. 32, § 14-32.1      14-17.1
Ch. 14, Art. 32, § 14-32.2      14-17.2
Ch. 14, Art. 32, § 14-32.3      14-17.3
Ch. 14, Art. 32, § 14-32.4      14-17.4
Ch. 14, Art. 33, § 14-33.1      14-18.1
Ch. 14, Art. 33, § 14-33.2      14-18.2
Ch. 14, Art. 33, § 14-33.3      14-18.3
Ch. 14, Art. 33, § 14-33.4      14-18.4
Ch. 14, Art. 33, § 14-33.5      14-18.5
Ch. 14, Art. 33, § 14-33.6      14-18.6
Ch. 14, App. 14-A                Ch. 14, App. 14-A
Ch. 14, App. 14-B                Ch. 43, App. 43-A
Ch. 14, App. 14-C                Ch. 43, App. 43-B
Ch. 14, App. 14-D                Ch. 43, App. 43-C
Ch. 15, Art. 1, § 15-1.1        15-1.1
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.1        15-2.1
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.2        15-2.2
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.3        15-2.3
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.4        15-2.4
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.5        15-2.5
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.6        15-2.6
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.7        15-2.7
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.8        15-2.8
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.9        15-2.9
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.10       15-2.10
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.11       15-2.11
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.12       15-2.12
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.13       15-2.13
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.14       15-2.14
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.15       15-2.15
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.16       15-2.16
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.17       15-2.17
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.18       15-2.18
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.19       15-2.19
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.20       15-2.20
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.21       15-2.21
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.22       15-2.22
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.23       15-2.23
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.24       15-2.24
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.25       15-2.25
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.26       15-2.26
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.27       15-2.27
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.28       15-2.28
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.29       15-2.29
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.30       15-2.30
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.31       15-2.31
Ch. 15, Art. 2, § 15-2.32       15-2.32
Ch. 15, Art. 3, § 15-3.1        15-3.1
Ch. 15, Art. 3, § 15-3.2        15-3.2
Ch. 15, Art. 3, § 15-3.3        15-3.3
Ch. 15, Art. 4, § 15-4.1        15-4.1
Ch. 15, Art. 4, § 15-4.2        15-4.2
Ch. 15, Art. 4, § 15-4.3        15-4.3
Ch. 15, Art. 4, § 15-4.4        15-4.4
Ch. 15, Art. 4, § 15-4.5        15-4.5
Ch. 15, Art. 4, § 15-4.6        15-4.6
Ch. 15, Art. 4, § 15-4.8        15-4.8
Ch. 15, Art. 4, § 15-4.9        15-4.9
Ch. 15, Art. 4, § 15-4.10       15-4.10
Ch. 15, Art. 4, § 15-4.11       15-4.11
Ch. 15, Art. 5, § 15-5.1        15-5.1
Ch. 15, Art. 5, § 15-5.2        15-5.2
Ch. 15, Art. 5, § 15-5.3        15-5.3
Ch. 15, Art. 5, § 15-5.4        15-5.4
Ch. 15, Art. 5, § 15-5.5        15-5.5
Ch. 15, Art. 6, § 15-6.1        15-6.1
Ch. 15, Art. 6, § 15-6.2        15-6.2
Ch. 15, Art. 6, § 15-6.3        15-6.3
Ch. 15, Art. 6, § 15-6.4        15-6.4
Ch. 15, Art. 6, § 15-6.5        15-6.5
Ch. 15, Art. 6, § 15-6.6        15-6.6
Ch. 15, Art. 6, § 15-6.7        15-6.7
Ch. 15, Art. 7, § 15-7.1        15-7.1
Ch. 15, Art. 7, § 15-7.2        15-7.2
Ch. 15, Art. 7, § 15-7.3        15-7.3
Ch. 15, Art. 7, § 15-7.4        15-7.4
Ch. 15, Art. 7, § 15-7.5        15-7.5
Ch. 15, Art. 7, § 15-7.6        15-7.6
Ch. 15, Art. 7, § 15-7.7        15-7.7
Ch. 15, Art. 7, § 15-7.8        15-7.8
Ch. 15, Art. 8, § 15-8.1        15-8.1
Ch. 15, Art. 8, § 15-8.2        15-8.2
Ch. 15, Art. 8, § 15-8.3        15-8.3
Ch. 15, Art. 8, § 15-8.4        15-8.4
Ch. 15, Art. 8, § 15-8.5        15-8.5
Ch. 15, Art. 8, § 15-8.6        15-8.6
Ch. 15, Art. 9, § 15-9.1        15-9.1
Ch. 15, Art. 9, § 15-9.2        15-9.2
Ch. 15, Art. 10, § 15-10.1      15-10.1
Ch. 15, Art. 11, § 15-11.2      15-11.2
Ch. 15, Art. 11, § 15-11.3      15-11.3
Ch. 15, Art. 12, § 15-12.1      15-12.1
Ch. 15, Art. 12, § 15-12.2      15-12.2
Ch. 15, Art. 12, § 15-12.3      15-12.3
Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.1      15-13.1
Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.2      15-13.2
Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.3      15-13.3
Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.4      15-13.4
Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.5      15-13.5
Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.6      15-13.6
Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.7      15-13.7
Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.8      15-13.8
Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.9      15-13.9
Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.10     15-13.10
Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.11     15-13.11
Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.12     15-13.12
Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.13     15-13.13
Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.14     15-13.14
Ch. 15, Art. 13, § 15-13.15     15-13.15
Ch. 15, Art. 14, § 15-14.1      15-14.1
Ch. 15, Art. 14, § 15-14.2      15-14.2
Ch. 15, Art. 14, § 15-14.3      15-14.3
Ch. 15, Art. 14, § 15-14.4      15-14.4
Ch. 15, Art. 14, § 15-14.5      15-14.5
Ch. 15, Art. 14, § 15-14.6      15-14.6
Ch. 15, Art. 14, § 15-14.7      15-14.7
Ch. 15, Art. 14, § 15-14.8      15-14.8
Ch. 15, Art. 15, § 15-15.1      15-15.1
Ch. 15, Art. 15, § 15-15.2      15-15.2
Ch. 15, Art. 15, § 15-15.3      15-15.3
Ch. 15, Art. 15, § 15-15.4      15-15.4
Ch. 15, Art. 15, § 15-15.5      15-15.5
Ch. 15, Art. 15, § 15-15.6      15-15.6
Ch. 15, Art. 16, § 15-16.1      15-16.1
Ch. 15, Art. 16, § 15-16.2      15-16.2
Ch. 15, Art. 16, § 15-16.3      15-16.3
Ch. 15, Art. 16, § 15-16.4      15-16.4
Ch. 15, Art. 16, § 15-16.5      15-16.5
Ch. 15, Art. 16, § 15-16.6      15-16.6
Ch. 15, Art. 16, § 15-16.7      15-16.7
Ch. 15, Art. 16, § 15-16.8      15-16.8
Ch. 15, Art. 17, § 15-17.1      15-17.1
Ch. 15, Art. 17, § 15-17.2      15-17.2
Ch. 15, Art. 17, § 15-17.3      15-17.3
Ch. 15, Art. 17, § 15-17.4      15-17.4
Ch. 15, Art. 17, § 15-17.5      15-17.5
Ch. 15, Art. 17, § 15-17.6      15-17.6
Ch. 15, Art. 17, § 15-17.7      15-17.7
Ch. 15, Art. 17, § 15-17.8      15-17.8
Ch. 15, Art. 18, § 15-18.1      15-18.1
Ch. 15, Art. 18, § 15-18.2      15-18.2
Ch. 15, Art. 18, § 15-18.3      15-18.3
Ch. 15, Art. 18, § 15-18.4      15-18.4
Ch. 15, Art. 18, § 15-18.5      15-18.5
Ch. 15, Art. 18, § 15-18.6      15-18.6
Ch. 15, Art. 18, § 15-18.7      15-18.7
Ch. 15, Art. 18, § 15-18.8      15-18.8
Ch. 15, Art. 18, § 15-18.10     15-18.10
Ch. 15, Art. 18, § 15-18.11     15-18.11
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.1      15-19.1
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.2      15-19.2
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.3      15-19.3
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.4      15-19.4
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.5      15-19.5
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.6      15-19.6
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.7      15-19.7
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.8      15-19.8
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.9      15-19.9
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.10     15-19.10
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.11     15-19.11
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.12     15-19.12
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.13     15-19.13
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.14     15-19.14
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.15     15-19.15
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.16     15-19.16
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.17     15-19.17
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.18     15-19.18
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.19     15-19.19
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.20     15-19.20
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.21     15-19.21
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.22     15-19.22
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.23     15-19.23
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.24     15-19.24
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.25     15-19.25
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.26     15-19.26
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.27     15-19.27
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.28     15-19.28
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.29     15-19.29
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.30     15-19.30
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.31     15-19.31
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.32     15-19.32
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.33     15-19.33
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.35     15-19.35
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.36     15-19.36
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.37     15-19.37
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.39     15-19.39
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.40     15-19.40
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.41     15-19.41
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.42     15-19.42
Ch. 15, Art. 19, § 15-19.43     15-19.43
Ch. 15, Art. 20, § 15-20.1      15-20.1
Ch. 15, Art. 20, § 15-20.2      15-20.2
Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.2      15-21.2
Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.3      15-21.3
Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.5      15-21.5
Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.6      15-21.6
Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.7      15-21.7
Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.8      15-21.8
Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.10     15-21.10
Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.11     15-21.11
Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.12     15-21.12
Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.13     15-21.13
Ch. 15, Art. 21, § 15-21.15     15-21.15
Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.1      15-22.1
Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.2      15-22.2
Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.3      15-22.3
Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.4      15-22.4
Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.5      15-22.5
Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.6      15-22.6
Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.7      15-22.7
Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.8      15-22.8
Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.9      15-22.9
Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.10     15-22.10
Ch. 15, Art. 22, § 15-22.11     15-22.11
Ch. 15, Art. 23, § 15-23.1      15-23.1
Ch. 15, Art. 23, § 15-23.2      15-23.2
Ch. 15, Art. 23, § 15-23.2A     15-23.2A
Ch. 15, Art. 23, § 15-23.2B     15-23.2B
Ch. 15, Art. 23, § 15-23.2C     15-23.2C
Ch. 15, Art. 23, § 15-23.2D     15-23.2D
Ch. 15, Art. 23, § 15-23.3      15-23.3
Ch. 15, Art. 23, § 15-23.4      15-23.4
Ch. 15, Art. 23, § 15-23.5      15-23.5
Ch. 15, Art. 23, § 15-23.6      15-23.6
Ch. 15, Art. 23, § 15-23.7      15-23.7
Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.1      15-24.1
Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.2      15-24.2
Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.3      15-24.3
Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.4      15-24.4
Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.5      15-24.5
Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.6      15-24.6
Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.8      15-24.8
Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.11     15-24.11
Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.12     15-24.12
Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.13     15-24.13
Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.14     15-24.14
Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.15     15-24.15
Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.16     15-24.16
Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.17     15-24.17
Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.18     15-24.18
Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.19     15-24.19
Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.20     15-24.20
Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.21     15-24.21
Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.22     15-24.22
Ch. 15, Art. 24, § 15-24.23     15-24.23
Ch. 15, Art. 25, § 15-25.1      15-25.1
Ch. 15, Art. 25, § 15-25.2      15-25.2
Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.1      15-26.1
Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.2      15-26.2
Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.3      15-26.3
Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.4      15-26.4
Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.5      15-26.5
Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.6      15-26.6
Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.7      15-26.7
Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.8      15-26.8
Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.9      15-26.9
Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.10     15-26.10
Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.11     15-26.11
Ch. 15, Art. 26, § 15-26.12     15-26.12
Ch. 15, Art. 27, § 15-27.1      15-27.1
Ch. 15, Art. 27, § 15-27.2      15-27.2
Ch. 15, Art. 27, § 15-27.3      15-27.3
Ch. 15, Art. 27, § 15-27.4      15-27.4
Ch. 15, Art. 27, § 15-27.5      15-27.5
Ch. 15, Art. 27, § 15-27.6      15-27.6
Ch. 15, Art. 27, § 15-27.7      15-27.7
Ch. 15, Art. 27, § 15-27.8      15-27.8
Ch. 15, Art. 27, § 15-27.9      15-27.9
Ch. 15, Art. 27, § 15-27.10     15-27.10
Ch. 15, Art. 28, § 15-28.1      15-28.1
Ch. 15, Art. 28, § 15-28.3      15-28.3
Ch. 15, Art. 28, § 15-28.4      15-28.4
Ch. 15, Art. 28, § 15-28.5      15-28.5
Ch. 15, Art. 28, § 15-28.6      15-28.6
Ch. 16, Art. 1, § 16-1.1        16-1.1
Ch. 16, Art. 1, § 16-1.2        16-1.2
Ch. 16, Art. 2, § 16-2.1        16-2.1
Ch. 16, Art. 2, § 16-2.2        16-2.2
Ch. 16, Art. 2, § 16-2.3        16-2.3
Ch. 16, Art. 2, § 16-2.4        16-2.4
Ch. 16, Art. 2, § 16-2.5        16-2.5
Ch. 16, Art. 2, § 16-2.6        16-2.6
Ch. 16, Art. 2, § 16-2.7        16-2.7
Ch. 16, Art. 2, § 16-2.8        16-2.8
Ch. 16, Art. 2, § 16-2.9        16-2.9
Ch. 16, Art. 2, § 16-2.10       16-2.10
Ch. 16, Art. 2, § 16-2.11       16-2.11
Ch. 16, Art. 2, § 16-2.12       16-2.12
Ch. 16, Art. 2, § 16-2.13       16-2.13
Ch. 16, Art. 2, § 16-2.14       16-2.14
Ch. 16, Art. 3, § 16-3.1        16-3.1
Ch. 16, Art. 3, § 16-3.2        16-3.2
Ch. 16, Art. 3, § 16-3.3        16-3.3
Ch. 16, Art. 3, § 16-3.4        16-3.4
Ch. 16, Art. 3, § 16-3.5        16-3.5
Ch. 16, Art. 3, § 16-3.6        16-3.6
Ch. 16, Art. 3, § 16-3.7        16-3.7
Ch. 16, Art. 3, § 16-3.8        16-3.8
Ch. 16, Art. 3, § 16-3.9        16-3.9
Ch. 16, Art. 3, § 16-3.10       16-3.10
Ch. 16, Art. 3, § 16-3.11       16-3.11
Ch. 16, Art. 4, § 16-4.1        16-4.1
Ch. 16, Art. 4, § 16-4.2        16-4.2
Ch. 16, Art. 4, § 16-4.3        16-4.3
Ch. 16, Art. 4, § 16-4.4        16-4.4
Ch. 16, Art. 6, § 16-6.1        16-6.1
Ch. 16, Art. 6, § 16-6.2        16-6.2
Ch. 16, Art. 6, § 16-6.3        16-6.3
Ch. 16, Art. 6, § 16-6.4        16-6.4
Ch. 16, Art. 6, § 16-6.5        16-6.5
Ch. 16, Art. 6, § 16-6.6        16-6.6
Ch. 16, Art. 7, § 16-7.1        16-7.1
Ch. 16, Art. 7, § 16-7.2        16-7.2
Ch. 16, Art. 7, § 16-7.3        16-7.3
Ch. 16, Art. 7, § 16-7.4        16-7.4
Ch. 16, Art. 7, § 16-7.5        16-7.5
Ch. 16, Art. 7, § 16-7.6        16-7.6
Ch. 16, Art. 7, § 16-7.7        16-7.7
Ch. 16, Art. 7, § 16-7.8        16-7.8
Ch. 16, Art. 7, § 16-7.9        16-7.9
Ch. 16, Art. 7, § 16-7.10       16-7.10
Ch. 16, Art. 8, § 16-8.1        16-8.1
Ch. 16, Art. 8, § 16-8.2        16-8.2
Ch. 16, Art. 8, § 16-8.3        16-8.3
Ch. 16, Art. 8, § 16-8.4        16-8.4
Ch. 16, Art. 8, § 16-8.5        16-8.5
Ch. 16, Art. 9, § 16-9.1        16-9.1
Ch. 16, Art. 10, § 16-10.1      16-10.1
Ch. 16, Art. 10, § 16-10.2      16-10.2
Ch. 16, Art. 10, § 16-10.3      16-10.3
Ch. 16, Art. 10, § 16-10.4      16-10.4
Ch. 16, Art. 11, § 16-11.1      16-11.1
Ch. 16, Art. 11, § 16-11.2      16-11.2
Ch. 16, Art. 11, § 16-11.3      16-11.3
Ch. 16, Art. 11, § 16-11.4      16-11.4
Ch. 16, Art. 11, § 16-11.5      16-11.5
Ch. 16, Art. 11, § 16-11.6      16-11.6
Ch. 16, Art. 12, § 16-12.1      16-12.1
Ch. 16, Art. 12, § 16-12.2      16-12.2
Ch. 16, Art. 12, § 16-12.3      16-12.3
Ch. 16, Art. 12, § 16-12.4      16-12.4
Ch. 16, Art. 12, § 16-12.5      16-12.5
Ch. 16, Art. 12, § 16-12.6      16-12.6
Ch. 16, Art. 12, § 16-12.7      16-12.7
Ch. 16, Art. 12, § 16-12.8      16-12.8
Ch. 16, Art. 12, § 16-12.9      16-12.9
Ch. 16, Art. 13, § 16-13.1      16-13.1
Ch. 16, Art. 13, § 16-13.2      16-13.2
Ch. 16, Art. 13, § 16-13.3      16-13.3
Ch. 16, Art. 13, § 16-13.4      16-13.4
Ch. 16, Art. 13, § 16-13.5      16-13.5
Ch. 16, Art. 13, § 16-13.6      16-13.6
Ch. 16, Art. 13, § 16-13.7      16-13.7
Ch. 16, Art. 13, § 16-13.8      16-13.8
Ch. 16, Art. 13, § 16-13.10     16-13.9
Ch. 16, Art. 13, § 16-13.12     16-13.10
Ch. 16, Art. 14, § 16-14.1      16-14.1
Ch. 16, Art. 14, § 16-14.2      16-14.3
Ch. 16, Art. 14, § 16-14.3      16-14.4
Ch. 16, Art. 14, § 16-14.4      16-14.5
Ch. 16, Art. 14, § 16-14.5      16-14.6
Ch. 16, Art. 14, § 16-14.6      16-14.7
Ch. 16, Art. 14, § 16-14.7      16-14.8
Ch. 16, Art. 14, § 16-14.9      16-14.9
Ch. 16, Art. 15, § 16-15.1      16-15.1
Ch. 16, Art. 15, § 16-15.2      16-15.2
Ch. 16, Art. 15, § 16-15.3      16-15.3
Ch. 16, Art. 15, § 16-15.4      16-15.4
Ch. 16, Art. 15, § 16-15.5      16-15.5
Ch. 16, Art. 16, § 16-16.1      16-16.1
Ch. 16, Art. 16, § 16-16.2      16-16.2
Ch. 16, Art. 16, § 16-16.3      16-16.3
Ch. 16, Art. 16, § 16-16.4      16-16.4
Ch. 16, Art. 16, § 16-16.5      16-16.5
Ch. 16, Art. 16, § 16-16.6      16-16.6
Ch. 16, Art. 17, § 16-17.1      16-17.1
Ch. 16, Art. 17, § 16-17.2      16-17.2
Ch. 16, Art. 17, § 16-17.3      16-17.3
Ch. 16, Art. 17, § 16-17.4      16-17.4
Ch. 18, Art. 1, § 18-1.1        18-1.1
Ch. 18, Art. 2, § 18-2.1        18-2.1
Ch. 18, Art. 3, § 18-3.1        18-3.1
Ch. 18, Art. 3, § 18-3.2        18-3.2
Ch. 18, Art. 3, § 18-3.3        18-3.3
Ch. 18, Art. 3, § 18-3.4        18-3.4
Ch. 18, Art. 4, § 18-4.1        18-4.1
Ch. 18, Art. 4, § 18-4.2        18-4.2
Ch. 18, Art. 4, § 18-4.3        18-4.3
Ch. 18, Art. 4, § 18-4.4        18-4.4
Ch. 18, Art. 4, § 18-4.5        18-4.5
Ch. 18, Art. 4, § 18-4.6        18-4.6
Ch. 18, Art. 5, § 18-5.1        18-5.1
Ch. 18, Art. 5, § 18-5.2        18-5.2
Ch. 18, Art. 5, § 18-5.3        18-5.3
Ch. 18, Art. 5, § 18-5.4        18-5.4
Ch. 18, Art. 5, § 18-5.5        18-5.5
Ch. 18, Art. 5, § 18-5.6        18-5.6
Ch. 18, Art. 5, § 18-5.7        18-5.7
Ch. 18, Art. 5, § 18-5.8        18-5.8
Ch. 18, Art. 6, § 18-6.1        18-6.1
Ch. 18, Art. 6, § 18-6.2        18-6.2
Ch. 18, Art. 6, § 18-6.3        18-6.3
Ch. 18, Art. 6, § 18-6.4        18-6.4
Ch. 18, Art. 6, § 18-6.5        18-6.5
Ch. 18, Art. 7, § 18-7.1        18-7.1
Ch. 18, Art. 7, § 18-7.2        18-7.2
Ch. 18, Art. 7, § 18-7.3        18-7.3
Ch. 18, Art. 7, § 18-7.4        18-7.4
Ch. 18, Art. 7, § 18-7.5        18-7.5
Ch. 18, Table 18-A               Ch. 18, Table 18-A
Ch. 20, Art. 1, § 20-1.1        20-1.1
Ch. 20, Art. 2, § 20-2.1        20-2.1
Ch. 20, Art. 2, § 20-2.2        20-2.2
Ch. 20, Art. 2, § 20-2.3        20-2.3
Ch. 20, Art. 2, § 20-2.3A       20-2.3A
Ch. 20, Art. 2, § 20-2.4        20-2.4
Ch. 20, Art. 2, § 20-2.5        20-2.5
Ch. 20, Art. 2, § 20-2.6        20-2.6
Ch. 20, Art. 2, § 20-2.7        20-2.7
Ch. 20, Art. 2, § 20-2.8        20-2.8
Ch. 20, Art. 3, § 20-3.1        20-3.1
Ch. 20, Art. 3, § 20-3.2        20-3.2
Ch. 20, Art. 5, § 20-5.1        20-5.1
Ch. 20, Art. 5, § 20-5.2        20-5.2
Ch. 20, Art. 5, § 20-5.3        20-5.3
Ch. 20, Art. 5, § 20-5.4        20-5.4
Ch. 20, Art. 5, § 20-5.5        20-5.5
Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.1        20-6.1
Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.2        20-6.2
Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.3        20-6.3
Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.4        20-6.4
Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.5        20-6.5
Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.6        20-6.6
Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.7        20-6.7
Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.8        20-6.8
Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.9        20-6.9
Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.10       20-6.10
Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.11       20-6.11
Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.12       20-6.12
Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.13       20-6.13
Ch. 20, Art. 6, § 20-6.14       20-6.14
Ch. 21, Art. 1, § 21-1.10       21-1.10
Ch. 21, Art. 1, § 21-1.20       21-1.20
Ch. 21, Art. 1, § 21-1.30       21-1.30
Ch. 21, Art. 1, § 21-1.40       21-1.40
Ch. 21, Art. 1, § 21-1.50       21-1.50
Ch. 21, Art. 1, § 21-1.60       21-1.60
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.10       21-2.10
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.20       21-2.20
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.30       21-2.30
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.40       21-2.40
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.40-1     21-2.40-1
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.40-2     21-2.40-2
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.50       21-2.50
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.60       21-2.60
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.70       21-2.70
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.80       21-2.80
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.90       21-2.90
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.90-1     21-2.90-1
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.90-2     21-2.90-2
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.100      21-2.100
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.110      21-2.110
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.110-1    21-2.110-1
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.110-2    21-2.110-2
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.120      21-2.120
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.120-1    21-2.120-1
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.120-2    21-2.120-2
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.120-3    21-2.120-3
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.130      21-2.130
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.140      21-2.140
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.140-1    21-2.140-1
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.140-2    21-2.140-2
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.150      21-2.150
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.150-1    21-2.150-1
Ch. 21, Art. 2, § 21-2.150-2    21-2.150-2
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.10       21-3.10
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.20       21-3.20
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.30       21-3.30
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.40       21-3.40
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.40-1     21-3.40-1
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.50       21-3.50
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.50-1     21-3.50-1
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.50-2     21-3.50-2
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.50-3     21-3.50-3
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.50-4     21-3.50-4
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.60       21-3.60
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.60-1     21-3.60-1
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.60-2     21-3.60-2
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.60-3     21-3.60-3
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.60-4     21-3.60-4
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.70       21-3.70
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.70-1     21-3.70-1
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.80       21-3.80
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.80-1     21-3.80-1
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.90       21-3.90
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.90-1     21-3.90-1
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.100      21-3.100
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.100-1    21-3.100-1
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.110      21-3.110
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.110-1    21-3.110-1
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.120      21-3.120
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.120-1    21-3.120-1
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.120-2    21-3.120-2
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.130      21-3.130
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.130-1    21-3.130-1
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.140      21-3.140
Ch. 21, Art. 3, § 21-3.140-1    21-3.140-1
Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.10       21-4.10
Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.20       21-4.20
Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.30       21-4.30
Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.40       21-4.40
Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.50       21-4.50
Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.60       21-4.60
Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.70       21-4.70
Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.70-1     21-4.70-1
Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.80       21-4.80
Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.90       21-4.90
Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.100      21-4.100
Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.110      21-4.110
Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.110-1    21-4.110-1
Ch. 21, Art. 4, § 21-4.110-2    21-4.110-2
Ch. 21, Art. 7, § 21-7.10       21-7.10
Ch. 21, Art. 7, § 21-7.20       21-7.20
Ch. 21, Art. 7, § 21-7.30       21-7.30
Ch. 21, Art. 7, § 21-7.40       21-7.40
Ch. 21, Art. 7, § 21-7.50       21-7.50
Ch. 21, Art. 7, § 21-7.60       21-7.60
Ch. 21, Art. 7, § 21-7.70       21-7.70
Ch. 21, Art. 7, § 21-7.80       21-7.80
Ch. 21, Art. 7, § 21-7.80-1     21-7.80-1
Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.10       21-8.10
Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.20A      21-8.20A
Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.30       21-8.30
Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.40       21-8.40
Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.40-1     21-8.40-1
Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.40-2     21-8.40-2
Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50       21-8.50
Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-1     21-8.50-1
Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-2     21-8.50-2
Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-3     21-8.50-3
Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-4     21-8.50-4
Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-5     21-8.50-5
Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-6     21-8.50-6
Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-7     21-8.50-7
Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-8     21-8.50-8
Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-9     21-8.50-9
Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-10    21-8.50-10
Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.50-11    21-8.50-11
Ch. 21, Art. 8, § 21-8.60       21-8.60
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.10       21-9.10
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.20       21-9.20
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.20-1     21-9.20-1
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.20-2     21-9.20-2
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.20-3     21-9.20-3
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.20-4     21-9.20-4
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.20-5     21-9.20-5
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.20-6     21-9.20-6
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.30       21-9.30
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.30-1     21-9.30-1
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.30-2     21-9.30-2
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.30-3     21-9.30-3
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.30-4     21-9.30-4
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.30-5     21-9.30-5
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.40       21-9.40
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.40-1     21-9.40-1
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.40-2     21-9.40-2
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.40-3     21-9.40-3
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.40-4     21-9.40-4
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.40-5     21-9.40-5
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.40-6     21-9.40-6
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.50       21-9.50
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.50-1     21-9.50-1
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.50-2     21-9.50-2
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.50-3     21-9.50-3
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.50-4     21-9.50-4
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.50-5     21-9.50-5
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.50-6     21-9.50-6
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60       21-9.60
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-1     21-9.60-1
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-2     21-9.60-2
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-3     21-9.60-3
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-4     21-9.60-4
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-5     21-9.60-5
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-6     21-9.60-6
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-7     21-9.60-7
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-8     21-9.60-8
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-9     21-9.60-9
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-10    21-9.60-10
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-11    21-9.60-11
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-12    21-9.60-12
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.60-13    21-9.60-13
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.70       21-9.70
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.70-1     21-9.70-1
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.70-2     21-9.70-2
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.70-3     21-9.70-3
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.70-4     21-9.70-4
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.70-5     21-9.70-5
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.80       21-9.80
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.80-1     21-9.80-1
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.80-2     21-9.80-2
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.80-3     21-9.80-3
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.80-4     21-9.80-4
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.80-5     21-9.80-5
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.80-6     21-9.80-6
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.80-8     21-9.80-8
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.80-9     21-9.80-9
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.90       21-9.90
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.90-1     21-9.90-1
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.90-2     21-9.90-2
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.90-3     21-9.90-3
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.90-4     21-9.90-4
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.90-5     21-9.90-5
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.90-6     21-9.90-6
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.100      21-9.100
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.100-1    21-9.100-1
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.100-2    21-9.100-2
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.100-3    21-9.100-3
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.100-4    21-9.100-4
Ch. 21, Art. 9, § 21-9.100-5    21-9.100-5
Ch. 21, Art. 10, § 21-10.1      21-10.1
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-B            Ch. 21,
                                 Appendix 21-B
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-C            Ch. 21,
                                 Appendix 21-C
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-D            Ch. 21,
                                 Appendix 21-D
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-E            Ch. 21,
                                 Appendix 21-E
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.1 Ch. 21, App. F,
                                 21-F.1
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.2 Ch. 21, App. F,
                                 21-F.2
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.3 Ch. 21, App. F,
                                 21-F.3
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.4 Ch. 21, App. F,
                                 21-F.4
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.5 Ch. 21, App. F,
                                 21-F.5
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.6 Ch. 21, App. F,
                                 21-F.6
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.7 Ch. 21, App. F,
                                 21-F.7
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.8 Ch. 21, App. F,
                                 21-F.8
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.9 Ch. 21, App. F,
                                 21-F.9
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.10Ch. 21, App. F,
                                 21-F.10
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.11Ch. 21, App. F,
                                 21-F.11
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.12Ch. 21, App. F,
                                 21-F.12
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.13Ch. 21, App. F,
                                 21-F.13
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-F, § 21-F.14Ch. 21, App. F,
                                 21-F.14
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-G            Ch. 21, App.
                                 21-G
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-H            Ch. 21, App.
                                 21-H
Ch. 21, Appendix 21-I            Ch. 21, App.
                                 21-A
Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.1      21A-1.1
Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.2      21A-1.2
Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.3      21A-1.3
Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.4      21A-1.4
Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.5      21A-1.5
Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.6      21A-1.6
Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.7      21A-1.7
Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.8      21A-1.8
Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.9      21A-1.9
Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.10     21A-1.10
Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.11     21A-1.11
Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.12     21A-1.12
Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.13     21A-1.13
Ch. 21A, Art. 1, § 21A-1.14     21A-1.14
Ch. 22, Art. 1, § 22-1.1        22-1.1
Ch. 22, Art. 1, § 22-1.2        22-1.2
Ch. 22, Art. 1, § 22-1.3        22-1.3
Ch. 22, Art. 1, § 22-1.4        22-1.4
Ch. 22, Art. 2, § 22-2.1        22-2.1
Ch. 22, Art. 2, § 22-2.2        22-2.2
Ch. 22, Art. 2, § 22-2.3        22-2.3
Ch. 22, Art. 2, § 22-2.4        22-2.4
Ch. 22, Art. 2, § 22-2.5        22-2.5
Ch. 22, Art. 2, § 22-2.6        22-2.6
Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.1        22-3.1
Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.2        22-3.2
Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.3        22-3.3
Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.4        22-3.4
Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.5        22-3.5
Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.6        22-3.6
Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.7        22-3.7
Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.8        22-3.8
Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.9        22-3.9
Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.10       22-3.10
Ch. 22, Art. 3, § 22-3.11       22-3.11
Ch. 22, Art. 4, § 22-4.1        22-4.1
Ch. 22, Art. 4, § 22-4.2        22-4.2
Ch. 22, Art. 5, § 22-5.1        22-5.1
Ch. 22, Art. 5, § 22-5.2        22-5.2
Ch. 22, Art. 5, § 22-5.3        22-5.3
Ch. 22, Art. 5, § 22-5.4        22-5.4
Ch. 22, Art. 5, § 22-5.5        22-5.5
Ch. 22, Art. 5, § 22-5.6        22-5.6
Ch. 22, Art. 5, § 22-5.7        22-5.7
Ch. 22, Art. 6, § 22-6.1        22-6.1
Ch. 22, Art. 6, § 22-6.2        22-6.2
Ch. 22, Art. 6, § 22-6.3        22-6.3
Ch. 22, Art. 6, § 22-6.4        22-6.4
Ch. 22, Art. 6, § 22-6.5        22-6.5
Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.1        22-7.1
Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.2        22-7.2
Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.3        22-7.3
Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.4        22-7.4
Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.5        22-7.5
Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.6        22-7.6
Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.7        22-7.7
Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.8        22-7.8
Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.9        22-7.9
Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.10       22-7.10
Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.11       22-7.11
Ch. 22, Art. 7, § 22-7.12       22-7.12
Ch. 22, Art. 8, § 22-8.1        22-8.1
Ch. 22, Art. 8, § 22-8.2        22-8.2
Ch. 22, Art. 8, § 22-8.3        22-8.3
Ch. 22, Art. 8, § 22-8.4        22-8.4
Ch. 22, Art. 8, § 22-8.5        22-8.5
Ch. 22, Art. 9, § 22-9.1        22-9.1
Ch. 22, Art. 9, § 22-9.2        22-9.2
Ch. 22, Art. 9, § 22-9.3        22-9.3
Ch. 22, Art. 9, § 22-9.4        22-9.4
Ch. 22, Art. 9, § 22-9.5        22-9.5
Ch. 22, Art. 9, § 22-9.6        22-9.6
Ch. 22, Art. 9, § 22-9.7        22-9.7
Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.1        26-1.1
Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.2        26-1.2
Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.3        26-1.3
Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.4        26-1.4
Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.5        26-1.5
Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.6        26-1.6
Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.7        26-1.7
Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.8        26-1.8
Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.9        26-1.9
Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.10       26-1.10
Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.11       26-1.11
Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.12       26-1.12
Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.13       26-1.13
Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.14       26-1.14
Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.15       26-1.15
Ch. 23, Art. 1, § 23-1.16       26-1.16
Ch. 24, Art. 1, § 24-1.1        24-1.1
Ch. 24, Art. 1, § 24-1.2        24-1.2
Ch. 24, Art. 1, § 24-1.3        24-1.3
Ch. 24, Art. 1, § 24-1.4        24-1.4
Ch. 24, Art. 1, § 24-1.5        24-1.5
Ch. 24, Art. 1, § 24-1.6        24-1.6
Ch. 24, Art. 1, § 24-1.7        24-1.7
Ch. 24, Art. 1, § 24-1.8        24-1.8
Ch. 24, Art. 1, § 24-1.9        24-1.9
Ch. 24, Art. 1, § 24-1.10       24-1.10
Ch. 24, Art. 1, § 24-1.12       24-1.11
Ch. 24, Art. 1, § 24-1.13       24-1.12
Ch. 24, Art. 1, § 24-1.14       24-1.13
Ch. 24, Art. 1, § 24-1.15       24-1.14
Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.1        24-2.1
Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.2        24-2.2
Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.3        24-2.3
Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.4        24-2.4
Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.5        24-2.5
Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.6        24-2.6
Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.7        24-2.7
Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.9        24-2.8
Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.10       24-2.9
Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.12       24-2.10
Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.13       24-2.11
Ch. 24, Art. 2, § 24-2.14       24-2.12
Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.1        24-3.1
Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.2        24-3.2
Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.3        24-3.3
Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.4        24-3.4
Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.5        24-3.5
Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.6        24-3.6
Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.7        24-3.7
Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.8        24-3.8
Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.9        24-3.9
Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.10       24-3.10
Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.11       24-3.11
Ch. 24, Art. 3, § 24-3.12       24-3.12
Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.1        24-4.1
Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.2        24-4.2
Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.3        24-4.3
Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.4        24-4.4
Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.5        24-4.5
Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.7        24-4.7
Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.8        24-4.6
Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.9        24-4.8
Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.10       24-4.9
Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.12       24-4.10
Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.13       24-4.11
Ch. 24, Art. 4, § 24-4.14       24-4.12
Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.1        24-5.1
Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.2        24-5.2
Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.3        24-5.3
Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.4        24-5.4
Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.5        24-5.5
Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.6        24-5.6
Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.7        24-5.8
Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.8        24-5.7
Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.9        24-5.9
Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.10       24-5.10
Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.12       24-5.11
Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.13       24-5.12
Ch. 24, Art. 5, § 24-5.14       24-5.13
Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.1        24-6.1
Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.2        24-6.2
Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.3        24-6.3
Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.4        24-6.4
Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.5        24-6.5
Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.6        24-6.6
Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.7        24-6.7
Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.8        24-6.8
Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.9        24-6.9
Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.10       24-6.10
Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.11       24-6.11
Ch. 24, Art. 6, § 24-6.12       24-6.12
Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.1        24-7.1
Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.2        24-7.2
Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.3        24-7.3
Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.4        24-7.4
Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.5        24-7.5
Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.7        24-7.7
Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.8        24-7.6
Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.9        24-7.8
Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.10       24-7.9
Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.12       24-7.10
Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.13       24-7.11
Ch. 24, Art. 7, § 24-7.14       24-7.12
Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.1        24-8.1
Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.2        24-8.2
Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.3        24-8.3
Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.4        24-8.4
Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.5        24-8.5
Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.6        24-8.6
Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.7        24-8.7
Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.8        24-8.8
Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.9        24-8.9
Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.10       24-8.10
Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.11       24-8.11
Ch. 24, Art. 8, § 24-8.12       24-8.12
Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.1        24-9.1
Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.2        24-9.2
Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.3        24-9.3
Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.4        24-9.4
Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.5        24-9.5
Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.6        24-9.6
Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.7        24-9.7
Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.8        24-9.8
Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.9        24-9.9
Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.10       24-9.10
Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.11       24-9.11
Ch. 24, Art. 9, § 24-9.12       24-9.12
Ch. 24, Art. 10, § 24-10.1      24-10.1
Ch. 24, Art. 10, § 24-10.2      24-10.2
Ch. 24, Art. 10, § 24-10.3      24-10.3
Ch. 24, Art. 10, § 24-10.4      24-10.4
Ch. 25, Art. 1, § 25-1.1        25-1.1
Ch. 25, Art. 1, § 25-1.2        25-1.2
Ch. 25, Art. 1, § 25-1.3        25-1.3
Ch. 25, Art. 2, § 25-2.1        25-2.1
Ch. 25, Art. 2, § 25-2.2        25-2.2
Ch. 25, Art. 3, § 25-3.1        25-3.1
Ch. 25, Art. 5, § 25-5.1        25-5.2
Ch. 25, Art. 6, § 25-6.3        25-6.1
Ch. 25, Art. 7, § 25-7.1        25-7.1
Ch. 25, Art. 8, § 25-8.1        25-8.1
Ch. 25, Art. 8, § 25-8.2        25-8.2
Ch. 25, Art. 8, § 25-8.3        25-8.3
Ch. 25, Art. 9, § 25-9.1        25-9.1
Ch. 25, Art. 9, § 25-9.2        25-9.2
Ch. 25, Art. 9, § 25-9.3        25-9.3
Ch. 25, Art. 9, § 25-9.4        25-9.4
Ch. 25, Art. 9, § 25-9.5        25-9.5
Ch. 25, Art. 9, § 25-9.6        25-9.6
Ch. 25, Art. 9, § 25-9.7        25-9.7
Ch. 25, Art. 10, § 25-10.1      25-10.1
Ch. 25, Art. 11, § 25-11.1      25-11.1
Ch. 25, Appendix 25-1            Ch. 25,
                                 App. 25-1
Ch. 25, Appendix 25-2            Ch. 25,
                                 App. 25-1
Ch. 26, Art. 1, § 26-1.1        23-1.1
Ch. 26, Art. 1, § 26-1.2        23-1.2
Ch. 26, Art. 1, § 26-1.3        23-1.3
Ch. 26, Art. 1, § 26-1.4        23-1.4
Ch. 26, Art. 1, § 26-1.5        23-1.5
Ch. 26, Art. 1, § 26-1.6        23-1.6
Ch. 26, Art. 1, § 26-1.7        23-1.7
Ch. 26, Art. 1, § 26-1.8        23-1.8
Ch. 26, Art. 1, § 26-1.9        23-1.9
Ch. 27, Art. 1, § 27-1.1        16A-1.1
Ch. 27, Art. 1, § 27-1.2        16A-1.2
Ch. 27, Art. 1, § 27-1.3        16A-1.3
Ch. 27, Art. 2, § 27-2.1        16A-2.1
Ch. 27, Art. 3, § 27-3.1        16A-3.1
Ch. 27, Art. 4, § 27-4.1        16A-4.1
Ch. 27, Art. 4, § 27-4.2        16A-4.2
Ch. 27, Art. 4, § 27-4.3        16A-4.3
Ch. 27, Art. 4, § 27-4.4        16A-4.4
Ch. 27, Art. 4, § 27-4.5        16A-4.5
Ch. 27, Art. 5, § 27-5.1        16A-5.1
Ch. 27, Art. 6, § 27-6.1        16A-6.1
Ch. 27, Art. 7, § 27-7.1        16A-7.1
Ch. 27, Art. 8, § 27-8.1        16A-8.1
Ch. 27, Art. 9, § 27-9.1        16A-9.1
Ch. 27, Art. 10, § 27-10.1      16A-10.1
Ch. 27, Art. 10, § 27-10.2      16A-10.2
Ch. 27, Art. 10, § 27-10.3      16A-10.3
Ch. 27, Art. 10, § 27-10.4      16A-10.4
Ch. 27, Art. 10, § 27-10.5      16A-10.5
Ch. 27, Art. 10, § 27-10.6      16A-10.6
Ch. 27, Art. 11, § 27-11.1      16A-11.1
Ch. 28, Art. 1, § 28-1.1        38-1.1
Ch. 28, Art. 1, § 28-1.2        38-1.2
Ch. 28, Art. 1, § 28-1.3        38-1.3
Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.1        38-2.1
Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.2        38-2.2
Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.3        38-2.3
Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.4        38-2.4
Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.5        38-2.5
Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.6        38-2.6
Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.7        38-2.7
Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.8        38-2.8
Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.9        38-2.9
Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.10       38-2.10
Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.11       38-2.11
Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.12       38-2.12
Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.13       38-2.13
Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.14       38-2.14
Ch. 28, Art. 2, § 28-2.15       38-2.15
Ch. 28, Art. 3, § 28-3.1        38-3.1
Ch. 28, Art. 3, § 28-3.3        38-3.2
Ch. 28, Art. 3, § 28-3.4        38-3.3
Ch. 28, Art. 3, § 28-3.5        38-3.4
Ch. 28, Art. 4, § 28-4.1        38-4.1
Ch. 28, Art. 4, § 28-4.2        38-4.2
Ch. 28, Art. 5, § 28-5.1        38-5.1
Ch. 28, Art. 6, § 28-6.1        38-6.1
Ch. 28, Art. 6, § 28-6.2        38-6.2
Ch. 28, Art. 6, § 28-6.3        38-6.3
Ch. 28, Art. 6, § 28-6.4        38-6.4
Ch. 28, Art. 6, § 28-6.5        38-6.5
Ch. 28, Art. 6, § 28-6.6        38-6.6
Ch. 28, Art. 6, § 28-6.7        38-6.7
Ch. 28, Art. 6, § 28-6.8        38-6.8
Ch. 28, Art. 6, § 28-6.9        38-6.9
Ch. 28, Art. 6, § 28-6.10       38-6.10
Ch. 28, Art. 6, § 28-6.11       38-6.11
Ch. 28, Art. 6, § 28-6.12       38-6.12
Ch. 28, Art. 6, § 28-6.13       38-6.13
Ch. 28, Art. 7, § 28-7.1        38-7.1
Ch. 28, Art. 7, § 28-7.3        38-7.2
Ch. 28, Art. 7, § 28-7.4        38-7.3
Ch. 28, Art. 7, § 28-7.5        38-7.4
Ch. 28, Art. 7, § 28-7.6        38-7.5
Ch. 28, Art. 7, § 28-7.7        38-7.6
Ch. 28, Art. 8, § 28-8.1        38-8.1
Ch. 28, Art. 9, § 28-9.1        38-9.1
Ch. 28, Art. 9, § 28-9.2        38-9.2
Ch. 28, Art. 9, § 28-9.3        38-9.3
Ch. 28, Art. 9, § 28-9.4        38-9.4
Ch. 28, Art. 9, § 28-9.5        38-9.5
Ch. 28, Art. 9, § 28-9.6        38-9.6
Ch. 28, Art. 9, § 28-9.7        38-9.7
Ch. 28, Art. 10, § 28-10.1      38-10.1
Ch. 28, Art. 11, § 28-11.1      38-11.1
Ch. 28, Art. 11, § 28-11.2      38-11.2
Ch. 28, Art. 11, § 28-11.3      38-11.3
Ch. 28, Art. 11, § 28-11.4      38-11.4
Ch. 28, Art. 11, § 28-11.5      38-11.5
Ch. 28, Art. 11, § 28-11.6      38-11.6
Ch. 28, Art. 12, § 28-12.1      38-12.1
Ch. 28, Art. 12, § 28-12.2      38-12.2
Ch. 28, Art. 12, § 28-12.3      38-12.3
Ch. 28, Art. 12, § 28-12.4      38-12.4
Ch. 29, Art. 1, § 29-1.1        13-1.1
Ch. 29, Art. 1, § 29-1.2        13-1.2
Ch. 29, Art. 2, § 29-2.1        13-2.1
Ch. 29, Art. 2, § 29-2.2        13-2.2
Ch. 29, Art. 4, § 29-4.1        13-4.1
Ch. 29, Art. 4, § 29-4.2        13-4.2
Ch. 29, Art. 4, § 29-4.3        13-4.3
Ch. 29, Art. 4, § 29-4.4        13-4.4
Ch. 29, Art. 4, § 29-4.5        13-4.5
Ch. 29, Art. 4, § 29-4.7        13-4.6
Ch. 29, Art. 4, § 29-4.8        13-4.7
Ch. 29, Art. 5, § 29-5.1        13-5.1
Ch. 29, Art. 5, § 29-5.2        13-5.2
Ch. 29, Art. 6, § 29-6.1        13-6.1
Ch. 29, Art. 6, § 29-6.2        13-6.2
Ch. 29, Art. 6, § 29-6.3        13-6.3
Ch. 29, Art. 6, § 29-6.4        13-6.4
Ch. 29, Art. 6A, § 29-6A.1      13-6A.1
Ch. 29, Art. 6A, § 29-6A.2      13-6A.2
Ch. 29, Art. 6A, § 29-6A.3      13-6A.3
Ch. 29, Art. 6A, § 29-6A.4      13-6A.4
Ch. 29, Art. 6A, § 29-6A.5      13-6A.5
Ch. 29, Art. 6A, § 29-6A.6      13-6A.6
Ch. 29, Art. 6A, § 29-6A.7      13-6A.7
Ch. 29, Art. 7, § 29-7.1        13-7.1
Ch. 29, Art. 7, § 29-7.2        13-7.2
Ch. 29, Art. 7, § 29-7.3        13-7.3
Ch. 29, Art. 7, § 29-7.4        13-7.4
Ch. 29, Art. 7, § 29-7.5        13-7.5
Ch. 29, Art. 7, § 29-7.6        13-7.6
Ch. 29, Art. 8, § 29-8.1        13-8.1
Ch. 29, Art. 8, § 29-8.2        13-8.2
Ch. 29, Art. 8, § 29-8.4        13-8.4
Ch. 29, Art. 8, § 29-8.6        13-8.6
Ch. 29, Art. 8, § 29-8.7        13-8.7
Ch. 29, Art. 8, § 29-8.8        13-8.8
Ch. 29, Art. 8, § 29-8.9        13-8.9
Ch. 29, Art. 8, § 29-8.10       13-8.10
Ch. 29, Art. 8, § 29-8.11       13-8.11
Ch. 29, Art. 9, § 29-9.1        13-9.1
Ch. 29, Art. 9, § 29-9.2        13-9.2
Ch. 29, Art. 10, § 29-10.1      13-10.1
Ch. 29, Art. 10, § 29-10.2      13-10.2
Ch. 29, Art. 10, § 29-10.3      13-10.3
Ch. 29, Art. 10, § 29-10.4      13-10.4
Ch. 29, Art. 10, § 29-10.5      13-10.5
Ch. 29, Art. 10, § 29-10.6      13-10.6
Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.1      13-11.1
Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.2      13-11.2
Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.3      13-11.3
Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.4      13-11.4
Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.5      13-11.5
Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.6      13-11.6
Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.7      13-11.7
Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.8      13-11.8
Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.9      13-11.9
Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.10     13-11.10
Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.11     13-11.11
Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.12     13-11.12
Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.13     13-11.13
Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.14     13-11.14
Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.15     13-11.15
Ch. 29, Art. 11, § 29-11.16     13-11.16
Ch. 29, Art. 13, § 29-13.1      13-13.1
Ch. 29, Art. 13, § 29-13.2      13-13.2
Ch. 29, Art. 13, § 29-13.2A     13-13.2A
Ch. 29, Art. 13, § 29-13.3      13-13.3
Ch. 29, Art. 13, § 29-13.4      13-13.4
Ch. 29, Art. 14, § 29-14.1      13-14.1
Ch. 29, Art. 14, § 29-14.2      13-14.2
Ch. 29, Art. 14, § 29-14.3      13-14.3
Ch. 29, Art. 14, § 29-14.4      13-14.4
Ch. 29, Art. 14, § 29-14.5      13-14.5
Ch. 29, Art. 14, § 29-14.6      13-14.6
Ch. 29, Art. 15, § 29-15.1      13-15.1
Ch. 29, Art. 15, § 29-15.2      13-15.2
Ch. 29, Art. 15A, § 29-15A.1    13-15A.1
Ch. 29, Art. 15A, § 29-15A.2    13-15A.2
Ch. 29, Art. 15B, § 29-15B.1    13-15B.1
Ch. 29, Art. 15B, § 29-15B.2    13-15B.2
Ch. 29, Art. 16, § 29-16.1      13-16.1
Ch. 29, Art. 16, § 29-16.2      13-16.2
Ch. 29, Art. 16, § 29-16.3      13-16.3
Ch. 29, Art. 16, § 29-16.4      13-16.4
Ch. 29, Art. 16, § 29-16.5      13-16.5
Ch. 29, Art. 16, § 29-16.6      13-16.6
Ch. 29, Art. 16, § 29-16.7      13-16.7
Ch. 29, Art. 16, § 29-16.8      13-16.8
Ch. 29, Art. 17, § 29-17.1      13-17.1
Ch. 29, Art. 17, § 29-17.2      13-17.2
Ch. 29, Art. 17, § 29-17.3      13-17.3
Ch. 29, Art. 17, § 29-17.4      13-17.4
Ch. 29, Art. 18, § 29-18.1      13-18.1
Ch. 29, Art. 18, § 29-18.3      13-18.2
Ch. 29, Art. 18, § 29-18.4      13-18.3
Ch. 29, Art. 18, § 29-18.5      13-18.4
Ch. 29, Art. 18, § 29-18.6      13-18.5
Ch. 29, Art. 18, § 29-18.8      13-18.6
Ch. 29, Art. 19, § 29-19.1      13-19.1
Ch. 29, Art. 19, § 29-19.2      13-19.2
Ch. 29, Art. 19, § 29-19.3      13-19.3
Ch. 29, Art. 19, § 29-19.4      13-19.4
Ch. 29, Art. 19, § 29-19.5      13-19.5
Ch. 29, Art. 19, § 29-19.6      13-19.6
Ch. 29, Art. 19, § 29-19.7      13-19.7
Ch. 29, Art. 19, § 29-19.8      13-19.8
Ch. 29, Art. 20, § 29-20.1      13-20.1
Ch. 29, Art. 20, § 29-20.2      13-20.2
Ch. 29, Art. 21, § 29-21.1      13-21.1
Ch. 29, Art. 21, § 29-21.2      13-21.2
Ch. 30, Art. 1, § 30-1.1        30-1.1
Ch. 30, Art. 1, § 30-1.2        30-1.2
Ch. 30, Art. 1, § 30-1.3        30-1.3
Ch. 30, Art. 1, § 30-1.4        30-1.4
Ch. 30, Art. 1, § 30-1.5        30-1.5
Ch. 30, Art. 1, § 30-1.6        30-1.6
Ch. 30, Art. 2, § 30-2.1        30-2.1
Ch. 30, Art. 2, § 30-2.2        30-2.2
Ch. 30, Art. 2, § 30-2.3        30-2.3
Ch. 30, Art. 2A, § 30-2A.1      30-2A.1
Ch. 30, Art. 2A, § 30-2A.2      30-2A.2
Ch. 30, Art. 2A, § 30-2A.3      30-2A.3
Ch. 30, Art. 2B, § 30-2B.1      30-2B.1
Ch. 30, Art. 2B, § 30-2B.2      30-2B.2
Ch. 30, Art. 2B, § 30-2B.3      30-2B.3
Ch. 30, Art. 2C, § 30-2C.1      30-2C.1
Ch. 30, Art. 2C, § 30-2C.2      30-2C.2
Ch. 30, Art. 2C, § 30-2C.3      30-2C.3
Ch. 30, Art. 2D, § 30-2D.1      30-2D.1
Ch. 30, Art. 2D, § 30-2D.2      30-2D.2
Ch. 30, Art. 2D, § 30-2D.3      30-2D.3
Ch. 30, Art. 3, § 30-3.1        30-3.1
Ch. 30, Art. 4, § 30-4.1        30-4.1
Ch. 30, Art. 4, § 30-4.2        30-4.2
Ch. 30, Art. 4, § 30-4.3        30-4.3
Ch. 30, Art. 4, § 30-4.4        30-4.4
Ch. 30, Art. 4, § 30-4.5        30-4.5
Ch. 30, Art. 4, § 30-4.6        30-4.6
Ch. 30, Art. 4, § 30-4.7        30-4.7
Ch. 30, Art. 5, § 30-5.1        30-5.1
Ch. 30, Art. 5, § 30-5.2        30-5.2
Ch. 30, Art. 5, § 30-5.3        30-5.3
Ch. 31, Art. 1, § 31-1.1        31-1.1
Ch. 31, Art. 1, § 31-1.2        31-1.2
Ch. 31, Art. 1, § 31-1.3        31-1.3
Ch. 31, Art. 1, § 31-1.4        31-1.4
Ch. 31, Art. 1, § 31-1.5        31-1.5
Ch. 31, Art. 2, § 31-2.1        31-2.1
Ch. 31, Art. 2, § 31-2.2        31-2.2
Ch. 31, Art. 2, § 31-2.3        31-2.3
Ch. 31, Art. 2, § 31-2.4        31-2.4
Ch. 31, Art. 2, § 31-2.5        31-2.5
Ch. 31, Art. 3, § 31-3.1        31-3.1
Ch. 31, Art. 3, § 31-3.2        31-3.2
Ch. 31, Art. 3, § 31-3.3        31-3.3
Ch. 31, Art. 3, § 31-3.4        31-3.4
Ch. 31, Art. 3, § 31-3.5        31-3.5
Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.1        33-1.1
Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.2        33-1.2
Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.3        33-1.3
Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.4        33-1.4
Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.5        33-1.5
Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.5A       33-1.5A
Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.6        33-1.6
Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.7        33-1.7
Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.8        33-1.8
Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.9        33-1.9
Ch. 33, Art. 1, § 33-1.10       33-1.10
Ch. 33A, Art. 1, § 33A-1.1      33A-1.1
Ch. 33A, Art. 1, § 33A-1.2      33A-1.2
Ch. 33A, Art. 1, § 33A-1.3      33A-1.3
Ch. 33A, Art. 1, § 33A-1.4      33A-1.4
Ch. 33A, Art. 1, § 33A-1.5      33A-1.5
Ch. 33A, Art. 1, § 33A-1.6      33A-1.6
Ch. 33A, Art. 1, § 33A-1.7      33A-1.7
Ch. 33A, Art. 1, § 33A-1.8      33A-1.8
Ch. 33A, Art. 1, § 33A-1.9      33A-1.9
Ch. 33A, Art. 1, § 33A-1.10     33A-1.10
Ch. 34, Art. 1, § 34-1.1        27-1.1
Ch. 34, Art. 1, § 34-1.2        27-1.2
Ch. 34, Art. 1, § 34-1.3        27-1.3
Ch. 34, Art. 1, § 34-1.4        27-1.4
Ch. 34, Art. 1, § 34-1.5        27-1.5
Ch. 34, Art. 1, § 34-1.6        27-1.6
Ch. 34, Art. 1, § 34-1.7        27-1.7
Ch. 34, Art. 1, § 34-1.8        27-1.8
Ch. 34, Art. 1, § 34-1.9        27-1.9
Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.1        27-2.1
Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.2        27-2.2
Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.3        27-2.3
Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.4        27-2.4
Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.5        27-2.5
Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.6        27-2.6
Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.7        27-2.7
Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.8        27-2.8
Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.9        27-2.9
Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.10       27-2.10
Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.11       27-2.11
Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.12       27-2.12
Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.13       27-2.13
Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.14       27-2.14
Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.15       27-2.15
Ch. 34, Art. 2, § 34-2.16       27-2.16
Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.1        27-3.1
Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.2        27-3.2
Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.3        27-3.3
Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.4        27-3.4
Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.5        27-3.5
Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.6        27-3.6
Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.7        27-3.7
Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.8        27-3.8
Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.9        27-3.9
Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.10       27-3.10
Ch. 34, Art. 3, § 34-3.11       27-3.11
Ch. 34, Art. 4, § 34-4.1        27-4.1
Ch. 34, Art. 4, § 34-4.2        27-4.2
Ch. 34, Art. 4, § 34-4.3        27-4.3
Ch. 34, Art. 4, § 34-4.4        27-4.4
Ch. 34, Art. 4, § 34-4.5        27-4.5
Ch. 34, Art. 4, § 34-4.6        27-4.6
Ch. 34, Art. 4, § 34-4.7        27-4.7
Ch. 34, Art. 4, § 34-4.8        27-4.8
Ch. 34, Art. 4, § 34-4.9        27-4.9
Ch. 34, Art. 4, § 34-4.10       27-4.10
Ch. 34, Art. 5, § 34-5.1        27-5.1
Ch. 34, Art. 5, § 34-5.2        27-5.2
Ch. 34, Art. 5, § 34-5.3        27-5.3
Ch. 34, Art. 5, § 34-5.4        27-5.4
Ch. 34, Art. 5, § 34-5.5        27-5.5
Ch. 34, Art. 5, § 34-5.6        27-5.6
Ch. 34, Art. 5, § 34-5.7        27-5.7
Ch. 34, Art. 5, § 34-5.8        27-5.8
Ch. 34, Art. 5, § 34-5.9        27-5.9
Ch. 34, Art. 5, § 34-5.10       27-5.10
Ch. 34, Art. 6, § 34-6.1        27-6.1
Ch. 34, Art. 6, § 34-6.2        27-6.2
Ch. 34, Art. 6, § 34-6.3        27-6.3
Ch. 34, Art. 6, § 34-6.4        27-6.4
Ch. 34, Art. 6, § 34-6.5        27-6.5
Ch. 34, Art. 6, § 34-6.6        27-6.6
Ch. 34, Art. 6, § 34-6.7        27-6.7
Ch. 34, Art. 6, § 34-6.8        27-6.8
Ch. 34, Art. 7, § 34-7.1        27-7.1
Ch. 34, Art. 7, § 34-7.2        27-7.2
Ch. 34, Art. 7, § 34-7.3        27-7.3
Ch. 34, Art. 7, § 34-7.4        27-7.4
Ch. 34, Art. 7, § 34-7.5        27-7.5
Ch. 34, Art. 7, § 34-7.6        27-7.6
Ch. 34, Art. 7, § 34-7.7        27-7.7
Ch. 34, Art. 7, § 34-7.8        27-7.8
Ch. 34, Art. 7, § 34-7.9        27-7.9
Ch. 34, Art. 7, § 34-7.10       27-7.10
Ch. 36, Art. 1, § 36-1.1        28-1.1
Ch. 36, Art. 1, § 36-1.2        28-1.2
Ch. 36, Art. 1, § 36-1.3        28-1.3
Ch. 36, Art. 1, § 36-1.4        28-1.4
Ch. 36, Art. 1, § 36-1.5        28-1.5
Ch. 36, Art. 1, § 36-1.6        28-1.6
Ch. 36, Art. 1, § 36-1.7        28-1.7
Ch. 36, Art. 1, § 36-1.8        28-1.8
Ch. 36, Art. 1, § 36-1.9        28-1.9
Ch. 36, Art. 2, § 36-2.1        28-2.1
Ch. 36, Art. 2, § 36-2.2        28-2.2
Ch. 36, Art. 2, § 36-2.3        28-2.3
Ch. 36, Art. 2, § 36-2.4        28-2.4
Ch. 36, Art. 2, § 36-2.5        28-2.5
Ch. 36, Art. 2, § 36-2.6        28-2.6
Ch. 36, Art. 2, § 36-2.7        28-2.7
Ch. 36, Art. 2, § 36-2.8        28-2.8
Ch. 36, Art. 2, § 36-2.9        28-2.9
Ch. 36, Art. 2, § 36-2.10       28-2.10
Ch. 36, Art. 3, § 36-3.1        28-3.1
Ch. 36, Art. 3, § 36-3.2        28-3.2
Ch. 36, Art. 3, § 36-3.3        28-3.3
Ch. 36, Art. 3, § 36-3.4        28-3.4
Ch. 36, Art. 3, § 36-3.5        28-3.5
Ch. 36, Art. 3, § 36-3.6        28-3.6
Ch. 36, Art. 3, § 36-3.7        28-3.7
Ch. 36, Art. 3, § 36-3.8        28-3.8
Ch. 36, Art. 4, § 36-4.1        28-4.1
Ch. 36, Art. 4, § 36-4.2        28-4.2
Ch. 36, Art. 4, § 36-4.3        28-4.3
Ch. 36, Art. 4, § 36-4.4        28-4.4
Ch. 36, Art. 4, § 36-4.5        28-4.5
Ch. 36, Art. 4, § 36-4.6        28-4.6
Ch. 36, Art. 4, § 36-4.7        28-4.7
Ch. 36, Art. 4, § 36-4.8        28-4.8
Ch. 36, Art. 4, § 36-4.9        28-4.9
Ch. 36, Art. 5, § 36-5.1        28-5.1
Ch. 36, Art. 5, § 36-5.2        28-5.2
Ch. 36, Art. 5, § 36-5.3        28-5.3
Ch. 36, Art. 5, § 36-5.4        28-5.4
Ch. 36, Art. 5, § 36-5.5        28-5.5
Ch. 36, Art. 5, § 36-5.6        28-5.6
Ch. 36, Art. 5, § 36-5.7        28-5.7
Ch. 36, Art. 5, § 36-5.8        28-5.8
Ch. 36, Art. 6, § 36-6.1        28-6.1
Ch. 36, Art. 6, § 36-6.2        28-6.2
Ch. 36, Art. 6, § 36-6.3        28-6.3
Ch. 36, Art. 6, § 36-6.4        28-6.4
Ch. 36, Art. 7, § 36-7.1        28-7.1
Ch. 36, Art. 7, § 36-7.2        28-7.2
Ch. 36, Art. 7, § 36-7.3        28-7.3
Ch. 36, Art. 7, § 36-7.4        28-7.4
Ch. 36, Art. 7, § 36-7.5        28-7.5
Ch. 36, Art. 7, § 36-7.6        28-7.6
Ch. 36, Art. 7, § 36-7.7        28-7.7
Ch. 36, Art. 7, § 36-7.8        28-7.8
Ch. 36, Art. 7, § 36-7.9        28-7.9
Ch. 36, Art. 7, § 36-7.10       28-7.10
Ch. 36, Appendix 36-A            Ch. 28,
                                 App. 28-A
Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.1        37-1.1
Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.2        37-1.2
Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.3        37-1.3
Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.4        37-1.4
Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.5        37-1.5
Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.6        37-1.6
Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.7        37-1.7
Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.8        37-1.8
Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.9        37-1.9
Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.10       37-1.10
Ch. 37, Art. 1, § 37-1.11       37-1.11
Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.1        39-1.1
Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.2        39-1.2
Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.3        39-1.3
Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.4        39-1.4
Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.5        39-1.5
Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.6        39-1.6
Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.7        39-1.7
Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.8        39-1.8
Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.9        39-1.9
Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.10       39-1.10
Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.11       39-1.11
Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.12       39-1.12
Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.13       39-1.13
Ch. 39, Art. 1, § 39-1.14       39-1.14
Ch. 40, Art. 1, § 40-1.1        41-1.1
Ch. 40, Art. 1, § 40-1.2        41-1.2
Ch. 40, Art. 1, § 40-1.3        41-1.3
Ch. 40, Art. 2, § 40-2.1        41-12.1
Ch. 40, Art. 2, § 40-2.2        41-12.2
Ch. 40, Art. 2, § 40-2.3        41-12.3
Ch. 40, Art. 2, § 40-2.4        41-12.4
Ch. 40, Art. 2, § 40-2.5        41-12.5
Ch. 40, Art. 2, § 40-2.6        41-12.6
Ch. 40, Art. 2, § 40-2.7        41-12.7
Ch. 40, Art. 2, § 40-2.8        41-12.8
Ch. 40, Art. 2, § 40-2.9        41-12.9
Ch. 40, Art. 2, § 40-2.10       41-12.10
Ch. 40, Art. 3, § 40-3.1        40-4.1
Ch. 40, Art. 3, § 40-3.2        40-4.2
Ch. 40, Art. 3, § 40-3.3        40-4.3
Ch. 40, Art. 3, § 40-3.4        40-4.4
Ch. 40, Art. 4, § 40-4.1        41-22.1
Ch. 40, Art. 4, § 40-4.2        41-22.2
Ch. 40, Art. 4, § 40-4.3        41-22.3
Ch. 40, Art. 5, § 40-5.1        41-3.1
Ch. 40, Art. 5, § 40-5.2        41-3.2
Ch. 40, Art. 5, § 40-5.3        41-3.3
Ch. 40, Art. 5, § 40-5.4        41-3.4
Ch. 40, Art. 5, § 40-5.5        41-3.5
Ch. 40, Art. 5, § 40-5.6        41-3.6
Ch. 40, Art. 6, § 40-6.1        41-28.1
Ch. 40, Art. 6, § 40-6.2        41-28.2
Ch. 40, Art. 7, § 40-7.1        41-9.1
Ch. 40, Art. 7, § 40-7.2        41-9.2
Ch. 40, Art. 7, § 40-7.3        41-9.3
Ch. 40, Art. 7, § 40-7.4        41-9.4
Ch. 40, Art. 8, § 40-8.1        34-11.1
Ch. 40, Art. 8, § 40-8.2        34-11.2
Ch. 40, Art. 9, § 40-9.1        34-12.1
Ch. 40, Art. 9, § 40-9.2        34-12.2
Ch. 40, Art. 10, § 40-10.1      41-13.1
Ch. 40, Art. 10, § 40-10.2      41-13.2
Ch. 40, Art. 10, § 40-10.3      41-13.3
Ch. 40, Art. 10, § 40-10.4      41-13.4
Ch. 40, Art. 11, § 40-11.1      40-5.1
Ch. 40, Art. 11, § 40-11.2      40-5.2
Ch. 40, Art. 11, § 40-11.3      40-5.3
Ch. 40, Art. 12, § 40-12.1      40-6.1
Ch. 40, Art. 12, § 40-12.2      40-6.2
Ch. 40, Art. 12, § 40-12.3      40-6.3
Ch. 40, Art. 12, § 40-12.4      40-6.4
Ch. 40, Art. 12, § 40-12.5      40-6.5
Ch. 40, Art. 13, § 40-13.1      41-4.1
Ch. 40, Art. 13, § 40-13.2      41-4.2
Ch. 40, Art. 13, § 40-13.3      41-4.3
Ch. 40, Art. 14, § 40-14.1      41-5.1
Ch. 40, Art. 14, § 40-14.2      41-5.2
Ch. 40, Art. 14, § 40-14.3      41-5.3
Ch. 40, Art. 15, § 40-15.1      41-19.1
Ch. 40, Art. 15, § 40-15.2      41-19.2
Ch. 40, Art. 15, § 40-15.3      41-19.3
Ch. 40, Art. 15, § 40-15.4      41-19.4
Ch. 40, Art. 16, § 40-16.1      41-17.1
Ch. 40, Art. 16, § 40-16.2      41-17.2
Ch. 40, Art. 16, § 40-16.3      41-17.3
Ch. 40, Art. 16, § 40-16.4      41-17.4
Ch. 40, Art. 17, § 40-17.1      41-23.1
Ch. 40, Art. 17, § 40-17.2      41-23.2
Ch. 40, Art. 17, § 40-17.3      41-23.3
Ch. 40, Art. 18, § 40-18.1      41-15.1
Ch. 40, Art. 18, § 40-18.2      41-15.2
Ch. 40, Art. 18, § 40-18.3      41-15.3
Ch. 40, Art. 19, § 40-19.1      41-2.1
Ch. 40, Art. 19, § 40-19.4      41-2.4
Ch. 40, Art. 20, § 40-20.1      41-16.1
Ch. 40, Art. 20, § 40-20.2      41-16.2
Ch. 40, Art. 20, § 40-20.3      41-16.3
Ch. 40, Art. 20, § 40-20.4      41-16.4
Ch. 40, Art. 21, § 40-21.1      41-18.1
Ch. 40, Art. 21, § 40-21.2      41-18.2
Ch. 40, Art. 21, § 40-21.3      41-18.3
Ch. 40, Art. 21, § 40-21.4      41-18.4
Ch. 40, Art. 22, § 40-22.1      41-24.1
Ch. 40, Art. 22, § 40-22.2      41-24.2
Ch. 40, Art. 22, § 40-22.3      41-24.3
Ch. 40, Art. 23, § 40-23.1      41-11.1
Ch. 40, Art. 23, § 40-23.2      41-11.2
Ch. 40, Art. 23, § 40-23.3      41-11.3
Ch. 40, Art. 24, § 40-24.1      41-20.1
Ch. 40, Art. 24, § 40-24.2      41-20.2
Ch. 40, Art. 24, § 40-24.3      41-20.3
Ch. 40, Art. 24, § 40-24.4      41-20.4
Ch. 40, Art. 24A, § 40-24A.1    41-21.1
Ch. 40, Art. 24A, § 40-24A.2    41-21.2
Ch. 40, Art. 24A, § 40-24A.3    41-21.3
Ch. 40, Art. 24A, § 40-24A.4    41-21.4
Ch. 41, Art. 1, § 41-1.1        1-23.1
Ch. 41, Art. 1, § 41-1.2        1-23.2
Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.1        34-1.1
Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.2        34-1.2
Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.3        34-1.3
Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.4        34-1.4
Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.5        34-1.5
Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.6        34-1.6
Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.7        34-1.7
Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.8        34-1.8
Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.9        34-1.9
Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.10       34-1.10
Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.11       34-1.11
Ch. 41, Art. 2, § 41-2.12       34-1.12
Ch. 41, Art. 4, § 41-4.1        34-2.1
Ch. 41, Art. 5, § 41-5.1        41-7.1
Ch. 41, Art. 5, § 41-5.2        41-7.2
Ch. 41, Art. 6, § 41-6.1        34-3.1
Ch. 41, Art. 6, § 41-6.2        34-3.2
Ch. 41, Art. 6, § 41-6.3        34-3.3
Ch. 41, Art. 6, § 41-6.4        34-3.4
Ch. 41, Art. 6, § 41-6.5        34-3.5
Ch. 41, Art. 6, § 41-6.6        34-3.6
Ch. 41, Art. 6, § 41-6.7        34-3.7
Ch. 41, Art. 6, § 41-6.8        34-3.8
Ch. 41, Art. 7, § 41-7.1        34-4.1
Ch. 41, Art. 8, § 41-8.1        41-10.1
Ch. 41, Art. 8, § 41-8.2        41-10.2
Ch. 41, Art. 8, § 41-8.3        41-10.3
Ch. 41, Art. 8, § 41-8.4        41-10.4
Ch. 41, Art. 8, § 41-8.5        41-10.5
Ch. 41, Art. 8, § 41-8.6        41-10.6
Ch. 41, Art. 10, § 41-10.1      40-7.1
Ch. 41, Art. 10, § 41-10.2      40-7.2
Ch. 41, Art. 10, § 41-10.3      40-7.3
Ch. 41, Art. 10, § 41-10.4      40-7.4
Ch. 41, Art. 10, § 41-10.5      40-7.5
Ch. 41, Art. 11, § 41-11.1      2-25A.1
Ch. 41, Art. 11, § 41-11.2      2-25A.2
Ch. 41, Art. 11, § 41-11.3      2-25A.3
Ch. 41, Art. 11, § 41-11.4      2-25A.4
Ch. 41, Art. 11, § 41-11.5      2-25A.5
Ch. 41, Art. 12, § 41-12.1      15A-1.1
Ch. 41, Art. 12, § 41-12.2      15A-1.2
Ch. 41, Art. 12, § 41-12.3      15A-1.3
Ch. 41, Art. 12, § 41-12.4      15A-1.4
Ch. 41, Art. 12, § 41-12.5      15A-1.5
Ch. 41, Art. 12, § 41-12.6      15A-1.6
Ch. 41, Art. 12, § 41-12.7      15A-1.7
Ch. 41, Art. 12, § 41-12.8      15A-1.8
Ch. 41, Art. 12, § 41-12.9      15A-1.9
Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.1      40-8.1
Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.2      40-8.2
Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.3      40-8.3
Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.4      40-8.4
Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.5      40-8.5
Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.6      40-8.6
Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.7      40-8.7
Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.8      40-8.8
Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.9      40-8.9
Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.10     40-8.10
Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.11     40-8.11
Ch. 41, Art. 13, § 41-13.12     40-8.12
Ch. 41, Art. 14, § 41-14.1      41-29.1
Ch. 41, Art. 14, § 41-14.2      41-29.2
Ch. 41, Art. 14, § 41-14.3      41-29.3
Ch. 41, Art. 14, § 41-14.4      41-29.4
Ch. 41, Art. 15, § 41-15.1      34-5.1
Ch. 41, Art. 15, § 41-15.2      34-5.2
Ch. 41, Art. 15, § 41-15.3      34-5.3
Ch. 41, Art. 15, § 41-15.4      34-5.4
Ch. 41, Art. 15, § 41-15.5      34-5.5
Ch. 41, Art. 15, § 41-15.6      34-5.6
Ch. 41, Art. 15, § 41-15.7      34-5.7
Ch. 41, Art. 15, § 41-15.8      34-5.8
Ch. 41, Art. 16, § 41-16.1      15A-2.1
Ch. 41, Art. 16, § 41-16.2      15A-2.2
Ch. 41, Art. 16, § 41-16.3      15A-2.3
Ch. 41, Art. 17, § 41-17.1      15A-3.1
Ch. 41, Art. 17, § 41-17.2      15A-3.2
Ch. 41, Art. 17, § 41-17.3      15A-3.3
Ch. 41, Art. 18, § 41-18.1      15A-4.1
Ch. 41, Art. 18, § 41-18.2      15A-4.2
Ch. 41, Art. 18, § 41-18.3      15A-4.3
Ch. 41, Art. 18, § 41-18.4      15A-4.4
Ch. 41, Art. 18, § 41-18.5      15A-4.5
Ch. 41, Art. 18, § 41-18.6      15A-4.6
Ch. 41, Art. 18, § 41-18.7      15A-4.7
Ch. 41, Art. 19, § 41-19.1      6-12.1
Ch. 41, Art. 20, § 41-20.1      6-12.2
Ch. 41, Art. 21, § 41-21.1      41-14.1
Ch. 41, Art. 21, § 41-21.2      41-14.2
Ch. 41, Art. 21, § 41-21.3      41-14.3
Ch. 41, Art. 21, § 41-21.4      41-14.4
Ch. 41, Art. 21, § 41-21.5      41-14.5
Ch. 41, Art. 21, § 41-21.6      41-14.6
Ch. 41, Art. 21, § 41-21.7      41-14.7
Ch. 41, Art. 21, § 41-21.8      41-14.8
Ch. 41, Art. 21, § 41-21.9      41-14.9
Ch. 41, Art. 22, § 41-22.1      14-20.1
Ch. 41, Art. 22, § 41-22.2      14-20.2
Ch. 41, Art. 22, § 41-22.3      14-20.3
Ch. 41, Art. 22, § 41-22.4      14-20.4
Ch. 41, Art. 22, § 41-22.5      14-20.5
Ch. 41, Art. 22, § 41-22.6      14-20.6
Ch. 41, Art. 22, § 41-22.7      14-20.7
Ch. 41, Art. 22, § 41-22.8      14-20.8
Ch. 41, Art. 22, § 41-22.9      14-20.9
Ch. 41, Art. 23, § 41-23.1      14-21.1
Ch. 41, Art. 23, § 41-23.2      14-21.2
Ch. 41, Art. 23, § 41-23.3      14-21.3
Ch. 41, Art. 23, § 41-23.4      14-21.4
Ch. 41, Art. 23, § 41-23.5      14-21.5
Ch. 41, Art. 24, § 41-24.1      2-41.1
Ch. 41, Art. 24, § 41-24.2      2-41.2
Ch. 41, Art. 24, § 41-24.3      2-41.3
Ch. 41, Art. 25, § 41-25.1      40-1.1
Ch. 41, Art. 25, § 41-25.2      40-1.2
Ch. 41, Art. 25, § 41-25.3      40-1.3
Ch. 41, Art. 25, § 41-25.4      40-1.4
Ch. 41, Art. 25, § 41-25.5      40-1.5
Ch. 41, Art. 25, § 41-25.6      40-1.6
Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.1      40-2.1
Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.2      40-2.2
Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.3      40-2.3
Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.4      40-2.4
Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.5      40-2.5
Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.6      40-2.6
Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.7      40-2.7
Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.8      40-2.8
Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.9      40-2.9
Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.10     40-2.10
Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.11     40-2.11
Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.12     40-2.12
Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.13     40-2.13
Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.14     40-2.14
Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.15     40-2.15
Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.16     40-2.16
Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.17     40-2.17
Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.18     40-2.18
Ch. 41, Art. 26, § 41-26.19     40-2.19
Ch. 41, Art. 28, § 41-28.1      15-29.1
Ch. 41, Art. 28, § 41-28.2      15-29.2
Ch. 41, Art. 28, § 41-28.3      15-29.3
Ch. 41, Art. 28, § 41-28.4      15-29.4
Ch. 41, Art. 28, § 41-28.5      15-29.5
Ch. 41, Art. 28, § 41-28.6      15-29.6
Ch. 41, Art. 29, § 41-29.1      15A-5.1
Ch. 41, Art. 29, § 41-29.2      15A-5.2
Ch. 41, Art. 29, § 41-29.3      15A-5.3
Ch. 41, Art. 29, § 41-29.4      15A-5.4
Ch. 41, Art. 29, § 41-29.5      15A-5.5
Ch. 41, Art. 29, § 41-29.6      15A-5.6
Ch. 41, Art. 29, § 41-29.7      15A-5.7
Ch. 41, Art. 30, § 41-30.1      40-10.1
Ch. 41, Art. 30, § 41-30.2      40-10.2
Ch. 41, Art. 30, § 41-30.3      40-10.3
Ch. 41, Art. 31, § 41-31.1      41-6.1
Ch. 41, Art. 31, § 41-31.2      41-6.2
Ch. 41, Art. 31, § 41-31.3      41-6.3
Ch. 41, Art. 31, § 41-31.4      41-6.4
Ch. 41, Art. 31, § 41-31.5      41-6.5
Ch. 41, Art. 32, § 41-32.1      41-25.1
Ch. 41, Art. 32, § 41-32.2      41-25.2
Ch. 41, Art. 32, § 41-32.3      41-25.3
Ch. 41, Art. 32, § 41-32.4      41-25.4
Ch. 41, Art. 33, § 41-33.1      41-26.1
Ch. 41, Art. 33, § 41-33.2      41-26.2
Ch. 41, Art. 33, § 41-33.3      41-26.3
Ch. 41, Art. 33, § 41-33.4      41-26.4
Ch. 41, Art. 33, § 41-33.5      41-26.5
Ch. 41, Art. 33, § 41-33.6      41-26.6
Ch. 41, Art. 34, § 41-34.1      41-8.1
Ch. 41, Art. 34, § 41-34.2      41-8.2
Ch. 41, Art. 34, § 41-34.3      41-8.3
Ch. 41, Art. 34, § 41-34.4      41-8.4
Ch. 41, Art. 34, § 41-34.5      41-8.5
Ch. 41, Art. 34, § 41-34.6      41-8.6
Ch. 41, Art. 35, § 41-35.1      34-6.1
Ch. 41, Art. 35, § 41-35.2      34-6.2
Ch. 41, Art. 35, § 41-35.3      34-6.3
Ch. 41, Art. 36, § 41-36.1      34-7.1
Ch. 41, Art. 36, § 41-36.2      34-7.2
Ch. 41, Art. 36, § 41-36.3      34-7.3
Ch. 41, Art. 37, § 41-37.1      41-27.1
Ch. 41, Art. 37, § 41-37.2      41-27.2
Ch. 41, Art. 37, § 41-37.3      41-27.3
Ch. 41, Art. 37, § 41-37.4      41-27.4
Ch. 41, Art. 37, § 41-37.5      41-27.5
Ch. 41, Art. 37, § 41-37.6      41-27.6
Ch. 41, Art. 37, § 41-37.7      41-27.7
Ch. 41, Art. 37, § 41-37.8      41-27.8
Ch. 41, Art. 37, § 41-37.9      41-27.9
Ch. 41, Art. 38, § 41-38.1      15A-6.1
Ch. 41, Art. 38, § 41-38.2      15A-6.2
Ch. 41, Art. 38, § 41-38.3      15A-6.3
Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.1      34-8.1
Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.2      34-8.2
Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.3      34-8.3
Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.4      34-8.4
Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.5      34-8.5
Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.6      34-8.6
Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.7      34-8.7
Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.8      34-8.8
Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.9      34-8.9
Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.10     34-8.10
Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.11     34-8.11
Ch. 41, Art. 39, § 41-39.12     34-8.12
Ch. 41, Art. 40, § 41-40.1      34-9.1
Ch. 41, Art. 40, § 41-40.2      34-9.2
Ch. 41, Art. 40, § 41-40.3      34-9.3
Ch. 41, Art. 40, § 41-40.4      34-9.4
Ch. 41, Art. 40, § 41-40.5      34-9.5
Ch. 41, Art. 40, § 41-40.6      34-9.6
Ch. 41, Art. 40, § 41-40.7      34-9.7
Ch. 41, Art. 41, § 41-41.1      34-10.1
Ch. 41, Art. 41, § 41-41.2      34-10.2
Ch. 41, Art. 41, § 41-41.3      34-10.3
Ch. 41, Art. 41, § 41-41.4      34-10.4
Ch. 41, Art. 41, § 41-41.5      34-10.5
Ch. 41, Art. 41, § 41-41.6      34-10.6
Ch. 41, Art. 41, § 41-41.7      34-10.7
Ch. 41, Art. 41, § 41-41.8      34-10.8
Ch. 41, Art. 41, § 41-41.9      34-10.9
Ch. 41, Art. 41, § 41-41.10     34-10.10
Ch. 41, Art. 42, § 41-42.1      40-9.1
Ch. 41, Art. 42, § 41-42.2      40-9.2
Ch. 41, Art. 42, § 41-42.3      40-9.3
Ch. 41, Art. 42, § 41-42.4      40-9.4
Ch. 41, Art. 42, § 41-42.5      40-9.5
Ch. 41, Art. 42, § 41-42.6      40-9.6
Ch. 41, Art. 42, § 41-42.7      40-9.7
Ch. 41, Art. 42, § 41-42.8      40-9.8
Ch. 41, Art. 42, § 41-42.9      40-9.9
Ch. 41, Art. 42, § 41-42.10     40-9.10
Ch. 41, Art. 43, § 41-43.1      40-3.1
Ch. 41, Art. 43, § 41-43.2      40-3.2
Ch. 41, Art. 43, § 41-43.3      40-3.3
Ch. 42, Art. 1, § 42-1.1        32-1.1
Ch. 42, Art. 1, § 42-1.2        32-1.2
Ch. 42, Art. 1, § 42-1.3        32-1.3
Ch. 42, Art. 1, § 42-1.4        32-1.4
Ch. 42, Art. 1, § 42-1.5        32-1.5
Ch. 42, Art. 1, § 42-1.6        32-1.6
Ch. 42, Art. 2, § 42-2.1        32-2.1
Ch. 42, Art. 2, § 42-2.2        32-2.2
Ch. 42, Art. 2, § 42-2.3        32-2.3
Ch. 42, Art. 2, § 42-2.4        32-2.4
Ch. 42, Art. 2, § 42-2.5        32-2.5
Ch. 42, Art. 2, § 42-2.6        32-2.6
Ch. 42, Art. 2, § 42-2.7        32-2.7
Ch. 42, Art. 2, § 42-2.8        32-2.8
Ch. 42, Art. 2, § 42-2.9        32-2.9
Ch. 42, Art. 2, § 42-2.10       32-2.10
Ch. 42, Art. 3, § 42-3.1        32-3.1
Ch. 42, Art. 3, § 42-3.2        32-3.2
                                 
 
 
 
RESOLUTION AND ORDINANCE LISTS AND DISPOSITION TABLES
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No.        Date Passed  Code Section
88-102          4-13-1988    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
88-119          4-13-1988    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
88-121          6-8-1988     Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
88-165          6-8-1988     Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
88-171          6-8-1988     Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
89-124          5-10-1989    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
89-152          7-21-1989    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
89-155          5-24-1989    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
89-206          7-12-1989    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
89-225          7-21-1989    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
89-233          6-21-1989    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
89-264          7-12-1989    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
89-337          8-9-1989     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
89-354          8-9-1989     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
89-374          9-20-1989    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
89-375          9-20-1989    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
89-411          12-13-1989   Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
89-412          11-8-1989    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
89-440          10-11-1989   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
89-442          10-11-1989   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
89-443          10-11-1989   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
89-464          10-11-1989   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
89-491          11-8-1989    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
89-551          1-31-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
89-570          1-31-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-9            1-31-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-10           2-14-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-11           1-31-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-90           6-26-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-140          4-25-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-146          4-25-1990    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
90-147          4-25-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-153          4-25-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-154          4-25-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-193          12-5-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-218          5-23-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-219          9-12-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-220          5-23-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-224          5-23-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-254          10-17-1990   Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
90-302          7-25-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-303          10-3-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-304          12-5-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-331          7-25-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-356          8-8-1990     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-386          10-3-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-388          1-30-1991    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-405          9-12-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-408          12-5-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-418          10-3-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-426          10-3-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-432          10-3-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-433          10-3-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-452          10-17-1990   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-484          12-5-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-518          12-5-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-524          1-30-1991    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-526          12-5-1990    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-558          1-30-1991    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-559          8-7-1991     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-560          1-30-1991    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
90-561          1-30-1991    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
91-07           1-30-1991    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
91-08           1-30-1991    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
91-22           8-7-1991     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
91-85           4-10-1991    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
91-91           4-10-1991    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
91-148          7-24-1991    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
91-149          8-7-1991     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
91-162          9-11-1991    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
91-164          9-11-1991    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
91-169          8-7-1991     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
91-170          8-7-1991     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
91-177          9-11-1991    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
91-209          10-23-1991   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
91-250          11-13-1991   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
91-260          10-14-1992   Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
91-271          2-12-1992    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
91-300          2-12-1992    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-60           3-25-1992    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-68           4-15-1992    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-93           5-27-1992    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
92-94           5-6-1992     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-96           5-27-1992    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-100          5-6-1992     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-114          5-27-1992    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-131          6-17-1992    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-144          7-8-1992     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-146          7-8-1992     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-152          7-8-1992     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-156          7-8-1992     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-185          9-23-1992    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-193          10-14-1992   Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
92-223          10-14-1992   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-227          10-14-1992   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-242          12-2-1992    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
92-268          12-2-1992    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-272          12-2-1992    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-281          12-2-1992    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-282          12-2-1992    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-283          12-2-1992    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-286          3-10-1993    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
92-296          1-27-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-307          2-17-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
92-312          1-27-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-58           3-10-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-59           3-10-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-68           3-10-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-87           3-31-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-88           3-31-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-108          4-21-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-110          4-21-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-132          5-26-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-134          5-26-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-137          6-23-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-150          5-26-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-212          8-11-1993    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
93-213          7-14-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-215          7-14-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-219          7-14-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-223          8-11-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-225          9-29-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-229          8-11-1993    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
93-235          8-11-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-244          10-20-1993   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-251          8-11-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-259          9-29-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-272          9-29-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-284          9-29-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-286          12-1-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-292          11-10-1993   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-305          10-20-1993   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-316          12-1-1993    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-318          10-20-1993   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-339          10-12-1994   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-354          1-26-1994    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
93-376          1-26-1994    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
94-31           3-9-1994     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
94-49           3-9-1994     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
94-69           4-13-1994    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
94-85           4-13-1994    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
94-87           5-4-1994     Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
94-122          9-21-1994    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
94-123          9-21-1994    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
94-125          6-22-1994    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
94-160          6-22-1994    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
94-164          6-22-1994    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
94-177          8-31-1994    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
94-180          12-1-1994    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
94-202          9-21-1994    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
94-209          8-31-1994    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
94-212          9-21-1994    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
94-231          9-21-1994    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
94-232          5-24-1995    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
94-266          10-12-1994   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
94-280          3-8-1995     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
94-297          1-25-1995    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
94-322          12-1-1994    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
94-367          5-3-1995     Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
95-10           1-25-1995    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
95-72           3-8-1995     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
95-92           4-12-1995    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
95-120          5-3-1995     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
95-154          6-20-1995    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
95-190          6-20-1995    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
95-250          8-16-1995    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
95-251          8-16-1995    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
95-288          9-20-1995    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
95-345          6-26-1996    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
95-347          12-6-1995    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
95-354          1-24-1996    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
95-379          5-1-1996     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
95-380          1-24-1996    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
95-381          1-24-1996    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
96-03           1-24-1996    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
96-47           2-14-1996    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
96-66           5-1-1996     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
96-68           8-7-1996     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
96-72           3-13-1996    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
96-75           3-13-1996    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
96-114          5-1-1996     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
96-121          8-7-1996     Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
96-158          6-26-1996    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
96-162          6-26-1996    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
96-218          9-25-1996    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
96-219          10-16-1996   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
96-220          10-16-1996   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
96-271          12-4-1996    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
96-272          12-4-1996    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
96-273          12-4-1996    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
96-276          12-4-1996    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
96-287          1-29-1997    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
96-321          5-7-1997     Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
96-341          1-29-1997    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
97-48           2-19-1997    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
97-49           3-12-1997    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
97-64           3-12-1997    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
97-143          5-28-1997    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
97-177          6-18-1997    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
97-198          12-3-1997    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
97-230          8-6-1997     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
97-276          10-15-1997   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
97-293          10-15-1997   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
97-336          12-3-1997    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
97-342          12-3-1997    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
98-54           4-8-1998     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
98-179          10-14-1998   Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
98-224          6-30-1999    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
98-246          10-14-1998   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
98-259          11-10-1998   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
98-265          12-2-1998    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
98-272          1-27-1999    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
98-294          2-24-1999    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
98-306          12-2-1998    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
98-307          12-2-1998    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
98-316          6-9-1999     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
99-22           8-11-1999    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
99-41           3-17-1999    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
99-74           6-30-1999    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
99-145          6-30-1999    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
99-233          9-22-1999    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
99-256          11-10-1999   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
99-356          12-1-1999    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
99-359          3-15-2000    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
00-21           3-15-2000    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
00-40           5-24-2000    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
00-46           5-24-2000    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
00-68           4-26-2000    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
00-73           4-26-2000    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
00-98           6-14-2000    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
00-104          1-24-2001    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
00-105          10-18-2000   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
00-120          7-12-2000    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
00-144          8-9-2000     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
00-169          9-27-2000    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
00-186          10-18-2000   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
00-199          10-18-2000   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
00-215          11-15-2000   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
00-216          11-15-2000   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
00-217          11-15-2000   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
00-218          11-15-2000   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
00-219          11-15-2000   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
01-42           3-14-2001    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
01-58           12-12-2001   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
01-84           4-4-2001     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
01-141          5-30-2001    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
01-155          6-20-2001    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
01-185          7-11-2001    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
01-189          7-11-2001    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
01-190          7-11-2001    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
01-211          12-12-2001   Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
01-212          8-1-2001     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
01-228          9-11-2001    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
01-241          9-11-2001    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
01-250          9-11-2001    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
01-258          10-17-2001   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
01-323          12-12-2001   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
02-03           1-30-2002    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
02-10           02-20-2002   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
02-16           02-20-2002   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
02-24           2-20-2002    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
02-133          6-26-2002    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
02-211          8-7-2002     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
02-220          8-7-2002     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
02-221          8-7-2002     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
02-225          8-7-2002     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
02-226          8-7-2002     Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-H
02-271          11-13-2002   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
02-272          11-13-2002   Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-H
02-307          12-4-2002    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
02-310          12-4-2002    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
02-339          1-29-2003    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
03-25           2-26-2003    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
03-80           4-16-2003    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
03-92           5-7-2003     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
03-116          7-2-2003     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
03-123          6-4-2003     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
03-193          1-28-2004    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
03-218          9-24-2003    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
03-235          5-12-2004    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
03-237          9-24-2003    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
03-238          9-24-2003    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
03-262          10-15-2003   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
03-274          11-5-2003    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
03-297          12-3-2003    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
03-333          5-12-2004    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
03-348          1-28-2004    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
04-04           2-18-2004    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
04-11           2-18-2004    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
04-13           2-18-2004    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
04-49           3-24-2004    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
04-57           3-24-2004    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
04-64           4-14-2004    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
04-120          6-4-2004     Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
04-174          7-14-2004    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
04-241          9-22-2004    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
04-244          10-13-2004   Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
04-247          9-22-2004    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
04-251          9-22-2004    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
04-355          1-26-2005    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
04-391          1-26-2005    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
05-001          1-26-2005    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
05-056          3-16-2005    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
05-074          4-6-2005     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
05-116          5-11-2005    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
05-213          7-6-2005     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
05-241          1-25-2006    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
05-242          8-10-2005    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
05-251          9-28-2005    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
05-269          9-28-2005    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
05-310          10-19-2005   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
05-314          10-19-2005   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
05-316          10-19-2005   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
05-338          11-9-2005    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
05-351          12-7-2005    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
05-408          1-25-2006    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
05-415          2-15-2006    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
05-416          1-25-2006    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
06-022          3-1-2006     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
06-048          3-1-2006     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
06-054          3-1-2006     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
06-069          4-12-2006    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
06-106          4-12-2006    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
06-183          7-19-2006    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
06-239          7-19-2006    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
06-255          9-6-2006     Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
06-345          12-13-2006   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
07-001          1-24-2007    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
07-072          4-11-2007    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
07-118          6-6-2007     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
07-221          8-15-2007    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
07-247          9-19-2007    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
07-252          9-19-2007    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
07-278          10-17-2007   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
07-293          10-17-2007   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
07-317          11-7-2007    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
07-318          3-19-2008    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
07-350          12-12-2007   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
07-368          12-12-2007   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
07-383          1-23-2008    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
08-16           2-20-2008    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
08-21           2-20-2008    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
08-27           3-19-2008    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
08-140          11-12-2008   Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
08-195          9-24-2008    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
08-229          11-12-2008   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
08-234          11-12-2008   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
08-244          12-3-2008    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
08-258          2-3-2008     Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
08-266          1-28-2009    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
08-276          1-28-2009    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
09-133          5-27-2009    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
09-213          8-26-2009    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
09-240          8-26-2009    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
09-251          9-16-2009    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
09-253          9-16-2009    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
09-254          9-16-2009    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
09-265          10-27-2009   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
09-276          10-27-2009   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
09-277          10-27-2009   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
09-278          10-27-2009   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
09-302          11-18-2009   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
09-307          11-18-2009   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
09-309          11-18-2009   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
09-341          3-17-2010    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
09-347          1-27-2010    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
09-365          1-27-2010    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
10-134          9-22-2010    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
10-144          7-14-2010    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
10-143          8-18-2010    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
10-185          7-14-2010    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
10-199          8-18-2010    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
10-203          8-18-2010    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
10-209          8-18-2010    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
10-210          8-18-2010    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
10-211          8-18-2020    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-H
10-212          8-18-2020    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-H
10-276          12-8-2010    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
10-294          11-22-2010   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
10-323          1-26-2011    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
10-338          1-26-2011    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
10-339          1-26-2011    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
11-7            1-26-2011    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
11-48           3-16-2011    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
11-84           9-16-2011    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
11-170          8-17-2011    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
11-174          8-17-2011    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
11-179          9-6-2011     Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
11-211          8-17-2011    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
11-221          9-16-2011    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
11-277          12-7-2011    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
11-282          4-3-2012     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
12-47           4-25-2012    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
12-112          6-6-2012     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
12-114          6-6-2012     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
12-142          7-11-2012    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
12-165          8-15-2012    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
12-167          8-15-2012    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
12-195          9-12-2012    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
12-221          9-12-2012    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
12-292          12-5-2012    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
12-335          1-30-2013    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
12-336          1-30-2013    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
12-337          1-30-2013    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
13-65           5-8-2013     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
13-68           5-8-2013     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
13-136          7-10-2013    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
13-150          8-7-2013     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
13-208          9-11-2013    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
13-261          12-11-2013   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
14-165          8-13-2014    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
14-222          11-12-2014   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
14-279          12-10-2014   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
15-039          3-11-2015    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
15-117          6-3-2015     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
15-130          7-8-2015     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
15-247          10-7-2015    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
16-74           5-4-2016     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
16-127          8-3-2016     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
16-130          7-6-2016     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
16-133          7-6-2016     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
16-180          10-5-2016    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
16-203          9-7-2016     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
16-242          11-2-2016    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
16-265          11-2-2016    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
16-319          1-25-2017    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
16-325          1-25-2017    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
17-060          4-26-2017    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
17-069          3-22-2017    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
17-118          6-7-2017     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
17-228          9-6-2017     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
17-248          10-11-2017   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
17-273          11-1-2017    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
18-19           2-28-2018    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
18-36           2-28-2018    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
18-110          6-6-2018     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
18-123          7-11-2018    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
18-124          7-11-2018    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
18-148          8-15-2018    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
18-166          9-12-2018    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
18-238          12-5-2018    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
18-245          11-14-2018   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
18-288          1-30-2019    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
19-43, CD-1     7-3-2019     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
19-111, CD-1    7-3-2019     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
19-138, CD1     7-3-2019     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
19-267, CD1     11-6-2019    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
20-1, CD1       2-19-2020    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
20-21, CD1      2-19-2020    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
20-57, CD1      7-8-2020     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
20-69, FD1      4-15-2020    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
20-70, FD1      4-15-2020    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
20-97, CD1      5-6-2020     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
20-187, CD1     9-9-2020     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
20-226, CD1     5-5-2021     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
20-290, CD1     12-9-2020    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
21-16, CD1, FD1 6-2-2021     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
21-40, CD1      3-17-2021    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
21-61, CD1      4-14-2021    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
21-91, CD1      6-2-2021     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
21-115, CD1     6-30-2021    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
21-203, CD1     10-6-2021    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
21-204, CD1     10-6-2021    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
21-209, CD1     10-6-2021    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
21-259, CD1     12-1-2021    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
21-267, CD1     1-26-2022    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
21-281, CD1     1-26-2022    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
22-13, CD1      2-23-2022    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
22-61, CD1      5-4-2022     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
22-66, CD1      5-4-2022     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
22-117, CD1     6-1-2022     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
22-118, CD1     6-1-2022     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
22-141, CD1     7-6-2022     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
22-175, CD1     11-2-2022    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
22-220, CD1     10-5-2022    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
22-235, CD1     11-2-2022    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
23-35, CD1      6-7-2023     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
23-57, CD1      6-7-2023     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
23-90, CD1, FD1 6-7-2023     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
23-140, CD1     8-9-2023     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
23-178, CD1     9-6-2023     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
23-181, CD1     9-6-2023     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
23-184, CD1     9-6-2023     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
23-206, CD1     11-1-2023    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
23-238, CD1     11-1-2023    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
23-242, CD1     11-1-2023    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
23-244          12-1-2023    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-D
23-252, CD1     12-6-2023    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
23-253, CD1     11-1-2023    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
23-264, CD1     12-6-2023    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
23-272, CD1     - -          Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-H
23-273, CD1     12-6-2023    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-14, CD1      2-28-2024    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-23, CD1, FD1 4-17-2024    Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-H
24-24, CD1      3-25-2024    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-38, CD1      3-25-2024    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-39, CD1      3-25-2024    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-54, CD1      4-17-2024    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-57, CD1      4-17-2024    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-58, CD1      4-17-2024    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-71, CD1      4-17-2024    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-80, CD1      4-17-2024  Ch. 21,
                             Appendix 21-H
24-95, CD1      5-15-2024    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-110, CD1     5-15-2024    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-124, CD1     6-5-2024     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-142          7-10-2024    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-152          7-10-2024    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-154          8-7-2024     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-155          8-7-2024     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-156          8-7-2024     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-182          8-7-2024     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-208          10-9-2024    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-219          10-9-2024    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-225          10-9-2024    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-226          10-9-2024    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-227          10-9-2024    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-231          10-9-2024    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-250          11-7-2024    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-251          12-11-2024   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-255          12-11-2024   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-256          12-11-2024   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-258          12-11-2024   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
25-266          12-11-2024   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
24-277          12-11-2024   Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
25-23, CD1      1-29-2025    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
25-24, CD1      4-16-2025    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
25-39, CD1      2-26-2025    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
25-49, CD1      3-19-2025    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
25-68           4-16-2025    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
25-78           4-16-2025    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
25-80, CD1      4-16-2025    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
25-91, CD1      4-16-2025    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
                             Ch. 21,
25-92, CD1      4-16-2025    Appendix 21-H, Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
25-93, CD1      4-16-2025    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
25-95, CD1      4-16-2025    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
25-96, CD1      5-14-2025    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
25-108, CD1     5-14-2025    Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
25-120, CD1     6-4-2025     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
25-144, CD1     6-4-2025     Ch. 25,
                             Appendix 25-1
                            
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Editor’s note:
This table lists all ordinances after the latest ordinance appearing in the
1987 Cumulative Supplement to ROH 1978 (1983 Edition).
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
87-  10-14-   Adds article to Ch. 2, Oahu civil defense agency (2-25) (Eff. 8-13-1993)
97   1987
     1-20-    Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 8-10.24; amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 8-10.1(a)
88-1 1988     and (d) and 8-10.9(b)(6), real property tax exemptions (8-10) (Eff. tax year
              beginning 7-1-1988)
88-2 1-20-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Crestview) (Special)
     1988
88-3 1-20-    Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 13, enforcement of water safety rules
     1988     by lifeguards (2-41)
88-4 1-20-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for central Oahu (Special)
     1988
88-5 1-20-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
     1988
88-6 1-20-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
     1988     center (Special)
88-7 1-20-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Waianae (Special)
     1988
88-8 1-20-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolauloa
     1988     (Special)
88-9 1-20-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
     1988     center (Special)
88-  1-20-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
10   1988
88-  1-21-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 17, Mokuleia-Haleiwa (Special)
11   1988
88-  1-21-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Art. 4 of Ch. 6, salaries (5-3)
12   1988
88-  1-21-    Amends Ord. 87-71, appropriations for FY 1987-88 executive capital budget
13   1988     (amendment No. 4) (Special)
88-  2-18-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 2-18.2, budget execution (2-17) (Eff. FY 1989-90
14   1988     budget ordinance) (§ 2-17.2)
88-  2-18-    Amends Ord. 87-70, appropriations for FY 1987-88 executive operating budget
15   1988     (amendment No. 1) (Special)
88-  2-18-    Adds article to Ch. 1, R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.), on nondiscrimination (1-11)
16   1988
88-  2-18-    Amends Ord. 87-71, appropriations for FY 1987-88 executive capital budget
17   1988     (amendment No. 3) (Special)
88-  3-7-1988 Amends portion of zoning map No. 4, Nuuanu-McCully (Special)
18
88-  3-7-1988 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 15-13.6, selling on highways (15-13)
19
88-  3-7-1988 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 18-4.3, construction permit plans and
20            specifications (18-4)
88-  3-7-1988 Amends development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
21
88-  3-7-1988 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 32-1.14, development plan common provisions,
22            status review (24-1.13)
88-  3-7-1988 Adds section to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 29, waiver of certain rental fees,
23            department of auditoriums (38-6)
88-  3-16-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Art. 1 of Ch. 19A, model fire code (20-1; Ord. 15-
24   1988     45; Am. Ord. 17-14)
88-  3-16-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
25   1988     (Special)
88-  3-16-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolauloa
26   1988     (Special)
88-  3-16-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
27   1988
88-  3-16-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
28   1988     center (Special)
88-  3-16-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for central Oahu
29   1988     (Special)
88-  3-16-    Amends Ord. 87-71, appropriations for FY 1987-88 executive capital budget
30   1988     (amendment No. 5) (Special)
88-  3-16-    Regulates granting of grading and building permits for Lanikai (Kailua)
31   1988     (Special)
88-  4-7-1988 Amends portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani) (Special)
32
88-  4-7-1988 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
33            center (Special)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
88-  4-7-1988 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 15-13.10(1)(b), disabled vehicles (15-13)
34
88-  4-7-1988 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 15-13.11, unclaimed vehicles (15-13)
35
88-  4-7-1988 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 26-6.2, peddlers (13-6)
36
88-  4-7-1988 Amends portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special)
37
88-  4-7-1988 Amends portion of zoning map No. 11, Wahiawa-Whitmore (Special)
38
88-  4-7-1988 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Waianae (Special)
39
88-  4-7-1988 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Waianae (Special)
40
88-  4-7-1988 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 18-6.5, payment of plan review and permit fees (18-
41            6)
88-  4-22-    Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 3, salary commission (3-7)
42   1988
88-  4-22-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko (Special)
43   1988
88-  4-22-    Amends portion of State land use district boundary in Waianae (Special)
44   1988
88-  4-22-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 21A-3.140-1, land use, home occupations (21-3)
45   1988
              Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-3.90-8, 21A-5.50-2, 21A-5.60-2, 21A-6.40-2(J),
              21A-6.50-2(G), 21A-6.50-8(F), 21A-7.80-4(E), 21A-8.60-1, 21A-8.60-2; amends R.O.
              1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-1.50, 21A-3.30, 21A-3.40, 21A-3.50, 21A-3.70-3(A), 21A-
88-  4-22-    3.70-5(A), 21A-3.70-9, 21A-3.70-10, 21A-3.70-13(A) and (F), 21A-3.80, 21A-3.90-1,
46   1988     21A-3.90-3, 21A-3.90-4, 21A-3.120, 21A-3.130, 21A-4.70, 21A-6.30, 21A-6.50-2(E)
              and (F), 21A-7.10-2, 21A-7.10-4—21A-7.10-7, 21A-7.10-10—21A-7.10-13, 21A-7.80-4
              (C), 21A-8.60, amends Art. 9 of Ch. 21A and Tables 6-B, 10-B—10-D, 11-B—11-D, 13-
              A, 13-B, 14-A, 14-B, 15-A, 15-B, 16-B, 18-A, 20-A and 20-B and table of contents
              note of Ch. 21A, miscellaneous land use (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
88-  4-27-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 21A-3.70-3(C), Art. 9 of and Table 1 of Ch. 21A,
47   1988     land use, parking (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
88-  4-28-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 21A-6.20, land use, ohana dwellings (Repealed by
48   1988     Ord. 99-12)
88-  5-11-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 6, Red Hill-Ft. Shafter (Special)
49   1988
88-  5-11-    Adds section to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 15, parking enforcement by special
50   1988     officers (15-4)
              Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-4.40-37, 21A-4.40-25, 21A-4.40-16, 21A-4.40-14,
              21A-4.40-5 and 21A-4.40-3; amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-5.100, 21A-5.100-
              1 and Tables 17-A, 18-A, 18-B and 19-A of Ch. 21A; renumbers R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)
88-  5-11-    §§ 21A-4.40-32—21A-4.40-36 to 21A-4.40-38—21A-4.40-42, 21A-4.40-21—21A-4.40-31 to
51   1988     21A-4.40-26—21A-4.40-36, 21A-4.40-13—21A-4.40-20 to 21A-4.40-17—21A-4.40-24, 21A-
              4.40-12 to 21A-4.40-15, 21A-4.40-6—21A-4.40-11 to 21A-4.40-8—21A-4.40-13, 21A-
              4.40-4 to 21A-4.40-6 and 21A-4.40-3 to 21A-4.40-4; renumbers and amends R.O. 1978
              (1983 Ed.) § 21A-4.40-5 to 21A-4.40-7, land use, industrial districts (Repealed
              by Ord. 99-12)
88-  5-11-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 13-28.2, license and permit fees (15A-2)
52   1988
88-  5-18-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 15-4.10, slow moving vehicles (15-4) (Eff. 8-1-
53   1988     1988)
88-  5-18-    Repeals and replaces R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 26-7.4 and repeals R.O. 1978 (1983
54   1988     Ed.) § 26-7.5, dispensing racks (Repealed by Ord. 88-83)
88-  5-18-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
55   1988
88-  5-18-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-3.60, 21A-3.60-1 and Tables 7-B, 8-B and 9-
56   1988     B of Ch. 21A, land use, height measurement (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
88-  5-18-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-3.60(B), 21A-4.40-3 and Art. 9 and Tables 3-A,
57   1988     4-A, 5-A, 6-A, 7-A, 8-A, 9-A, 10-A, 11-A, 12-A, 13-A, 14-A, 15-A, 16-A, 17-A, 18-
              A, 19-A and 20-A, land use, broadcast antennas (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
88-  5-18-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for East Honolulu
58   1988     (Special)
88-  5-18-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
59   1988
88-  5-18-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko (Special)
60   1988
88-  5-18-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 15-4.1(5), traffic code, police exemption from
61   1988     parking fees (15-4)
88-  5-18-    Amends Ord. 87-70, appropriations for FY 1987-88 executive operating budget
62   1988     (amendment No. 2) (Special)
88-  6-6-1988 Amends portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu (Special)
63
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
88-  6-6-1988 Adopts FY 1988-89 executive operating budget appropriation (Special) (Eff. 7-1-
64            1988)
88-  6-6-1988 Adopts FY 1988-89 executive capital budget appropriation (Special) (Eff. 7-1-1988)
65
88-  6-6-1988 Adopts FY 1988-89 legislative budget (Special) (Eff. 7-1-1988)
66
88-  6-6-1988 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 19-4.1, plumbing code (Repealed by Ord. 90-28)
67
88-  6-6-1988 Abolishes urban redevelopment fund
68
88-  6-6-1988 Repeals R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Art. 11 of Ch. 5 (Repealer) (improvement district
69            assessment fund) (Eff. 7-1-1988)
88-  6-6-1988 Repeals R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Art. 22 of Ch. 5 (Repealer) (special assessment
70            revolving fund) (Eff. 7-1-1988)
88-  6-6-1988 Repeals R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Art. 5 of Ch. 5 (Repealer) (improvement revolving
71            fund)
88-  6-6-1988 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko (Special)
72
88-  6-6-1988 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko (Special)
73
88-  6-6-1988 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban center
74            (Special)
88-  6-6-1988 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko (Special)
75
88-  6-6-1988 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolauloa (Special)
76
88-  6-6-1988 Amends Exh. A to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 32-9.1, development plan special
77            provisions for Waianae (24-9)
88-  6-6-1988 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 26-11.5(c) and 26-11.6, litter control (13-4)
78
88-  6-19-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
79   1988
88-  6-19-    Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 5, housing development special fund (6-
80   1988     46) (Amended by Ord. 89-61)
88-  6-19-    Repeals R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Art. 43 of Ch. 5 (Repealer) (police officers defense
81   1988     fund)
88-  6-19-    Improvement district assessment levy, Nuuanu (Nuuanu Valley sewers) (Special)
82   1988
88-  6-24-    Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 26 and repeals R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Art.
83   1988     7 of Ch. 26, handbilling in Waikiki (13-7)
88-           Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 8-10.4(a) and (d), real property taxation (8-10)
84   7-5-1988 (Eff. upon approval of uniform ordinances by three counties or tax year beginning
              7-1-1990, whichever occurs first)
88-  7-5-1988 Amends portion of zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City (Special)
85
88-  7-5-1988 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for central Oahu
86            (Special)
88-  7-5-1988 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for North Shore (Special)
87
88-  7-5-1988 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for North Shore (Special)
88
88-  7-5-1988 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko (Special)
89
88-  7-5-1988 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban center
90            (Special)
88-  7-5-1988 Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 26-6.2, peddlers (13-6)
91
88-  7-20-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for Waianae (Special)
92   1988
88-  7-20-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 16-1.1, termite control (Repealed by Ord. 90-57)
93   1988
88-  7-20-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani) (Special)
94   1988
88-  7-20-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 15-25.1, pedestrian malls, Union St. Mall (15-25)
95   1988
88-  7-20-    Adds section to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 29, waiver of certain rental fees,
96   1988     department of auditoriums (38-6)
88-  7-20-    Adds chapter to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.), maintenance by assessments (14-27)
97   1988
              Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 12-1.21—12-1.26; amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 12-
88-  7-20-    1.12, 12-1.11(b) and 12-1.16(b); repeals and replaces R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 12-
98   1988     1.1, taxicabs; repeals R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 12-1.2 (35A-1) (Requires taximeter
              90 days after effective date of ordinance.)
88-  8-10-    Improvement district assessment levy, Kaneohe (Kaneohe sewers) (Special)
99   1988
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
88-  8-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
100  1988
88-  8-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
101  1988
88-  8-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Waianae (Special)
102  1988
88-  8-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Waianae (Special)
103  1988
88-  8-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for East Honolulu
104  1988     (Special)
88-  8-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for East Honolulu
105  1988     (Special)
88-  8-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
106  1988     (Special)
88-  9-29-    Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 2, form of annual executive operating
107  1988     budget and executive capital budget (2-18) (Eff. beginning with FY 1989-90
              budget bills)
88-  9-29-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 17, Mokuleia-Haleiwa (Special)
108  1988
88-  9-29-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 13-36.7, exceptional trees (40-8)
109  1988
88-  9-29-    Amends Ord. 88-65, appropriations for FY 1988-89 executive capital budget
110  1988     (amendment No. 1) (Special)
88-  10-24-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 19, Kahuku-Laie (Special)
111  1988
88-  10-24-   Amends portions of development plan public facilities map for central Oahu
112  1988     (Special)
88-  10-24-   Amends portion of development plan land use map for central Oahu (Special)
113  1988
88-  10-24-   Amends portions of development plan public facilities map for central Oahu
114  1988     (Special)
88-  10-24-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
115  1988     (Special)
88-  10-24-   Amends Ord. 86-92, portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani) (Special)
116  1988
88-  11-14-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
117  1988     center (Special)
88-  11-14-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
118  1988     center (Special)
88-  11-14-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
119  1988     center (Special)
88-  12-7-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
120  1988     center (Special)
88-  12-7-    Authorizing general obligation bonds and bond anticipation notes (Special)
121  1988
88-  12-7-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 27-1.3, golf cart rental fees (10-4)
122  1988
88-  12-7-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
123  1988     (Special)
88-  12-7-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for central Oahu
124  1988     (Special)
88-  12-9-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for East Honolulu; amends
125  1988     portion of zoning map No. 1, zoning for certain parcels located near Sandy
              Beach (Initiative) (Special)
89-1 1-19-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 17, Mokuleia-Haleiwa (Special)
     1989
89-2 1-19-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 24-1.1(a), 24-4.5, 24-4.13, 24-5.1 and 24-5.2,
     1989     improvement by assessment (14-19, 14-22, 14-23) (Eff. 7-1-1988, retroactively)
89-3 1-19-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
     1989     (Special)
89-4 1-19-    Amends portion of zoning map Nos. 9 and 10, Waipio (Crestview) and Waipio
     1989     (Mililani) (Special)
89-5 1-19-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
     1989     center (Special)
89-6 1-19-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
     1989     (Special)
89-7 1-26-    Amends Ord. 88-65, appropriations for FY 1988-89 executive capital budget
     1989     (amendment No. 3) (Special)
89-8 2-1-1989 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 15-25.1(2), bicycles on Fort St. Mall (15-25)
89-9 2-1-1989 Amends portions of development plan common provisions (24-1)
89-           Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 32-6.2(a)(4)(D), development plan special
10   2-1-1989 provisions for Koolaupoko; amends portion of development plan public facilities
              map for Koolaupoko (24-6) (Special)
89-  2-1-1989 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 32-8.2(a)(4)(D), development plan special
11            provisions for North Shore (24-8)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
89-           Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 32-9.2(a)(4)(D), development plan special
12   2-1-1989 provisions for Waianae; amends portion of development plan land use map for
              Waianae (24-9) (Special)
89-  2-1-1989 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 12-1.5(e), taxicab kickbacks (35A-1)
13
89-  2-1-1989 Adds Article 13 to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 26, dispensing racks along
14            Kalakaua Avenue (13-11)
              Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 32-2.2(a)(4)(E), (b)(2)(A) and (b)(9)(C),
89-  2-10-    development plan special provisions for primary urban center; amend portions
15   1989     of land use map and public facilities map for primary urban center (24-2)
              (Special)
89-  2-10-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 32-3.1 and 32-3.2(a)(4)(D), development plan
16   1989     special provisions for Ewa; amends portion of land use map and public
              facilities map for Ewa (24-3) (Special)
89-  2-10-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 32-7.2(a)(4)(D), development plan special
17   1989     provisions for Koolauloa; amends portion of land use map for Koolauloa (24-7)
              (Special); and State land use boundary for Koolauloa (Special)
89-  2-10-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 32-5.2(a)(4)(D), development plan special
18   1989     provisions for central Oahu; amends portion of land use map and public
              facilities map for central Oahu (24-5) (Special)
89-  2-23-    Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 28-1.4 and amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 28-1.2,
19   1989     advertising on buses (Amended by Ord. 91-27; 15B-6)
89-  2-23-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 4, Nuuanu-McCully (Special)
20   1989
89-  2-23-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City (Special)
21   1989
89-  2-23-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
22   1989     (Special)
89-  2-23-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
23   1989     center (Special)
89-  2-23-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Waianae (Special)
24   1989
89-  2-23-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
25   1989     center (Special)
89-  2-23-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
26   1989     (Special)
89-  2-23-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Pt.-Nanakuli (Special)
27   1989
89-  2-23-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 6, Red Hill-Ft. Shafter (Special) (Unilateral
28   1989     agreement was amended by Ord. 98-14)
89-  2-23-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 1-2.5, adoption of resolutions (1-2)
29   1989
89-  2-23-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu (Special)
30   1989
89-  2-23-    Amends Ord. 88-64, appropriations for FY 1988-89 executive operating budget
31   1989     (amendment No. 1) (Special)
89-  3-9-1989 Amends Ord. 88-65, appropriations for FY 1988-89 executive capital budget
32            (amendment No. 4) (Special)
89-  3-9-1989 Amends Ord. 87-106, general obligation bonds (Special)
33
89-  3-15-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for Waianae (Special)
34   1989
89-  3-15-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for primary urban center
35   1989     (Special)
89-  3-15-    Interim ordinance restricting golf course construction in AG-2 district
36   1989     (Special)
89-  3-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for North Shore and
37   1989     Koolauloa (Special)
89-  3-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for central Oahu
38   1989     (Special)
89-  3-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Waianae (Special)
39   1989
89-  3-15-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for Waianae (Special)
40   1989
89-  3-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
41   1989
89-  3-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
42   1989
89-  3-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for North Shore
43   1989     (Special)
89-  3-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
44   1989     center (Special)
89-  3-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
45   1989     center (Special)
89-  3-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
46   1989
89-  3-30-    Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 13, damage to public property (40-1)
47   1989
89-  3-30-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 15-23.2, public parking (15-23)
48   1989
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
89-  3-30-    Amends Ord. 88-64, appropriations for FY 1988-89 executive operating budget
49   1989     (amendment No. 2) (Special)
89-  4-18-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-3.160-1, 21A-3.160-2 and Art. 9 of R.O. 1978
50   1989     (1983 Ed.) Ch. 21A, land use, convention center (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
89-  4-18-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 32-2.2(b)(8), development plan special provisions
51   1989     for primary urban center (24-2)
              Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 21A-8.30-8; amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 21A-8.30-
89-  4-18-    4; repeals R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 21A-7.20—21A-7.90 and replaces with R.O. 1978
52   1989     (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-7.20—21A-7.90-6, Ch. 21A, Art. 7, Exhibits 1-18 and Tables
              21-A—21-G, land use, special district regulations and processing (Repealed by
              Ord. 99-12)
89-  4-18-    Amends portion of zoning map Nos. 4 and 5, Nuuanu-McCully and Kalihi- Nuuanu
53   1989     (Special)
89-  4-18-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 12-1.24, taxicabs (35A-1)
54   1989
89-  4-18-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa (Special)
55   1989
89-  4-18-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 28-2.1, public transit system fares (15B-1)
56   1989
89-  5-5-1989 Amends portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
57
              Adds section to Art. 2 and Art. 24 of R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 15; amends R.O.
89-  5-19-    1978 (1983 Ed.) 15-14.8, 15-15.1, 15-22.4, 15-22.11, 15-22.13, 15-23.2, special
58   1989     transit service vehicle parking for mobility handicapped (15-2, 15-14, 15-15,
              15-22, 15-23, 15-24)
89-  5-19-    Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.), maintenance of channels, streambeds,
59   1989     streambanks and drainageways (40-2)
89-  5-19-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 20-6.2(a) and 20-6.4, underground utilities (14-
60   1989     18)
89-  5-19-    Amends one section of R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 5, enacted by Ord. 88-80,
61   1989     housing development special fund, receipts and expenditures (6-46)
89-  5-19-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for North Shore
62   1989     (Special)
89-  5-19-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for Koolauloa (Special)
63   1989
89-  5-19-    Adds new chapter to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.), child care (11-1)
64   1989
89-  5-19-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 15-25.1, establishment of pedestrian malls (15-
65   1989     25)
89-  5-19-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for East Honolulu
66   1989     (Special)
89-  5-19-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolauloa
67   1989     (Special)
89-  5-19-    Interim ordinance for conduct of motor vehicle racing at Campbell Industrial
68   1989     Park (subject to repeal on 12-31-1991)
89-  5-24-    Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 27, commercial windsurfing (10-5)
69   1989
89-  5-30-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 32-4.2(a)(4)(D), development plan special
70   1989     provisions for East Honolulu; amends development plan land use map for East
              Honolulu (24-4) (Special)
89-  5-30-    Interim restriction on issuance of grading and building permits for certain
71   1989     property in vicinity of Sandy Beach (Special)
89-  6-1-1989 Amends portion of zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City (Special)
72
89-  6-1-1989 Amends portion of zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City (Special)
73
89-  6-1-1989 Appropriations for FY 1989-90 executive operating budget (Special) (Eff. 7-1-
74            1989)
89-  6-1-1989 Appropriations for FY 1989-90 executive capital budget (Special) (Eff. 7-1-
75            1989)
89-  6-1-1989 Appropriations for FY 1989-90 legislative budget (Special) (Eff. 7-1-1989)
76
89-  6-1-1989 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Edition) §§ 9-4.1 and 9-4.2, refuse collection and
77            disposal charges (9-4) (Eff. 7-1-1989)
89-           Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 15-15.1(2), 15-16.5, 15-22.4, 15-22.12, 15-
78   6-1-1989 22.13, 15-23.2, 15-23.7 and 15-23.8, traffic code, employee and public parking
              (§§ 15-15, 15-16, 15-22, 15-23)
89-  6-1-1989 Amends Art. 1 of R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 4, motor vehicle weight tax (§ 15A-3)
79            (Eff. 1-1-1990)
89-           Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 11-6.3(c) and 11-6.5(a), sewers; amends R.O.
80   6-1-1989 1978 (1983 Ed.) Appendices G and H, sewer service and cesspool charge schedules
              (14-6) (Eff. 7-1-1989)
89-  6-1-1989 Renumbers R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 27-1.3 to be 27-1.4 and adds new § 27-1.3;
81            amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 27-1.2, golf fees (10-4)
89-  6-1-1989 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 27-3.1, admission fees for Honolulu Zoo and
82            Foster Botanic Garden (10-2)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
89-  6-1-1989 Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 9-1.9, recycling coordinator (9-1)
83
89-  6-1-1989 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolauloa
84            (Special)
89-  6-1-1989 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
85            center (Special)
89-  6-1-1989 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
86            (Special)
89-  6-1-1989 Amends portion of development plan land use map for Koolaupoko (Special)
87
89-  6-1-1989 Amends portion of development plan land use map for Koolauloa (Special)
88
89-  6-22-    Amends Ord. 88-65, appropriations for FY 1988-89 executive capital budget
89   1989     (amendment No. 5) (Special)
89-  6-22-    Authorizes issuance of general obligation refunding bonds (Special)
90   1989
89-  7-3-1989 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolauloa
91            (Special)
89-  7-3-1989 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 15-22.12(2), 15-24.11(6) and 15-24.11-A(6),
92            parking for disabled persons (15-24)
89-  7-3-1989 Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 13, parking for disabled persons (15-
93            29)
89-  7-3-1989 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 15-13.9, abandoned vehicles on highways (15-13)
94
89-  7-3-1989 Adds new article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 22, memorials and names for city
95            parks, sites and facilities (22-9)
89-  7-3-1989 Improvement district assessment levy, Nanakuli (Special) (Amended by Ord. 90-
96            29)
89-  7-20-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 4, Nuuanu-McCully (Special)
97   1989
89-  7-20-    Authorizes issuance of general obligation bonds and bond anticipation notes
98   1989     (Special)
89-  7-27-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 28-1.2, advertising on buses
99   1989
89-  8-3-1989 Amends portion of zoning map No. 4, Nuuanu-McCully (Special)
100
89-  8-3-1989 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Waianae (Special)
101
89-  8-3-1989 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Waianae (Special)
102
89-  8-3-1989 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Waianae (Special)
103
89-  8-3-1989 Amends portion of development plan land use map for Waianae (Special)
104
89-  8-3-1989 Amends portion of development plan land use map and public facilities map for
105           Ewa (Special)
89-  8-3-1989 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 15-25.1(1), establishment of pedestrian malls
106           (15-25)
89-  8-3-1989 Amends portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki (Special)
107
89-  8-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
108  1989     center (Special)
89-  8-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
109  1989     center (Special)
89-  8-15-    Amends portion of special management area map for Koolaupoko (Special)
110  1989
89-  9-27-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Crestview) (Special)
111  1989
89-  10-4-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 23, Kailua-Keolu (Special)
112  1989
89-  10-4-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 9-1.1, 9-1.3, 9-1.4, 9-1.6 and 9-5.1, refuse
113  1989     (9-1, 9-5)
89-  10-4-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 9-1.0, solid waste (9-1)
114  1989
89-  10-4-    Adds section to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 9, recycling pilot project (9-1)
115  1989
89-  10-4-    Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 1, preference for recycled paper
116  1989     products (1-12)
89-  10-4-    Adds section to Art. 1 of R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 9; amends R.O. 1978 (1983
117  1989     Ed.) § 9-1.6, mandatory recycling program for city government (9-1)
89-  10-4-    Adds section to Art. 8 of R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 2; amends R.O. 1978 (1983
118  1989     Ed.) § 9-1.4, used oil recycling (9-1)
89-  10-4-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for North Shore
119  1989     (Special)
89-  10-4-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki (Special)
120  1989
89-  10-4-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 27-4.1, canoe storage facilities (10-2)
121  1989
89-  10-4-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili (Special)
122  1989
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
89-  10-4-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani) (Special) (Unilateral
123  1989     Agreement amended by Ord. 93-23)
89-  10-23-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
124  1989
89-  10-23-   Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 9, recycling of glass containers (9-7)
125  1989
89-  10-23-   Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 13, polystyrene foam containers (34-
126  1989     13)
89-  10-23-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
127  1989     (Special)
89-  10-23-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 1, Hawaii Kai (Special)
128  1989
89-  11-21-   Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 8-10.1, claims for certain exemptions from
129  1989     taxation (8-10)
              Adds section to Art. 24 of R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 15; amends R.O. 1978 (1983
89-  11-21-   Ed.) §§ 15-2.28(6), 15-19.40 and 15-24.5; repeals R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 15-
130  1989     24.8, traffic code, carrying animals and people in pickup trucks (15-2, 15-19,
              15-24)
89-  11-21-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu (Special)
131  1989
89-  11-21-   Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 8-10.4(d), real property taxation (8-10)
132  1989
89-  11-21-   Amends Ord. 89-75, appropriations for FY 1989-90 executive capital budget
133  1989     (amendment No. 1) (Special)
89-  11-21-   Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 16-3.10 and 16-5.6; adds Art. 8 to R.O. 1978 (1983
134  1989     Ed.) Ch. 16; amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 16-1.1(5), 16-2.14, 16-4.4 and 16-
              7.12, building code (Repealed by Ord. 90-57)
89-  11-21-   Amends Art. 7 of R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 18, fees and permits for building,
135  1989     electrical, plumbing and sidewalk codes (18-7)
89-  11-21-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
136  1989     (Special)
89-  11-21-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
137  1989     (Special)
89-  12-1-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 8-10.8, real property tax exemptions (8-10)
138  1989     (Eff. tax year beginning 7-1-1990)
89-  12-1-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for East Honolulu
139  1989     (Special)
89-  12-1-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 32-4.2(a)(4) and 32-4.3, development plan
140  1989     special provisions for East Honolulu (24-4)
89-  12-1-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 32-3.2(a)(4) and 32-3.3, development plan
141  1989     special provisions for Ewa; amends portion of development plan land use map for
              Ewa (24-3) (Special)
89-  12-1-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 32-8.2(a)(4) and 32-8.3, development plan
142  1989     special provisions for North Shore (24-8)
89-  12-1-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 32-5.2(a)(4) and (b) and 32-5.3, development
143  1989     plan special provisions for central Oahu; amends portion of development plan
              land use map for central Oahu (24-5) (Special)
89-  12-1-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 32-9.2(a)(4) and 32-9.3, development plan
144  1989     special provisions for Waianae; amends portion of development land use map for
              Waianae (24-9) (Special)
89-  12-1-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 32-7.2(a)(4) and 32-7.3, development plan
145  1989     special provisions for Koolauloa (24-7)
              Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 21A-1.60, 21A-3.120-3; amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)
89-  12-22-   §§ 21A-3.80, 21A-3.90-1, Ch. 21A, Tables 1, 4-B, 5-B and 20-A, §§ 21A-7.80-6(A)
146  1989     and (C), 21A-8.30-4(D), 21A-8.30-6(D), 21A-8.30-7(G), 21A-8.30-8(D) and 21A-
              8.60 and Art. 9 of R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 21A; repeals R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)
              §§ 21A-5.50-2 and 21A-5.60-2, miscellaneous land use (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
89-  12-28-   Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 8-3.3, penalty for delinquency in real property
147  1989     tax payments (8-3) (Eff. 7-1-1990)
89-  12-28-   Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 4, voter registration at driver
148  1989     licensing sites (4-5)
89-  12-28-   Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 2-12.1, duties of director of transportation
149  1989     services (2-12)
89-  12-28-   Interim restrictions on hillside development (Special) (Amended by Ords. 91-07
150  1989     and 91-94)
89-  12-28-   Repeals Art. 6 of R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 13, relating to dance houses
151  1989     (Repealer)
89-  12-28-   Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 32-2.2(a) and (b), 32-2.3 and 32-2.4(1)(A),
152  1989     development plan special provisions for primary urban center (24-2)
89-  12-28-   Amends Ord. 89-75, appropriations for FY 1989-90 executive capital budget
153  1989     (amendment No. 2) (Special)
              Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-3.120-1 and 21A-3.120-2; amends R.O. 1978
89-  12-28-   (1983 Ed.) Ch. 21A, Table 12-A, and § 21A-7.80-5; amends Art. 9 of R.O. 1978
154  1989     (1983 Ed.) Ch. 21A, land use, transient vacation units and bed and breakfast
              homes (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
89-  12-28-   Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-6.20-1 and 21A-6.20-2; amends R.O. 1978 (1983
155  1989     Ed.) §§ 21A-6.20 and 21A-8.30-3, land use, ohana dwellings (Repealed by Ord. 99-
              12)
90-1 1-10-    Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 2, department of parks and recreation
     1990     (2-16)
90-2 1-18-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 22-7.4 and 22-7.5, park dedication requirements
     1990     (22-7)
90-3 2-7-1990 Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 13, motor vehicle alarms; amends R.O.
              1978 (1983 Ed.) § 15-24.1, tampering with vehicles (15-24, 15A-5)
90-4 2-7-1990 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Waianae (Special)
90-5 2-7-1990 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 32-1.2(i), 32-1.3, 32-1.4(7) and 32-1.13(b)—(c),
              development plan common provisions (24-1)
90-6 2-7-1990 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 13-14.2, use of public recreation areas (10-1)
90-7 2-7-1990 Amends portion of zoning map No. 8, Waipahu (Special)
90-8 2-7-1990 Amends portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki (Special)
90-9 2-7-1990 Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.), seal and motto of department of prosecuting
              attorney (1-13)
90-  2-7-1990 Amends portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani) (Special)
10
90-  2-7-1990 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban center
11            (Special)
90-  2-7-1990 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 15-13.10(1), storage of impounded vehicles (15-13)
12
90-  2-7-1990 Amends Ord. 89-74, appropriations for FY 1989-90 executive operating budget
13            (amendment No. 2) (Special)
              Adds §§ 30-3.4 and 30-3.5 to Art. 3 of R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 30; adds R.O.
90-  2-23-    1978 (1983 Ed.) § 30-4.2; amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 5-38.3, 30-3.2 and 30-
14   1990     4.1; repeals R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 30-3.1, leasing of city property to nonprofit
              corporations and community associations (28-3, 28-4)
90-  2-23-    Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 21A-5.10-2; amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 21A-3.160-
15   1990     1 and Ch. 21A, Tables 3-A and 12-A, and amends Art. 9 of R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch.
              21A, land use ordinance, golf courses (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
90-  2-23-    Amends Ord. 89-75, appropriations for FY 1989-90 executive capital budget
16   1990     (amendment No. 3) (Special)
90-  2-28-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 32-6.2(a)(4) and 32-6.3, development plan special
17   1990     provisions for Koolaupoko; amends portion of development plan land use map for
              Koolaupoko (24-6) (Special)
90-  3-9-1990 Amends portion of zoning map No. 6, Red Hill-Ft. Shafter (Special)
18
90-  3-9-1990 Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 8-5.10 and 8-5.11, lien for collection of delinquent
19            real property taxes (8-5)
90-  3-9-1990 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Waianae (Special)
20
90-  3-9-1990 Amends portion of development plan land use map for primary urban center
21            (Special)
90-  3-9-1990 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko (Special)
22
90-  3-9-1990 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban center
23            (Special)
90-  3-9-1990 Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.), historic preservation (40-10)
24
90-  3-29-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 2, Kahala-Kuliouou (Special)
25   1990
90-  3-29-    Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 13, noise control (41-6)
26   1990
90-  3-29-    Interim restrictions on grading and building permit issuance in Lanikai hillside
27   1990     area of Kailua (Special) (Eff. 3-16-1990)
90-  3-29-    Repeals and replaces R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 19, plumbing code (19-1, 19-2, 19-
28   1990     3, 19-4, 19-5, 19-6; amended by Ord. 99-73) (Eff. 5-28-1990)
90-  3-29-    Amends Ord. 89-96, improvement district assessment levy for Nanakuli (Special)
29   1990
90-  4-11-    Amends portion of zoning map Nos. 13 and 14, Makakilo and Barber’s Point- Kahe-
30   1990     Nanakuli (Special)
90-  4-11-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 8-10.20, exemptions from real property taxation for
31   1990     low- and moderate-income housing (8-10)
90-  4-11-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko (Special)
32   1990
90-  4-11-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 27-3.1—27-3.4, admission fees for Honolulu Zoo and
33   1990     Foster Botanic Garden (10-2)
90-  4-11-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for Ewa (Special)
34   1990
90-  4-11-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
35   1990
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
90-  4-11-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
36   1990
90-  5-1-1990 Amends Ord. 89-74, appropriations for FY 1989-90 executive operating budget
37            (amendment No. 3) (Special)
90-  5-3-1990 Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.), acquisition of property by eminent domain
38            (Repealed by Ord. 16-29)
90-  5-3-1990 Amends portion of zoning map No. 4, Nuuanu-McCully (Special)
39
90-  5-22-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for central Oahu
40   1990     (Special)
90-  5-22-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 32-1.1, 32-1.2(g) and 32- 1.4(1), development plan
41   1990     common provisions, references to land use ordinance (24-1)
90-  5-22-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban center
42   1990     (Special)
90-  5-22-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 32-1.5(A)(i), (iv) and (v), development plan common
43   1990     provisions (24-1)
90-  5-22-    Improvement district assessment levy for Ewa Beach (Ewa Beach sewers) (Special)
44   1990
90-  5-29-    Amends Ord. 89-75, appropriations for FY 1989-90 executive capital budget
45   1990     (amendment No. 4) (Special)
90-  5-29-    Authorizes issuance and sale of general obligation bonds for water system
46   1990     improvements (Special)
90-  6-6-1990 Appropriations for FY 1990-91 legislative budget (Special) (Eff. 7-1-1990)
47
90-  6-6-1990 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 6-4.3, salaries of appointed officials of the
48            council (5-3)
90-  6-6-1990 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 2-18.1 and 2-18.2, execution of executive
49            operating budget and executive capital budget ordinances (2-17)
90-  6-6-1990 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 11-1.5(b), sewers (14-1)
50
90-  6-6-1990 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko (Special)
51
90-  6-5-1990 Appropriations for FY 1990-91 executive operating budget (Special) (Eff. 7-1-
52            1990)
90-  6-5-1990 Appropriations for FY 1990-91 executive capital budget (Special) (Eff. 7-1-1990)
53
90-  6-20-    Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 3, appointment to boards, commissions
54   1990     and committees (3-9)
90-  7-3-1990 Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 13, animal nuisances; repeals Art. 24 of
55            R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 13, barking dogs (12-2)
90-  7-3-1990 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 17-1.2(a), 17-3.6 and 17-5.1(a), electrical code
56            (17-1, 17-3, 17-5) (Eff. 9-1-1990)
              Repeals Arts. 1—5, 7 and 8 of R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 16, and adds new Arts. 1—5
90-  7-3-1990 and 7—10 to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 16, building code (16-1, 16-2, 16-3, 16-4,
57            16-7, 16-8, 16-9, 16-10, 16-11) (Eff. 10-1-1990) (Art. 9, Ch. 16, repealed by
              Ord. 97-16)
90-  7-3-1990 Amends portion of State land use district map for Ewa (Special)
58
90-  7-3-1990 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko (Special)
59
90-  7-3-1990 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for central Oahu
60            (Special)
90-  7-25-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City (Special)
61   1990
90-  7-25-    Adds chapter to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.), water management (30-1, 30-2, 30-3)
62   1990     (Amended in part by Ord. 91-61)
90-  7-25-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban center
63   1990     (Special)
90-  7-25-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
64   1990
90-  7-25-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for East Honolulu
65   1990     (Special)
90-  7-25-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for central Oahu
66   1990     (Special)
90-  7-25-    Improvement district assessment levy for Makaha (Special)
67   1990
90-  7-26-    Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.), reporting of real property interests owned
68   1990     or acquired by foreign persons (Repealed by Ord. 04-03)
90-  7-26-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 2, Kahala-Kuliouou (Special)
69   1990
90-  8-7-1990 Authorization for general obligation bonds and bond anticipation notes (Special)
70
90-  8-22-    Renumbers R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 23-4.2—23-4.4 to be 23-4.5—23-4.7; adds new §§
71   1990     23-4.2—23-4.4, grading (29-4)
90-  8-22-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City (Special)
72   1990
90-  8-22-    Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 15-16.8, traffic code (15-16)
73   1990
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
90-  9-12-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 30-3.3, lease and rental of city property (38-3)
74   1990
90-  9-26-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili (Special)
75   1990
90-  9-26-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 15-13.12, traffic code, motorcycle, motor scooter
76   1990     and moped parking (15-13)
              Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 15-26.10A; amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 12-5.17,
              13-14.6, 15-6.7, 15-13.6, 15-15.1, 15-16.2, 15-16.8, 15-22.11, 15-23.6, 15-
90-  10-16-   24.11-A, 15-26.1, 15-26.3, 15-26.4, 15-26.6, 15-26.10; repeals R.O. 1978 (1983
77   1990     Ed.) §§ 15-4.2, 15-13.7, 15-22.12, 15-22.13, 15-23.7, 15-23.8 and 15-26.5,
              traffic code (violations) (10-1, 15-6, 15-13, 15-15, 15-16, 15-22, 15-23, 15-
              24, 15-26, 35A-5) (Eff. 1-1-1991)
90-  10-16-   Amends portions of zoning map Nos. 8 and 13, Waipahu and Makakilo (Special)
78   1990
90-  10-22-   Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 15, traffic code, closure of certain
79   1990     county highways to large passenger carrier vehicles (15-27) (Eff. 1-20-1991)
              Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 5; renumbers R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch.
90-  10-24-   11, Art. 10 to be Art. 11 and adds new Article 10 to Ch. 11; amends R.O. 1978
80   1990     (1983 Ed.) 11-1.2; adds new Appendix to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 11, wastewater
              systems and fees (6-47, 14-1, 14-10, 14-11)
90-  10-26-   Regulating for an interim period the granting of applications for conditional
81   1990     use permits in designated portions of the OR&L right-of-way (Special) (Amended
              by Ords. 91-26 and 91-79)
90-  10-26-   Adds section to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 3, Art. 3, art inspection, inventory
82   1990     and maintenance (3-2)
90-  10-26-   Regulating for an interim period development within portions of Kalihi Valley
83   1990     (Special) (Amended by Ord. 91-81)
90-  10-26-   Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 12-1.9, 12-1.11 and 12-1.12, taxicabs (35A-1)
84   1990     (Eff. 7-1-1991)
90-  11-26-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu (Special)
85   1990
90-  11-26-   Amends portion of the development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
86   1990
90-  11-26-   Amends portion of the development plan land use map for the primary urban
87   1990     center (Special)
90-  11-26-   Amends portion of the development plan public facilities map for the North
88   1990     Shore (Special)
90-  11-21-   Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 32-1.2, development plan common provisions (24-1)
89   1990
90-  11-26-   Amends portion of the development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
90   1990
90-  11-26-   Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 24, improvement by assessment (14-19, 14-20,
91   1990     14-21, 14-22, 14-23, 14-24, 14-25, 14-26)
90-  11-26-   Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 13-29.5, enforcement of disposal of weeds, garbage,
92   1990     trash and waste from property (40-7)
90-  11-26-   Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-3.140-1, Ch. 21A, Tables 4-A—12-A, Ch. 21A,
93   1990     Art. 9; repeals R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 21A-3.140-2 and 21A-4.40-19, land use,
              pet-keeping regulations (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
90-  11-26-   Amends portion of zoning map Nos. 9 and 10, Waipio (Crestview) and Waipio
94   1990     (Mililani) (Special)
90-  11-23-   Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 13, condominium real property leases
95   1990     (41-33)
90-  12-14-   Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 6-1.3 and 6-1.5, standards of conduct (3-8)
96   1990
90-  12-14-   Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 13-20.5 and 13-20.6, swimming pools (16-6)
97   1990
90-  12-14-   Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 15-23.2, traffic code, charges for parking (15-
98   1990     23)
91-  2-5-1991 Amends portions of development plan land use map and public facilities map for
01            primary urban center (Special)
91-  2-7-1991 Amends Exhibit B to 2-18.3, executive capital budget bill form (Eff. beginning
02            with FY 1991-92 annual budget bills)
91-  2-27-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 32-3.2(a)(3), (b)(1)(A) and (b)(4), development
03   1991     plan special provisions for Ewa; amends portions of development plan land use
              map and public facilities map for Ewa (24-3) (Special)
91-  2-27-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 32-5.2, development plan special provisions for
04   1991     central Oahu; amends portion of development plan land use map for central Oahu
              (24-5) (Special)
91-  2-27-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
05   1991     center (Special)
91-  2-27-    Adds section to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 30, Art. 4, child care (11-1)
06   1991
91-  2-27-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 23-1.4 and 23-4.2, grading, soil erosion and
07   1991     sediment control (29-1, 29-4)
91-  2-27-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 23-2.2 and 23-2.3, grading, soil erosion and
08   1991     sediment control (29-2)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
91-  2-27-    Amends Ord. 89-150, regulating for an interim period urban development within
09   1991     Oahu hillsides (Special)
91-  3-5-1991 Amends portions of development plan land use map for Koolaupoko (Special)
10
91-  3-13-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Crestview) (Special) (Amended by
11   1991     Ords. 92-19 and 01-42)
91-  3-14-    Regulates for an interim period development within Barber’s Point shoreline
12   1991     area (Special)
91-  3-14-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 15-23.2 and 15-23.5, traffic code, public
13   1991     parking (15-23)
91-  3-14-    Amends portions of development plan land use map for primary urban center
14   1991     (Special)
91-  3-14-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 32-2.2, development plan special provisions for
15   1991     primary urban center (24-2)
91-  3-18-    Amends Ord. 90-53, appropriations for FY 1990-91 executive capital budget
16   1991     (amendment No. 1) (Special)
91-  3-21-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special)
17   1991
91-  3-21-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi to Nuuanu (Special)
18   1991
91-  3-21-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
19   1991
91-  3-21-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
20   1991
91-  3-21-    Amends Ord. 90-52, appropriations for FY 1990-91 executive operating budget
21   1991     (amendment No. 1) (Special)
91-  4-22-    Regulates for an interim period development in Waikiki (Special)
22   1991
91-  4-23-    Adds section to Art. 4 of R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 24, and amends R.O. 1978
23   1991     (1983 Ed.) §§ 24-2.1 and 24-3.5, public works infrastructure, improvement
              districts (14-20, 14-21, 14-22)
91-  4-23-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 2-19.2, executive operating budget bill form (2-
24   1991     18) (Eff. beginning with FY 1991-92 annual budget bills)
91-  4-23-    Adds section to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 20, Art. 5; amends §§ 20-5.3 and 20-
25   1991     5.5, public works, construction of improvements (14-17)
91-  4-23-    Amends Ord. 90-81, OR&L right-of-way interim development controls (Special)
26   1991
              Adds new Arts. 1A, 1B and 1C to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 28, public transit;
              adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 4-2.1 and 4-2.3, OMPO; amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.)
              2-4.2, 2-8.1, 2-9.1, 2-12.1, 2-16.1, 2-16.3 and 2-18.2, public transit
              authority; 5-23.2, bus transportation fund; 6-2.2 and 6-4.2(b), bonds and
              salaries of officers and employees; 13-41.2, 13-41.9 and 13-46.1, public
              transit authority; 15-2.22, 15-2.28, 15-3.1(a), 15-6.7, 15-14.8, 15-15.3, 15-
91-           15.4, traffic code; 28-2.1, 28-2.2, 28-2.3, 28-2.5, 28-2.6, 28-3.1, 28-3.2, 28-
27   5-1-1991 3.4, 28-4.1, 28-4.2, 28-4.3, 28-4.5, 28-4.6 and 28-4.7, public transit; and 30-
              1.2, lease and rental of city real property; renumbers and amends R.O. 1978
              (1983 Ed.) § 4-2.1 to be 4-2.2, 4-2.2 to be 4-2.4, 4-2.3 to be 4-2.5 and 4-2.4
              to be 4-2.6, public transit authority; and repeals R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 28,
              Art. 1, public transit (Eff. 1-1-1992) (2-4, 2-5, 2-8, 2-12, 2-17, 2-19, 4-2,
              5-1, 15-2, 15-3, 15-6, 15-14, 15-15, 15B-2, 15B-3, 15B-4, 15B-6, 38-1, 41-1)
              (§§ 15B-3.4, 15B-6.3 repealed by Ord. 23-21; Art. 9, Ch. 2, repealed by Ord.
              16-29; Art. 5, Ch. 13, repealed by Ord. 97-02)
91-  5-7-1991 Adds section to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 18, Art. 7; and amends R.O. 1978 (1983
28            Ed.) § 18-5.4(d), fees and permits for technical codes (18-5, 18-7)
91-  5-7-1991 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 26-10.1 and 26-10.3(e), use of malls (13-10)
29
91-  5-29-    Adds article to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 1, personal names on signs relating to
30   1991     public projects and governmental activities (1-14)
91-  5-30-    Appropriations for FY 1991-92 executive operating budget (Special) (Eff. 7-1-
31   1991     1991)
91-  5-30-    Appropriations for FY 1991-92 executive capital budget (Special) (Eff. 7-1-
32   1991     1991)
91-  6-5-1991 Appropriations for FY 1991-92 legislative budget (Special) (Eff. 7-1-1991)
33
91-  6-5-1991 Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 11, Appx. G, sewer service charges and Appx. H,
34            cesspool charges (Appx. A, B) (Eff. 7-1-1991)
91-  6-5-1991 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for North Shore
35            (Special)
91-  6-5-1991 Amends portion of zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Special)
36
91-  6-25-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for Koolaupoko (Special)
37   1991
91-  6-25-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 13-36.7, exceptional trees (40-8)
38   1991
91-  7-29-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 4, Nuuanu-McCully (Special)
39   1991
91-  7-29-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
40   1991     center (Special)
91-  7-29-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
41   1991
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
91-  7-29-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for North Shore
42   1991     (Special)
91-  7-29-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for North Shore
43   1991     (Special)
91-  7-29-    Amends portions of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
44   1991     (Special)
91-  7-29-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
45   1991     (Special)
91-  7-29-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
46   1991     (Special)
91-  7-29-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
47   1991
91-  7-29-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
48   1991     center (Special)
91-  7-29-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
49   1991     center (Special)
91-  7-29-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
50   1991     center (Special)
91-  7-29-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
51   1991     (Special)
91-  7-29-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
52   1991     center (Special)
91-  7-29-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Waianae
53   1991     (Special)
91-  7-29-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
54   1991     (Special)
91-  7-29-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
55   1991     center (Special)
91-  7-29-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolauloa
56   1991     (Special)
91-  7-29-    Amends portions of development plan public facilities maps for primary urban
57   1991     center, central Oahu and Ewa (Special)
91-  7-29-    Amends portions of development plan public facilities maps for Koolaupoko and
58   1991     primary urban center (Special)
91-  8-21-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 6-4.2, salaries of appointed officials of the
59   1991     executive branch (5-3)
91-  8-21-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 13-29.2, disposal of weeds, garbage, trash and
60   1991     waste from property (40-7)
91-  8-21-    Amends portion of Ord. 90-62, Oahu water management plan (30-1)
61   1991
91-  8-21-    Authorization for general obligation bonds and bond anticipation notes
62   1991     (Special)
91-  8-21-    Improvement district assessment levy for Kahaluu (Kahaluu sewers) (Special)
63   1991
91-  8-21-    Improvement district assessment levy for Kahaluu (Kahaluu sewers) (Special)
64   1991
91-  9-20-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 13, Makakilo, and zoning map No. 14,
65   1991     Barber’s Point-Kahe-Nanakuli (Special)
91-  9-20-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 9-4.2, collection and disposal charges (9-4)
66   1991
91-  10-8-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili (Special)
67   1991
91-  10-8-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
68   1991     center (Special)
91-  10-8-    Amends portion of primary urban center development plan public facilities map
69   1991     (Special)
91-  10-9-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 28-2.1, 28-2.2, 28-2.3, 28-2.5, 28-2.7, 28-
70   1991     4.3, 28-4.4, 28-4.5 and 28-4.7, fare structure and activities prohibited on
              public transit (15B-2, 15B-4) (Eff. 1-1-1992)
91-  10-18-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
71   1991
91-  10-18-   Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 15-23.2, charges for parking (15-23)
72   1991
91-  10-18-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
73   1991     center (Special)
91-  10-29-   Amends Ord. 91-31, appropriations for FY 1991-92 executive operating budget
74   1991     (amendment No. 1) (Special)
91-  10-31-   Amends Ord. 91-32, appropriations for FY 1991-92 executive capital budget
75   1991     (amendment No. 1) (Special)
91-  11-4-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for central Oahu
76   1991     (Special)
91-  11-4-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 32-1.13, development plan common provisions
77   1991     (24-1)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
91-  11-4-    Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 32-1.13, development plan common provisions (24-
78   1991     1)
91-  11-4-    Amends Ord. 90-81, extends interim period for granting of applications for
79   1991     conditional use permits in designated portions of the OR&L right-of-way
              (Special)
91-  11-7-    Disclosure of interests of city officials (Honolulu Rapid Transit Development
80   1991     Project) (Special)
91-  11-7-    Amends Ord. 90-83, extends interim period for controls on development within
81   1991     portions of Kalihi Valley (Special)
91-  11-13-   Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 32-1.15, development plan common provisions (24-1)
82   1991
91-  11-14-   Authorizes mayor to enter into a development agreement with the governor of
83   1991     the State of Hawaii relating to the Honolulu rapid transit project (Special)
91-  11-27-   Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 8-7.1, property tax valuations (8-7)
84   1991
91-  11-27-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 6, Red Hill-Fort Shafter (Special)
85   1991
91-  11-27-   Adds R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 11-11.3 and 11-11.4, penalty for sewers; amends
86   1991     R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) §§ 11-1.2, 11-1.6 and 11-11.1, public works
              infrastructure requirements (14-1)
91-  11-27-   Enacts the provisions in and adopts the Revised Ordinances of Honolulu 1990
87   1991     (Not codified)
91-  12-17-   Adds Art. 34 to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) Ch. 41, regulated activities within the
88   1991     city, sound levels for Waikiki Shell (41-8)
91-  12-17-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
89   1991     center (Special)
91-  12-17-   Amends portions of the development plan land use map and public facilities map
90   1991     for the primary urban center (Special); amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) 32-2.2,
              primary urban center development plan special provisions (24-2)
91-  12-17-   Amends R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 32-6.2, urban design principles and controls for
91   1991     Koolaupoko (special provisions) (24-6)
91-  12-17-   Amends portion of the development plan land use map for East Honolulu
92   1991     (Special)
91-  12-17-   Adds to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.) § 11-11.2, penalty for sewers; amends R.O. 1978
93   1991     (1983 Ed.) §§ 11-1.2, 11-1.6, 11-5.1, 11-5.5, 11-5.6 and 11-5.8, general
              provisions and industrial wastewaters (14-1, 14-5, 14-11)
91-  12-17-   Amends Ord. No. 89-150 regulating for an interim period urban development
94   1991     within Oahu hillsides (Special)
91-  12-16-   Adds Ch. 38 to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.), residential condominium, cooperative
95   1991     housing and residential planned development leasehold conversion (Eff. 1-1-
              1992) (Repealed by Ord. 05-001)
91-  12-16-   Adds Ch. 39 to R.O. 1978 (1983 Ed.), maximum annual renegotiated lease rent;
96   1991     repeals ROH 1990, Art. 33, Ch. 41, condominium real property leases (39-1)
              Adds Art. 4 to Ch. 30, water conservation measures for nonresidential
92-  1-16-    properties; adds § 2-12.2, street lighting to be energy efficient; amends §
01   1992     22-2.3, installation and energizing of street lighting system (22-2, 30-4)
              (Amended by Ord. 92-109)
92-  1-16-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for North Shore (Special)
02   1992
92-  1-16-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for Ewa (Special); amends 24-
03   1992     3.2, development plan special provisions, urban design principles and controls
              for Ewa
92-  1-16-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for Waianae (Special)
04   1992
92-  1-16-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for central Oahu (Special)
05   1992
92-  3-10-    Amends Ord. 91-31, appropriations for FY 1991-92 executive operating budget
06   1992     (amendment No. 2) (Special)
92-  3-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
07   1992     center (Special)
92-  3-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
08   1992
92-  3-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for North Shore
09   1992     (Special)
92-  3-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
10   1992
92-  3-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
11   1992
92-  3-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
12   1992
92-  3-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
13   1992     (Special)
92-  3-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
14   1992     (Special)
92-  3-10-    Improvement district assessment levy for Leilehua (Leilehua Lane sewers)
15   1992     (Special)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
92-  3-10-    Amends § 19-4.1, uniform building code (Eff. 9-7-1992) (Amended by Ord. 99-
16   1992     73)
92-  3-10-    Amends § 3-6.3, boards and commissions
17   1992
92-  3-10-    Amends Ord. 91-32, appropriations for 1991-92 executive capital budget
18   1992     (amendment No. 2) (Special)
92-  3-11-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Crestview) (Special) (Amended
19   1992     by Ord. 01-42)
92-  4-6-1992 Amends §§ 8-2.1 and 8-2.2, real property tax
20
92-  4-6-1992 Amends portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani) (Special)
21
92-  4-6-1992 Amends portion of development plan land use map for central Oahu (Special)
22
92-  4-6-1992 Amends portion of State land use district boundary map for central Oahu
23            (Special)
92-  4-6-1992 Amends §§ 15-16.5, 15-23.2, traffic code, employee and public parking
24
92-  4-6-1992 Amends portion of development plan land use map for central Oahu (Special)
25
92-  4-6-1992 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
26
92-  4-6-1992 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
27
92-  4-6-1992 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
28
92-  4-6-1992 Amends Ord. 91-31, appropriations for FY 1991-92 executive operating budget
29            (amendment No. 3) (Special)
92-  4-6-1992 Amends portion of development plan public facilities maps for primary urban
30            center and central Oahu (Special)
92-  4-6-1992 Regulates for an interim period development within portions of the IMX-
31            1 industrial-commercial mixed use zoning district (Special)
92-  4-27-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu (Special)
32   1992
92-  4-27-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
33   1992
92-  4-27-    Adds Ch. 23, shoreline setbacks
34   1992
92-  4-27-    Adds Art. 6 to Ch. 10, beach and inland cabin camping facilities (Repealed
35   1992     by Ord. 96-49)
92-  4-27-    Improvement district assessment levy for Kahaluu (Kahaluu sewers) (Amends
36   1992     Ord. 91-64) (Special)
92-  4-27-    Improvement district assessment levy for Kahaluu (Kahaluu sewers) (Amends
37   1992     Ord. 91-63) (Special)
92-  4-27-    Amends § 8-4.2, remission of taxes in cases of certain natural disasters,
38   1992     amends §§ 8-6.1 and § 8-10.22, real property tax
92-  4-24-    Adds Art. 8 to Ch. 9, glasphalt paving (Eff. 1-1-1993) (14-30)
39   1992
92-  5-8-1992 Authorization for general obligation bonds (Special)
40
92-  5-15-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 4, Nuuanu-McCully (Special)
41   1992
92-  5-15-    Adds Art. 15 to Ch. 1, ordinance revision
42   1992
92-  5-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
43   1992     center (Special)
92-  5-15-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for Koolaupoko (Special)
44   1992
92-  5-15-    Amends portion of State land use district map for Waipahu (Special)
45   1992
92-  5-15-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for central Oahu (Special)
46   1992
92-  5-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
47   1992     center (Special)
92-  5-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for East Honolulu
48   1992     (Special)
92-  5-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Waianae
49   1992     (Special)
92-  5-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Waianae
50   1992     (Special)
92-  5-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
51   1992     center (Special)
92-  5-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
52   1992     center (Special)
92-  5-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
53   1992     center (Special)
92-  5-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
54   1992     center (Special)
92-  5-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for central Oahu
55   1992     (Special)
92-  5-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for central Oahu
56   1992     (Special)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
92-  5-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
57   1992     center (Special)
92-  6-12-    Adds § 3-9.5, composition of boards and commissions
58   1992
92-  6-12-    Amends §§ 24-1.2 and 24-1.8, development plan common provisions
59   1992
92-  6-12-    Amends § 9-4.2, disposal facility charges (Eff. 7-1-1992)
60   1992
92-  6-12-    Adds Art. 5 to Ch. 20, requirements for smoke detectors in existing highrise
61   1992     residential buildings
92-  6-12-    Amends Ord. 91-32, appropriations for FY 1991-92 executive capital budget
62   1992     (amendment No. 3) (Special)
92-  6-12-    Amends §§ 8-7.1, 8-10.5 and 8-10.20, real property tax (Eff. tax year
63   1992     beginning 7-1-1993)
92-  6-12-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani) (Special)
64   1992
92-  6-12-    Amends § 41-17.1, vehicle weight tax; adds Art. 48 to Ch. 6, motor vehicle
65   1992     registration fund (Eff. 1-1-1993) (Art. 48, Ch. 6, repealed by Ord. 97-42)
              (15A-3, 15A-4)
92-  6-12-    Amends §§ 12-1.9 and 12-1.15, taxicab fees (Eff. 1-1-1993) (35A-1)
66   1992
92-  6-12-    Amends § 6-21.2, bikeway fund (Eff. 7-1-1992)
67   1992
92-  6-12-    Amends §§ 20-4.3 and 20-4.5, fireworks license and permit fees (Eff. 7-1-1992)
68   1992     (20-6)
92-  6-12-    Amends § 7-3.1, dog licensing fees (Eff. 7-1-1992) (12-3.1)
69   1992
92-  6-12-    Amends §§ 12-5.2, 12-5.3 and 12-5.6, pedicab fees and licenses (Eff. 7-1-1992)
70   1992     (35A-5.2, 35A-5.3, 35A-5.6)
92-  6-12-    Amends § 36-2.3, U-drive vehicle licensing fees (Eff. 7-1-1992) (35A-2.3)
71   1992     (Repealed by Ord. 24-22)
92-  6-12-    Amends § 7-5.1, dog and cat spay/neuter fees (Eff. 7-1-1992) (12-5.1)
72   1992
92-  6-12-    Amends §§ 29-6.1 and 29-6.2, peddler licensing fees (Eff. 7-1-1992) (13-6.1,
73   1992     13-6.2)
92-  6-12-    Amends Table 18-A, fees for building permits
74   1992
92-  6-12-    Amends § 8-11.1, increase minimum real property tax (Eff. beginning tax year
75   1992     1993)
92-  6-12-    Amends §§ 10-4.1 and 10-4.2, golf course green fees (Eff. 7-1-1992)
76   1992
92-  6-17-    Appropriations for FY 1992-93 executive operating budget and program (Special)
77   1992     (Eff. 7-1-1992)
92-  6-17-    Appropriations for FY 1992-93 executive capital budget and program (Special)
78   1992     (Eff. 7-1-1992)
92-  6-24-    Appropriations for FY 1992-93 legislative budget (Special) (Eff. 7-1-1992)
79   1992
92-  6-24-    Amends Appendix A, sewer service charge schedules; amends Appendix B, cesspool
80   1992     charge schedules (Special) (Eff. 7-1-1992)
92-  6-29-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 13, Makakilo (Special) (Unilateral agreement
81   1992     was amended by Ord. 99-60)
92-  6-29-    Amends § 16-1.1, building code (Amended by Ord. 12-34; 13-3, 17-49)
82   1992
92-  6-29-    Amends Ord. 91-31, appropriations for FY 1991-92 executive operating budget
83   1992     (amendment No. 4) (Special)
92-  6-29-    Authorization for general obligation bonds and bond anticipation notes
84   1992     (Special)
92-  6-30-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
85   1992
92-  7-8-1992 Amends § 28-3.2, real property leases (Repealed by Ord. 04-33)
86
92-  7-21-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for central Oahu (Special)
87   1992
92-  7-21-    Amends § 20-1.1, fire code (20-1; Ord. 15-45; Am. Ord. 17-14)
88   1992
92-  7-21-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for central Oahu
89   1992     (Special)
92-  7-21-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
90   1992     center (Special)
92-  7-21-    Amends portion of State land use district map for Mililani (central Oahu)
91   1992     (Special)
92-  7-21-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani) (Special)
92   1992
92-  7-21-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
93   1992
92-  9-10-    Amends § 8-7.3(a); repeals § 8-7.3(k), dedicated lands (Amended by Ord. 04-34;
94   1992     Am. Ord. 07-4, 11-26, 12-16, 15-32, 17-2)
92-  9-10-    Amends § 38-3.1; adds § 38-3.4, real property leases to child care and human
95   1992     services providers
92-  9-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
96   1992
92-  9-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for East Honolulu
97   1992     (Special)
92-  9-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
98   1992
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
92-  9-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
99   1992
92-  9-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
100  1992
92-  9-10-    Amends §§ 21-3.120, 21-6.20, 21-8.30-3; repeals and replaces §§ 21-6.20-1, 21-
101  1992     6.20-2; amends Art. 9, Ch. 21, land use, ohana dwellings (21-2.140-1, Ch. 21,
              App. 21-B)
92-  9-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
102  1992     (Special)
92-  9-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
103  1992     center (Special)
92-  9-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
104  1992     (Special)
92-  9-10-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
105  1992     center (Special)
92-  9-10-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Point-Nanakuli (Special)
106  1992
92-  10-7-    Amends § 18-4.1, applications for permits
107  1992
92-  10-7-    Adds Ch. 37, city real property transactions
108  1992
92-  10-5-    Amends Ord. 92-01, §§ 30-4.1 and 30-4.2, water management
109  1992
92-  10-20-   Amends §§ 21-3.20(b), 21-3.70-1, 21-3.70-3(c), 21-3.70-6, 21-3.70-11, 21-3.80,
110  1992     21-3.120(c) and (d), 21-4.40-4 and 21-9.1, Tables 21-3.1(A), 21-5.3-A (Repealed
              by Ord. 25-2), land use, miscellaneous amendments (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
92-  10-27-   Amends §§ 9-4.2 and 9-4.6, refuse disposal charges; adds Art. 49, Ch. 6,
111  1992     recycling fund (Eff. 6-1-1993, 4 percent surcharge applied to all delinquent
              refuse disposal charges and to charges as of 6-30-1993)
92-  10-27-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
112  1992     center (Special)
92-  10-27-   Amends Ord. 92-16, § 19-4.1, plumbing code, water conservation (Amended by Ord.
113  1992     99-73)
92-  10-27-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Waianae (Special)
114  1992
92-  10-27-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
115  1992
92-  10-27-   Amends portion of development plan land use map for central Oahu (Special)
116  1992
92-  10-27-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani) (Special)
117  1992
92-  10-27-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu (Special)
118  1992
92-  10-27-   Authorization for general obligation bonds (Special)
119  1992
92-  10-27-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City (Special)
120  1992
92-  10-27-   Amends § 15-23.6; adds § 15-23.7, traffic code, off-street parking for People’s
121  1992     Open Market
              Amends §§ 14-12.2, 14-12.9, 14-12.12, 14-12.22, 14-12.23, 14-13.3, 14-13.1, 14-
92-  11-10-   13.3, 14-13.4, 14-13.5, 14-13.7, 29-1.3, 29-2.3, 29-2.7, 29-2.9; adds §§ 14-
122  1992     12.24, 14-12.25, 14-12.26, 14-12.27, 14-12.28, 14-12.29, 14-12.30, 14-12.31 and
              14-12.32, public works infrastructure
92-  11-18-   Amends § 40-8.7, exceptional trees
123  1992
92-  11-18-   Amends §§ 8-3.1 and 8-9.1, real property tax
124  1992
92-  11-18-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Waianae (Special)
125  1992
92-  11-18-   Amends § 35A-5.9, pedicab fares
126  1992
92-  11-18-   Amends Ord. 92-77, appropriations for FY 1992-93 executive operating budget
127  1992     (amendment No. 1) (Special)
92-  11-18-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani) (Special)
128  1992
92-  11-18-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
129  1992     (Special)
92-  11-18-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
130  1992
92-  11-18-   Authorization for general obligation bonds (Special)
131  1992
92-  12-9-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 2, Kahala-Kuliouou (Special)
132  1992
92-  12-17-   Adds Art. 26, Ch. 41, private security uniforms
133  1992
92-  12-17-   Environmental assessment of city facilities (Special)
134  1992
92-  12-17-   Repeals and replaces Ch. 19, plumbing code (Eff. 3-15-1993) (Amended by Ord. 99-
135  1992     73)
92-  12-17-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
136  1992     center (Special)
92-  12-17-   Adds § 9-4.7, refuse collection and disposal charges
137  1992
92-  12-17-   Amends § 24-3.2, development plan special provisions for Ewa; amends portion of
138  1992     development plan land use map for Ewa (Special)
92-  12-17-   Amends portion of development plan land use map for central Oahu (Special)
139  1992
92-  12-17-   Amends portion of development plan land use map for Koolaupoko (Special)
140  1992
92-  12-17-   Amends portion of development plan land use map for Koolauloa (Special)
141  1992
92-  12-17-   Amends Ord. 92-78, appropriations for FY 1992-93 executive capital budget
142  1992     (amendment No. 1) (Special)
92-  12-17-   Amends § 24-1.3, development plan common provisions
143  1992
92-  12-17-   Amends §§ 24-2.1, 24-2.2, 24-2.4, development plan special provisions for
144  1992     primary urban center; amends portion of the development plan land use map for
              primary urban center (Special)
93-  2-9-1993 Adds article to Ch. 2, annual review of fees and charges (2-22) (Repealed by
01            Ord. 16-29)
93-  2-9-1993 Amends §§ 21-3.90-2, 21-3.90-5, land use ordinance, political campaign signs
02            (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
93-  2-9-1993 Amends §§ 21-3.60, 21-3.80, and 21-9.1 (definition of floor area); adds § 21-
03            3.60-2, land use ordinance, rooftop structures (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
93-  2-9-1993 Amends §§ 14-1.2, 14-1.9(a); repeals § 14-8.3; renumbers §§ 14-8.3 and 14-8.4,
04            public works/sewers
93-  2-9-1993 Amends § 9-1.11, recycling program
05
93-  2-9-1993 Adds § 8-10.22, slaughterhouse real property tax exemption (Eff. tax year 1994)
06
93-  2-25-    Amends §§ 24-1.2 and 24-1.12, development plan common provisions
07   1993
              Amends a portion of zoning map No. 4, Nuuanu-McCully (Special) (Sec. II and
93-  2-25-    Exhibit “B” of Ord. 93-08 were repealed by Ord. 07-6, and all conditions set
08   1993     forth in the UA and Declaration for Conditional Zoning dated 2-11-1993 were
              released)
93-  2-25-    Amends Ord. 92-77, appropriations for FY 1992-93 executive operating budget
09   1993     (amendment No. 2) (Special)
93-  2-25-    Amends Ord. 92-78, appropriations for FY 1992-93 executive capital budget
10   1993     (amendment No. 2) (Special)
93-  3-19-    Amends § 24-1.2, development plan common provisions
11   1993
93-  3-19-    Amends development plan public facilities map for primary urban center (Special)
12   1993
93-  3-19-    Amends § 8-10.20, real property tax exemptions
13   1993
93-  3-19-    Amends § 24-1.12, development plan common provisions
14   1993
93-  3-19-    Amends development plan public facilities map for East Honolulu (Special)
15   1993
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
93-  3-19-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 23, Kailua-Lanikai-Keolu (Special)
16   1993
93-  3-19-    Amends development plan public facilities map for the primary urban center
17   1993     (Special)
93-  3-19-    Interim development control ordinance for development along Kamehameha Highway
18   1993     near Heeia Kea Boat Harbor (Special)
93-  3-19-    Amends § 9-1.4(b), collection of refuse
19   1993
93-  3-19-    Amends §§ 8-12.9(a), 8-12-10, real property tax appeal
20   1993
93-  3-25-    Authorization for general obligation bonds (Special)
21   1993
              Adds article to Ch. 13, transit voucher program (15B-7); amends 15B-6.3,
93-  4-16-    public transit operating revenues (Eff. date for transit voucher program
22   1993     implemented 60 days after enactment, 6-15-1993) (§§ 15B-6.3 and 15B-7.1
              repealed by Ord. 23-21)
93-  4-16-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani); amends Ords. 86-112
23   1993     and 89-123, unilateral agreement (Special)
93-  4-27-    Amends article title to Ch. 41, Art. 14; amends §§ 41-14.1, 41-14.2 and adds §
24   1993     41-14.9, regulation of smoking activities
93-  4-28-    Amends development plan public facilities map for central Oahu (Special)
25   1993
93-  4-28-    Adds article to Ch. 1, codification of ordinances (1-16) (Eff. 1-1-1994)
26   1993
93-  4-28-    Amends development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
27   1993
93-  4-28-    Amends Ord. 92-77, appropriations for FY 1992-93 executive operating budget
28   1993     (amendment No. 3) (Special)
93-  4-28-    Amends § 20-4.16, fire code (Repealed by Ord. 02-47)
29   1993
93-  4-28-    Amends Ord. 92-78, appropriations for FY 1992-93 executive capital budget
30   1993     (amendment No. 3) (Special)
93-  4-28-    Adds article to Ch. 2, department of wastewater management (2-23); amends 2-
31   1993     8.1 (Eff. 7-1-1993)
93-  4-28-    Amends §§ 14-1.2, 14-2.1(b), 14-15.1, 14-17.2(a), 14-17.4, 14-17.7(a),14-21.1,
32   1993     14-21.4, 14-21.8, 14-22.4, 14-24.2, 14-24.7(a); adds § 14-17.8, wastewater
              management, public works (Eff. 7-1-1993)
93-  4-28-    Amends Ord. 92-77, appropriations for FY 1992-93 executive operating budget
33   1993     (amendment No. 4) (Special)
93-  5-21-    Amends development plan public facilities map for Koolauloa (Special)
34   1993
93-  5-21-    Amends development plan public facilities map for Koolauloa (Special)
35   1993
93-  5-21-    Amends development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko (Special)
36   1993
93-  5-21-    Amends development plan public facilities map for primary urban center
37   1993     (Special)
93-  5-21-    Amends development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko (Special)
38   1993
93-  5-21-    Amends development plan public facilities map for central Oahu (Special)
39   1993
93-  5-21-    Amends development plan public facilities map for primary urban center
40   1993     (Special)
93-  5-21-    Amends development plan public facilities map for primary urban center
41   1993     (Special)
93-  5-21-    Amends development plan public facilities map for Koolauloa (Special)
42   1993
93-  6-7-1993 Amends Appendix A (sewer charges) and Appendix B (cesspool charges) (Eff. 7-1-
43            1993)
93-  6-14-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special) (Unilateral
44   1993     agreement amended by Ord. 97-51)
93-  6-14-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani) (Special)
45   1993
              Amends §§ 21-3.120, 21-4.40-20, 21-4.40-25, 21-5.110, 21-9.1; repeals § 21-
93-  6-14-    4.40-5; amends Tables 21-3.1(A), 21-5.17(A) and (B), 21-5.18(A) and (B), 21-
46   1993     5.19(A) and (B), 21-5.20(A) and (B), land use ordinance, industrial and IMX
              districts (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
93-  6-14-    Amends § 6-45.1, rental assistance fund
47   1993
93-  6-14-    Appropriations for FY 1993-94 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-1993)
48   1993     (Special)
93-  6-14-    Appropriations for FY 1993-94 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-1993)
49   1993     (Special)
93-  6-14-    Appropriations for FY 1993-94 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-1993) (Special)
50   1993
93-  6-14-    Amends § 15-13.9(a)(19), traffic code
51   1993
93-  6-14-    Amends § 2-9.2, urban house numbering (Repealed by Ord. 16-29)
52   1993
93-  6-14-    Adds § 1-12.3; amends §§ 1-12.1, 1-12.2; amends Art. 12, Ch. 1, title,
53   1993     recycling (Eff. 7-1-1993) (§ 1-12.2 repealed by Ord. 94-62, re-numbered § 1-
              12.3 to § 1-12.2)
93-  6-14-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special)
54   1993
93-  6-23-    Adds Article 10 to Ch. 3, boards and commissions
55   1993
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
93-  6-30-    Amends §§ 15B-2.1, 15B-2.2, 15B-2.3, 15B-2.5, 15B-6.1, 15B-6.3; adds § 15B-2.8,
56   1993     public transit (Eff. 10-1-1993) (§§ 15B-2.8, 15B-6.3 repealed by Ord. 23-21)
93-  7-9-1993 Amends development plan land use map for North Shore (Special)
57
93-  7-9-1993 Amends development plan public facilities map for North Shore (Special)
58
93-  7-9-1993 Amends Ch. 18; fees and permits for building, electrical, plumbing and sidewalk
59            codes
93-  7-28-    Amends §§ 10-4.1, 10-4.2, 10-4.3; adds §§ 10-4.6 and 10-4.7, golf fees
60   1993
93-  7-28-    Amends § 36-2.6; adds 36-2.7, U-Drive vehicles (Eff. 1-24-1994) (Repealed by Ord.
61   1993     24-22)
93-  7-28-    Amends § 24-5.2, development plan special provisions for central Oahu
62   1993
93-  7-28-    Authorization for general obligation bonds and bond anticipation notes (Special)
63   1993
93-  7-28-    Amends development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko (Special)
64   1993
93-  7-28-    Amends development plan public facilities map for primary urban center (Special)
65   1993
93-  7-28-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki (Special) (Unilateral
66   1993     agreement amended by Ord. 96-63)
93-  7-28-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 2, Kahala-Kuliouou (Special)
67   1993
93-  8-11-    Amends §§ 41-14.1, 41-14.2, 41-14.5, smoking prohibited
68   1993
93-  8-27-    Adds § 15B-6.6, advertising on buses
69   1993
93-  8-27-    Adds § 21-5.90-2; renumbers § 21-5.90-2 to be § 21-5.90-3; amends § 21-8.30-8 and
70   1993     Table 21-5.16-B, BMX-4 district height limits (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
93-  8-27-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 4, Nuuanu-McCully (Special)
71   1993
93-  8-27-    Adds Art. 24 to Ch. 2, planning department (Amended by Ord. 08-8, 09-4, 16-29);
72   1993     amends § 2-14.3 (Repealed by Ord. 16-29), executive agencies
93-  8-27-    Adds Art. 11 to Ch. 34, sale of toilets and urinals (Eff. 11-25-1993)
73   1993
93-  10-14-   Amends §§ 25-1.2, 25-1.3, 25-2.1, 25-3.2, 25-3.3; adds §§ 25-2.3, 25-8.3, Ch. 25,
74   1993     Art. 11; renumbers Ch. 25, Art. 11, to be Ch. 25, Art. 12, special management
              area, wetlands (§§25-2.3, 25-3.2, 25-3.3, 25-12.1 repealed by Ord. 23-4)
93-  10-14-   Repeals and replaces Art. 1, Ch. 16, adoption of uniform building code; amends
75   1993     16-2.12, permit fees (Eff. 1-12-1994)
93-  10-14-   Amends §§ 17-3.1 and 17-5.1, electrical code (Eff. 12-13-1993)
76   1993
93-  10-14-   Adds Art. 12 to Ch. 34, sale of showerheads and faucets (Eff. 4-12-1994)
77   1993
93-  10-20-   Adds § 2-3.4, settlement of claims
78   1993
93-  11-4-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Makai) Crestview (Special)
79   1993
93-  11-4-    Adds § 12-1.11A, special operations for an interim period for Hanauma Bay Nature
80   1993     Park (subject to repeal on 12-31-1994)
93-  11-4-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for North Shore
81   1993     (Special)
93-  11-4-    Amends § 5-3.2, salaries of appointed officials of the executive branch; adds §
82   1993     5-3.4, salaries of other employees of the executive branch (§ 5-3.4(b) Eff. 7-1-
              1994)
93-  11-4-    Amends Ord. 93-48, appropriations for FY 1993-94 executive operating budget
83   1993     (amendment No. 1) (Special)
93-  11-19-   Adds Arts. 17 and 18 to Ch. 1, sexual harassment
84   1993
93-  11-29-   Amends 35A-1.4(c), 35A-1.9(c), 35A-1.17, 35A-1.19(a), taxicabs (1990 ROH § 12-1.9
85   1993     automatically repealed on 3-16-2017 per Ord. 16-38; 1990 ROH § 12- 1.15 repealed
              by Ord. 16-38.)
93-  11-29-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu (Special)
86   1993
93-  11-29-   Adds §§ 13-5.20, 13-5.21 (Repealed by Ord. 97-02), bus logo; amends § 15B-6.3,
87   1993     operating revenues (§ 15B-6.3 repealed by Ord. 23-21)
93-  11-29-   Adds § 35A-1.22, no smoking prohibition in taxicabs
88   1993
93-  11-29-   Amends §§ 15B-2.1(a) and (e), 15B-2.2(a) through (g) and (k), bus pass fares
89   1993     (Eff. 3-1-1994)
93-  11-29-   Amends §§ 15B-1.1, 15B-4.2, 15B-4.3(c) and (d), 15B-4.5, 15B-4.6, 15B-4.7,
90   1993     special transit service for persons with disabilities (Eff. 2-26-1994)
93-  11-29-   Amends Ord. 93-49, appropriations for FY 1993-94 executive capital budget
91   1993     (amendment No. 2) (Special)
93-  12-1-    Amends § 41-14.2, smoking prohibition in certain places
92   1993
93-  12-13-   Amends § 22-7.5, land area required for parks and playgrounds
93   1993
93-  12-13-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special) (UA was
94   1993     amended by Ord. 02-58.)
93-  12-13-   Amends § 8-2.1, notice of assessments for 1994 tax year (Eff. 1-1-1994)
95   1993
93-  12-13-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 18, Kawailoa-Waialee (Special)
96   1993
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
93-  12-13-   Amends portion of development plan land use map for Koolaupoko (Special)
97   1993
93-  12-13-   Amends § 24-6.2, development plan special provisions, urban design principles
98   1993     and controls for Koolaupoko
93-  12-13-   Amends § 24-4.2, development plan special provisions, urban design principles
99   1993     and controls for East Honolulu
93-  12-13-   Amends portion of development plan land use map for central Oahu (Special)
100  1993
93-  12-13-   Amends portion of development plan land use map for central Oahu (Special)
101  1993
93-  12-13-   Amends § 24-8.2, development plan special provisions, urban design principles
102  1993     and controls for the North Shore
93-  12-13-   Amends portion of development plan land use map for Ewa (Special)
103  1993
93-  12-13-   Amends § 24-3.2, development plan special provisions, urban design principles
104  1993     and controls for Ewa
93-  12-13-   Amends portion of development plan land use map for Waianae (Special)
105  1993
93-  12-13-   Amends § 24-9.2, development plan special provisions, urban design principles
106  1993     and controls for Waianae
93-  12-13-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
107  1993     (Special)
93-  12-13-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Central Oahu
108  1993     (Special)
93-  12-13-   Adds Art. 19 to Ch. 1, addition of unpaid civil fines (automatic repeal
109  1993     provision [6-30-1996] was removed by Ord. 96-42)
93-  12-13-   Amends § 15A-3.1, vehicle weight tax (Eff. 3-14-1994)
110  1993
93-  12-13-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 17, Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa (Special)
111  1993
93-  12-22-   Amends § 8-10.20, other exemptions for tax year 1994 (Eff. 1-1-1994)
112  1993
93-  12-22-   Adds § 3-8.6, additional standards of conduct concerning campaign contributions
113  1993     and campaign assistance; amends §§ 3-6.3 and 3-6.6, request for opinions by
              officers or employees
93-  12-22-   Amends portion of development plan land use map for Ewa (Special)
114  1993
94-  1-7-1994 Amends portion of development plan land use map for Waianae (Special)
01
94-  2-10-    Real property tax refund established for transient vacation units for tax year
02   1994     beginning 7-1-1993 (Special)
94-  2-10-    Amends § 15-16.5, city hall and satellite off-street parking
03   1994
94-  2-10-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 23, Kailua-Lanikai-Keolu (Special)
04   1994
94-  2-10-    Amends § 10-1.2, park rules
05   1994
94-  2-10-    Amending Ord. No. 4122 relating to the Yacht Club Terrace planned development-
06   1994     housing district No. R-28 at Kaneohe (Special)
94-  2-10-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 21, Kualoa-Kahaluu (Special)
07   1994
94-  2-10-    Amends § 8-7.1, valuation—considerations in fixing (beginning with 1994-1995
08   1994     tax year)
94-  2-28-    Amends Ord. 93-49, appropriations for FY 1993-94 executive capital budget
09   1994     (amendment No. 1) (Special)
94-  3-15-    Amends portion of State land use district boundary at Waikakalaua (Special)
10   1994
94-  3-15-    Amends §§ 35A-5.6, 35A-5.9, 35A-5.17 and 35A-5.18, pedicabs (Eff. 5-14-1994)
11   1994
94-  3-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
12   1994     (Special)
94-  3-15-    Amends § 21-2.30, zoning maps and interpretations, minor zone changes
13   1994
94-  3-15-    Amends § 21-4.40-2, amusement facilities—outdoor, 21-3.120, nonconformities,
14   1994     Tables 21-5.20-A and B, IMX-1 district, and 21-9.1, definitions (Repealed by
              Ord. 99-12)
94-  3-15-    Amends § 21-8.40, conditional zoning—agreements (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
15   1994
94-  3-15-    Amends § 21-7.10-12, nonconforming structures within the flood hazard
16   1994     districts, § 21-7.10-13, flood hazard district exemptions (Repealed by Ord. 99-
              12)
94-  3-15-    Amends Tables 21-5.4-A, 21-5.5-A, 21-5.12-A, 21-5.14-A, 21-5.15-A, 21-5.16-A,
17   1994     21-5.20-A, land use ordinance, helistops (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
              Amends §§ 21-1.40, 21-3.40, 21-3.60, 21-3.70-4, 21-3.120, 21-3.140-1, 21-3.150,
              21-4.40-22, 21-4.40-28, 21-4.80-1, 21-5.40-1, 21-6.50-2, 21-7.60-12, 21-9.1,
94-  3-15-    Tables 21-5.3-A, 21-5.4-A, 21-5.5-A, 21-5.7-B, 21-5.8-B, 21-5.9-B, 21-5.10-B,
18   1994     21-5.10-C, 21-5.10-D, 21-5.11-B, 21-5.11-C, 21-5.11-D, 21-5.13-A, 21-5.14-A,
              21-5.15-A, 21-5.16-A, 21-5.18-A, 21-7.1, 21-7.2, 21-7.3, 21-7.4, 21-7.5, 21-
              7.7; repeals 21-3.70-9, land use ordinance, miscellaneous amendments (Repealed
              by Ord. 99-12)
94-  3-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for North Shore
19   1994     (Special)
94-  3-15-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki (Special)
20   1994
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
94-  4-28-    Establish pilot program to evaluate the purchase and use of alternative fuel
21   1994     vehicles and establish proposed schedule for city’s purchase of alternative fuel
              vehicles (Special)
94-  4-28-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 23, Kailua-Lanikai-Keolu (Special)
22   1994
94-  4-28-    Amends § 36-2.4; repeals § 12-2.5, renumbers § 36-2.6 as § 36-2.5; repeals § 12-
23   1994     2.7; renumbers § 36-2.8 as § 36-2.6 and § 36-2.9 as § 36-2.7, U-Drive motor
              vehicles (Repealed by Ord. 24-22)
94-  4-28-    Amends § 10-1.2, park rules (parking meters)
24   1994
94-  4-28-    Amends §§ 21-3.60, 21-3.80, 21-4.40-38, 21-9.1, Tables 21-5.6-A, 21-5.7-A, 21-
25   1994     5.8-A, 21-5.9-A, 21-5.10-A, 21-5.11-A; adds §§ 21-3.60-3 and 21-3.60-4, land use
              ordinance, antennas and utility installations (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
94-  4-28-    Amends §§ 24-1.1, 24-1.2, 24-1.9, 24-1.10, 24-1.12, 24-1.13, 24-1.14, 24-2.4, 24-
26   1994     3.4, 24-4.4, 24-5.4, 24-6.4, 24-7.4, 24-8.4, 24-9.4, development plans
94-  5-4-1994 Adds Art. 26 to Ch. 2, employment of private attorneys as special counsel to
27            represent the city, its agencies, officers and employees
94-  5-18-    Amends §§ 18-6.5, 30-4.2; adds § 30-4.6, water-conserving toilets and urinals
28   1994     (Amended by Ord. 94-67)
94-  5-18-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 22, Heeia (Special)
29   1994
94-  5-18-    Amends §§ 21-3.120-1 and 21-9.1, transient vacation units (Repealed by Ord. 99-
30   1994     12)
94-  5-18-    Amends § 21-3.120-2, bed and breakfast homes (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
31   1994
94-  5-18-    Amends Ch. 30, Art. 4, title, §§ 30-4.1, 14-8.2, water conservation; adds § 30-
32   1994     4.7, ultra-low flush toilet rebate program (Sec. 30-4.7 was amended by Ord. 98-
              26)
94-  5-24-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for the primary urban
33   1994     center (Special)
94-  5-24-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for East Honolulu
34   1994     (Special)
94-  5-24-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolauloa (Special)
35   1994
94-  6-6-1994 Amends § 6-41.1, fee schedule for land use ordinance applications and variances
36
94-  6-8-1994 Amends Ch. 4 title; adds Art. 6 to Ch. 4, services for deaf and hard-of-hearing
37            persons regarding council and council committee meetings
94-  6-8-1994 Adds Ch. 31, community economic development
38
              Amends § 2-12.1, bikeway system and master plan. (Within one year following the
94-  6-9-1994 enactment of this ordinance, the director of transportation services shall submit
39            to the council a proposed bikeway master plan, including a bikeway map,
              implementation plan, timetable, projected costs and sources of funding.)
94-  6-8-1994 Amends portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani) (Special)
40
94-  6-8-1994 Appropriations for FY 1994-1995 executive operating budget (Special) (Eff. 7-1-
41            1994)
94-  6-8-1994 Appropriations for FY 1994-1995 executive capital budget (Special) (Eff. 7-1-
42            1994)
94-  6-8-1994 Authorization for general obligation bonds and bond anticipation notes (Special)
43
94-  6-8-1994 Adds article to Ch. 6, zoo animal purchase fund (6-50) (Repealed by Ord. 16-12)
44
94-  6-8-1994 Appropriations for FY 1994-1995 legislative budget (Special) (Eff. 7-1-1994)
45
              Amends §§ 14-1.1, 14-1.2, 14-5.1; adds §§ 14-1.3, 14-1.4, 14-1.9, 14-1.11, 14-
              5.2, 14-5.6, 14-5.7, 14-5.8, 14-5.9, 14-5.10, 14-5.15, 14-5.16, 14-5.17, 14-5.18,
94-           14-5.19, 14-5.20, 14-5.21; renumbers 14-1.4 as 14-1.7 and 14-1.5 as 14-1.8;
46   6-8-1994 renumbers 14-1.3 as 14-1.6, 14-1.7 as 14-1.10, 14-5.2 as 14-5.3, 14-5.3 as 14-
              5.4, 14-5.4 as 14-5.5, 14-5.5 as 14-5.11, 14-5.6 as 14-5.12, 14-5.7 as 14-5.13,
              14-5.8 as 14-5.14 and amends these renumbered sections; repeals §§ 14-1.6, 14-
              5.9; wastewater management
94-  6-15-    Adds article to Ch. 29, charitable sales activities on public places (29-12)
47   1994     (Repealed by Ord. 94-86, Sec. 3)
94-  7-6-1994 Adds § 1-19.8, gifts to councilmember (Repealed by Ord. 24-7)
48
94-  7-6-1994 Adds § 1-19.7; amends §§ 1-19.1, 3-6.3, and 3-6.6, gifts to mayor, prosecuting
49            attorney, and appointed officer or employee
94-  7-6-1994 Amends Ch. 1, Art. 3, title, penalties and interest; adds § 1-3.3, interest on
50            debts owed the city
94-  7-6-1994 Amends portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu (Special)
51
94-  7-6-1994 Amends § 4-3.2, purpose of office of council services; adds § 4-3.3, authority of
52            the director of council services
94-  7-6-1994 Amends § 38-3.3, bidding not required—concessions, nonprofit zoo and botanical
53            garden concessions
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
94-  7-25-    Amends § 3-8.6; adds § 3-8.9, campaign contributions and assistance from
54   1994     lobbyists, standards of conduct (Eff. 1-1-1995)
94-  7-27-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for Koolaupoko (Special)
55   1994
94-  7-29-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for Koolaupoko (Special)
56   1994
94-  7-29-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special) (UA was
57   1994     amended by Ord. 06-26)
94-  7-29-    Amends § 16-1.1(b), amendment No. (53), Uniform Building Code (Guardrails) (Eff.
58   1994     8-29-1994) (Amended by Ord. 12-34; Ord. 13-3, 17-49)
94-  7-29-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 22, Heeia-Maunawili (Special)
59   1994
94-  9-15-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
60   1994
              Amends § 15-23.1; repeals § 15-23.2; adds §§ 15-23.2, 15-23.2A, 15-23.2B, 15-
94-  9-15-    23.2C, 15-23.2D, parking at municipal facilities. This ordinance shall not apply
61   1994     to parking concession contracts executed before 9-15-1994. (Carpool parking
              program shall be implemented no later than six months after the effective date of
              this ordinance, that is, 3-15-1995.)
94-  9-15-    Amends Ch. 1, Art. 12, title; amends §§ 1-12.1, 1-12.2; repeals 1990 ROH § 1-
62   1994     12.2, recycled paper products. (Applies to any city procurement of paper products
              commenced on or after 9-15-1994.)
94-  9-15-    Amends portions of boundaries of the special management area map for Ewa
63   1994     (Special) (Amended by Ord. 07-34)
94-  9-15-    Adds § 21-4.40-8A; amends § 21-9.1 and Tables 21-5.3-A, 21-5.4-A, 21-5.5-A, 21-
64   1994     5.18-A, composting, major and minor (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
94-  9-15-    Amends development plan public facilities map for Koolauloa (Special)
65   1994
94-  9-15-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 18, Kawailoa-Waialee (Special)
66   1994
94-  9-15-    Amends §§ 18-6.5 and 30-4.6, exemptions, ultra-low flush toilets
67   1994
94-  9-21-    Adds new article to Ch. 10, policy on fees for organized recreational programs
68   1994     (10-7)
94-  10-5-    Improvement district assessment levy for Kaneohe sewers (Special)
69   1994
94-  10-5-    Amends portion of State land use district boundary at Waialua. (Special)
70   1994
94-  10-5-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for central Oahu (Special)
71   1994
94-  10-27-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko (Special)
72   1994
94-  10-27-   Amends §§ 14-1.2, 14-1.8, 14-5.13, 14-5.21, 14-9.1, sewers; repeals Ch. 14, Art.
73   1994     11, penalty for sewers
94-  10-27-   Adds § 2-17.4, notice of bid results
74   1994
94-  10-27-   Adds Ch. 32, building energy efficiency standards; amends § 16-5.1, energy
75   1994     conservation (Eff. 4-25-1995) (Ch. 32 was repealed by Ord. 09-30 and a new Ch.
              32, building energy conservation code was added (Eff. 11-28-2009))
94-  11-21-   Amends § 8-10.3, homeowner’s tax exemption
76   1994
94-  11-21-   Amends § 38-6.8, dept. of auditoriums, bookings and cancellation—appeal, and § 2-
77   1994     16.1, use of parks areas and facilities, preference to Hawaii-based artists
94-  11-21-   Amends §§ 15-2.23, 15-3.1, 15-4.7, 15-6.7, 15-18.3; repeals § 15-18.9, traffic
78   1994     code, to promote safe bicycling (Eff. 1-1-1995) (§ 15-4.7 was repealed by Ord.
              95-15.)
94-  11-21-   Amends §§ 8-7.1 and 8-7.3, real property taxation, lands dedicated to
79   1994     agricultural uses, tree farm property (§ 8-7.3 was amended by Ord. 04-34)
94-  11-21-   Amends § 38-3.2, bidding not required—concessions, county cultural parks (Eff.
80   1994     upon enactment of State law exempting from State bidding requirements the
              operation of concessions at county cultural parks)
94-  11-21-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Point-Nanakuli (Special)
81   1994     (Unilateral agreement was amended by Ord. 98-08)
94-  11-21-   Adds article to Ch. 40, distribution of tobacco products and tobacco promotional
82   1994     materials near certain schools and preschools (40-10) (Repealed by Ord. 98-10)
94-  11-21-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 4, Nuuanu-McCully (Special)
83   1994
94-  11-21-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani) (Special)
84   1994
94-  12-1-    Refunding of improvement district bonds issued pursuant to Ord. 87-88 to finance
85   1994     the cost of improvements in Halawa Business Park (Special)
              Repeals and replaces Ch. 13, Art. 12, charitable sales activities on public
94-  12-2-    places in Waikiki; removed during 2020 codification; in accordance with § 13-
86   1994     12.16, this article has ceased to be effective as a result of the court decision
              upholding the city's peddling ordinance (Ch. 13, Art. 6)
94-  12-16-   Amends §§ 35A-1.9 and 35A-1.10, taxicab driver’s certificate, rate of fare,
87   1994     receipt required upon request (§ 35A-1.9 automatically repealed on 3-16-2017 per
              Ord. 16-38.)
94-  12-16-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban center
88   1994     (Special)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
94-  12-16-   Amends §§ 4-3.2, 4-3.3, 5-3.3; adds § 4-3.4, office of council services, salaries of
89   1994     appointed officials of the council (Sec. 4-3.4 becomes effective 1-1-1995)
95-  1-9-1995 Amends Ord. 94-42, appropriations for FY 1994-95 executive capital budget (amendment
01            No. 1) (Special)
95-  1-9-1995 Amends Ord. 94-41, appropriations for FY 1994-95 executive operating budget
02            (amendment No. 1) (Special)
95-           Adds article to Ch. 34, secondhand dealers (Eff. 2-9-1995, provided any secondhand
03   2-9-1995 dealer license issued pursuant to HRS Ch. 445 before the effective date shall be
              valid for the term of the license) (34-6)
              Amends Ch. 34, Art. 1, title and §§ 34-1.1, 34-1.2; reenacts § 34-1.3; adds §§ 34-
95-           1.4, 34-1.5, 34-1.6; renumbers § 34-1.4 as § 34-1.7, § 34-1.5 as § 34-1.8, § 34-1.6
04   2-9-1995 as § 34-1.9, § 34-1.7 as § 34-1.10, § 34-1.8 as § 34-1.11, § 34-1.9 as § 34-1.12 and
              amends each, auctions (Eff. 2-9-1995, provided any auction license issued pursuant
              to HRS Ch. 445 before the effective date shall be valid for the term of the license)
95-           Adds article to Ch. 34, scrap dealers (Eff. 2-9-1995, provided any scrap dealer
05   2-9-1995 license issued pursuant to HRS Ch. 445 before to the effective date shall be valid
              for the term of the license) (34-7)
95-  2-9-1995 Amends § 9-4.2, disposal charges (surcharge for recovering State and federal fees)
06
95-  3-23-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for primary urban center (Special)
07   1995
95-  3-23-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Crestview) (Special)
08   1995
              Amends § 2-4.2, powers and duties of budget and fiscal services director (writing
95-  4-27-    off uncollectible debts and accounts of the city of $1,000 or less and establishing
09   1995     service fee for dishonored checks by rules) ($9 service fee for dishonored checks
              shall remain in effect until the rules are amended to change the service fee)
95-  4-27-    Amends Ord. 94-42, appropriations for FY 1994-95 executive capital budget (amendment
10   1995     No. 2) (Special)
95-  4-27-    Amends § 14-10.2, time of payment, wastewater system facility charge (for city or
11   1995     city-sponsored or State or State-sponsored housing project)
95-  4-27-    Adds §§ 25-9.6, 25-9.7, shoreline management, voluntary and involuntary revocation
12   1995     or modification of permits (intended to have no effect on proceedings instituted
              before its effective date with respect to the revocation of any permit)
95-  5-18-    Amends §§ 21-3.90-1, 21-3.90-3, signs for second floor business establishments
13   1995     (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
95-  5-18-    Adds article to Ch. 2, volunteer services program (2-27) (Eff. 7-1-1995)
14   1995
95-  5-18-    Amends §§ 15-4.2, 15-4.6, 15-6.7, 15-13.6, 15-17.4, 15-21.6, 15-24.11, 15-26.3, 15-
15   1995     26.9, 15-27.10; repeals §§ 15-4.7, 15-11.1, 15-19.38, 15-21.1, 15-21.4, 15-24.7, 15-
              24.9, traffic code, eliminating and decriminalizing certain traffic offenses
95-  5-18-    Amends §§ 9-1.2, 9-1.4, recycling of food waste
16   1995
95-  5-18-    Amends § 14-19.2, improvement district fees, sanitary sewer system (does not affect
17   1995     fees for certain sewer improvement districts accepted by council or created before
              effective date)
95-  5-26-    Amends a portion of the development plan land use map for North Shore (Special)
18   1995
95-  5-26-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 18, Kawailoa-Waialee (Special) (Sec. II and
19   1995     Exhibit “B” of Ord. 95-19 were repealed, and all conditions set forth in the UA and
              Declaration for Conditional Zoning dated 5-17-1995 were released by Ord. 07-5)
95-  5-31-    Amends § 15A-1.9, bicycle registration, decriminalizes penalty for violation
20   1995
              Adds article to Ch. 12, cat identification program (7-6); amends § 3-5.2,
95-  5-31-    authorization to issue summons; adds § 3-5.5, authorization to impound cats (cat
21   1995     owners shall be given 90 days following the effective date of this ordinance to
              comply with the identification and sterilization provisions thereof)
95-  5-31-    Amends §§ 15B-2.1, 15B-2.2, 15B-2.3, 15B-2.5, 15B-4.5, raises bus and special
22   1995     transit service fares, establishes price of discounted tokens (Eff. 7-1-1995)
95-  5-31-    Amends § 3-8.4(f), financial disclosures, penalty (provided that penalties shall not
23   1995     be imposed upon any “officer,” “employee” or “candidate” whose required financial
              disclosure is due before January 1, 1996)
95-  5-31-    Appropriations for FY 1995-96 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-1995) (Special)
24   1995
95-  5-31-    Appropriations for FY 1995-96 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-1995) (Special)
25   1995
95-  5-31-    Appropriations for FY 1995-96 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-1995) (Special)
26   1995
95-  5-31-    Authorization for general obligation bonds and bond anticipation notes (Special)
27   1995
95-  5-31-    Amends Table No. 18-A of Ch. 18, to increase fees charged for building permits (Eff.
28   1995     7-1-1995)
95-  5-31-    Amends § 17-4.2, to increase charges for extra inspections and miscellaneous
29   1995     inspections under the electrical code (Eff. 7-1-1995)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
95-  5-31-    Amends § 15-16.5 to increase employee parking fees for employees of the city
30   1995     and the civic center child care facility (Eff. 7-1-1995)
95-  5-31-    Amends §§ 15A-4.4, 15A-4.5, 15A-4.6, to increase fees for certificates and
31   1995     duplicate certificates of title and for each correction of vehicle registration
              records (Eff. 7-1-1995)
95-  5-31-    Amends § 15A-2.2, to increase driver’s license fees, establish new fees
32   1995     relating to driver’s licenses, and to repeal provisions establishing special
              fees for senior citizens (Eff. 7-1-1995)
95-  5-31-    Amends § 12-3.1, to increase dog license and tag fees (Eff. 7-1-1995)
33   1995
95-  5-31-    Amends § 12-5.1, to increase fees for spaying/neutering cats and dogs and to
34   1995     repeal the waiver of those fees for cats and dogs owned by senior citizens
              (Eff. 7-1-1995)
95-  5-31-    Amends §§ 10-2.1, 10-2.2, 10-2.3; repeals § 10-2.4; adds § 10-2.7, fees and
35   1995     charges for Foster Botanical Garden, Honolulu Zoo and community gardens (Eff.
              7-1-1995)
95-  5-31-    Adds §§ 10-2.11, fees and charges for Hanauma Bay Nature Park (Eff. 7-1-1995)
36   1995     (Repealed by Ord. 96-01); Ord. 96-19 added § 10-2.11, fees for Hanauma Bay
              Nature Preserve (Eff. 3-12-1997)
95-  5-31-    Amend §§ 10-4.2, 10-4.3, 10-4.5; adds § 10-4.8, to increase green fees, golf
37   1995     club and cart rental rates, and provide for certain fees related to the
              automated golf tee time reservation system. (Eff. 7-1-1995)
95-  5-31-    Adds §§ 10-2.4, 10-2.5, 10-2.6, fees for the use of and services relating to
38   1995     parks and recreational facilities (Eff. 7-1-1995)
95-  5-31-    Amends § 9-4.2, disposal charges (increases charges at HPOWER, city transfer
39   1995     stations and landfills, deletes Waipahu Incinerator charges) (Eff. 7-1-1995)
95-  5-31-    Amends § 9-4.2, disposal charges (increases surcharge on disposal charges to
40   1995     six percent) (Eff. 1-1-1996)
95-  5-31-    Amends Ord. 94-41, appropriations for FY 1994-95 executive operating budget
41   1995     (amendment No. 2) (Special)
95-  5-31-    Amends § 15-14.1, traffic code, allows for parking on mauka side of Ala Wai
42   1995     Blvd. at certain intersections
95-  5-31-    Adds § 2-21.4, requires MRRC to charge a fine for overdue books, magazines, and
43   1995     other materials. (Eff. 7-1-1995)
95-  5-31-    Adds article to Ch. 10, summer fun activities (10-8) (Eff. 1-1-1996)
44   1995
95-  5-31-    Repeals Ch. 1, Art. 15; adds § 1-16.3, ordinance revision
45   1995
95-  7-6-1995 Adds article to Ch. 41; amends §§ 40-5.1, 40-5.2, regulation of distribution of
46            spray paints and wide-tipped markers (41-3)
95-  7-6-1995 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for primary urban
47            center (Special)
95-  7-6-1995 Amends § 15-4.10, enforcement of motor vehicle laws by special officers of the
48            city
95-  7-21-    Amends § 41-12.4; adds Art. 27 to Ch. 41, possession, use, and sale of pepper
49   1995     sprays for self-defense (termination date removed by Ord. 96-77)
95-  7-21-    Amends § 22-3.8, permits for work of any character in unapproved subdivisions,
50   1995     by streamlining the development process and allowing an increase in the number
              of model homes permitted after tentative subdivision approval
95-  8-11-    Adds new article to Ch. 10, professional sports activity at Hans L’Orange
51   1995     baseball facility (10-9)
95-  9-1-1995 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for North Shore
52            (Special)
95-  9-1-1995 Amends portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani) (Special)
53
95-  9-1-1995 Amends Ord. 92-92, portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani) (Special)
54
95-  9-1-1995 Amends Ord. 93-23, portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani) (Special)
55
95-  9-1-1995 Amends portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani) (Special)
56
95-  9-1-1995 Amends portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
57
95-  9-1-1995 Adds § 2-18.6, line-item budget details
58
95-  10-4-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
59   1995
95-  10-4-    Improvement district assessment levy for Kahaluu sewers (Special) (Amended by
60   1995     Ord. 98-37)
95-  10-4-    Amends § 38-3.3, bidding not required—concessions, to exempt certain
61   1995     concessionaires in Hans L’Orange Park
95-  10-26-   Amends § 15A-3.1, vehicle weight tax; and § 15A-3.2, vehicle weight tax,
62   1995     delinquent penalties (Eff. 1-1-1996)
95-  10-26-   Amends § 31-1.3, amendment or termination of enterprise zones
63   1995
95-  10-26-   Amends § 9-3.1, recycling by certain commercial establishments; and § 9-5.1,
64   1995     violation, penalty (Eff. 7-1-1996)
95-  11-21-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolauloa
65   1995     (Special)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
95-  11-21-   Amends portion of State land use district boundary map (Kahuku Quadrangle) at
66   1995     Laie (Special)
95-  12-18-   Amends §§ 8-10.1 and 8-10.14, relating to real property taxation (to repeal
67   1995     the exemption currently provided to privately owned properties that are leased
              to the State or county) (Eff. beginning with 1996-97 tax year)
              Amends §§ 3-2.1, 3-2.4, 3-2.7, relating to art in city buildings (transfers
95-  12-18-   the arts procurement authority from the individual city agencies to the
68   1995     commission on culture and the arts and provides that lapsed appropriations for
              the acquisition of works of art may be reappropriated) (Eff. 7-1-1996)
95-  12-18-   Amends § 15-2.29, vehicles and related terms; adds article to Ch. 15A,
69   1995     establishing inspection fees for reconstructed vehicles and motorcycles (15A-
              6)
95-  12-18-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special)
70   1995
95-  12-18-   Amends portion of development plan land use map for central Oahu (Special)
71   1995
96-           Repeals Ord. 95-36 which added § 10-2.11 relating to fees and charges for
01   1-8-1996 Hanauma Bay Nature Park (repeals all the admission fees for Hanauma Bay Nature
              Park, including vehicle assessment fees) (See Ord. 96-19 below)
96-  2-7-1996 Amends § 8-12.10, relating to real property tax assessment, to increase the
02            costs to be deposited for an appeal to the board of review
96-  2-7-1996 Amends portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu (Special)
03
96-  2-7-1996 Amends Ord. 95-25, appropriations for FY 1995-96 executive capital budget
04            (amendment No. 1) (Special)
96-  2-27-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu (Special)
05   1996
96-  2-27-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for Ewa (Special)
06   1996
96-  2-27-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili (Special)
07   1996
96-  2-27-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
08   1996
96-  3-29-    Adds Ch. 33, development agreements
09   1996
96-  3-29-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
10   1996
96-  3-29-    Amends § 15B-2.6, suspension of bus fares for promotional and demonstration
11   1996     purposes
96-  3-29-    Adds Art. 6 to Ch. 40, relating to graffiti (Shall apply only to graffiti
12   1996     placed on public property after effective date of ordinance)
96-  3-29-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for the primary urban center
13   1996     (Special)
96-  3-29-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 24, Waimanalo (Special)
14   1996
              Amends §§ 8-2.1, 8-2.2, 8-3.5, 8-6.2, 8-6.3, 8-6.7, 8-7.3, 8-7.4, 8-7.5, 8-
96-  3-29-    10.1, 8-10.3, 8-10.4, 8-10.5, 8-10.10, 8-10.12, 8-10.14, 8-10.15, 8-10.19, 8-
15   1996     10.22, 8-11.1, 8-12.1, 8-12.4, 8-12.7, relating to real property taxes
              (changing various real property tax deadlines) (Eff. beginning with 1997-98
              tax year)
96-  4-22-    Amends §§ 8-12.6, 8-12.7, boards of review for real property tax appeals
16   1996
96-  4-25-    Amends § 2-4.2, relating to capital improvement project reporting requirements
17   1996     of director of budget and fiscal services
96-  4-25-    Adds Ch. 27, community facilities districts
18   1996
96-  4-25-    Adds § 10-2.8, fees for Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve; and adds Art. 51 to Ch.
19   1996     6, Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve Fund (Eff. 3-12-1997)
96-  4-25-    Adds § 9-3.5, food waste recycling, and amends § 9-5.1, violation—penalty
20   1996     (Eff. 1-1-1997)
96-  4-25-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 4, Nuuanu-McCully (Special)
21   1996
96-  4-25-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Point-Kahe-Nanakuli (Special)
22   1996
96-  4-25-    Amends §§ 2-17.2, 2-18.2, 2-18.4, budget execution; operating budget bill
23   1996     form; and transfer and allocation of funds (shall apply to operating budget
              ordinances and amendments beginning 7-1-1996)
96-  5-15-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for Central Oahu (Special)
24   1996
96-  5-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for the primary urban
25   1996     center (Special)
96-  5-15-    Amends portion of State land use district boundary map at Ewa (Special)
26   1996
96-  5-15-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Central Oahu
27   1996     (Special)
96-  5-15-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 18, Kawailoa-Waialee (Special)
28   1996
96-  5-15-    Authorization for general obligation refunding bonds (Special)
29   1996
              Adds Art. 8 to Ch. 15B, transit management services contractor; amends §§ 15B-
              1.1, 15B-2.3, 15B-4.1, 13-5.3, 13-5.11, 13-5.17, 13-5.18, 15B-6.2, 13-6.5, 15-
96-  6-14-    2.11 (§§ 13-5.3, 13-5.11, 13-5.17, 13-5.18 repealed by Ord. 97-02); repeals
30   1996     1990 ROH §§ 13-6.3, 13-6.4, 13-6.5, 13-6.7, 13-6.8; relating to public transit
              (requires city bus system and special transit service to be managed, operated,
              and maintained by a single transit management services contractor) (Eff. 4-1-
              1997)
96-  6-14-    Appropriations for FY 1996-97 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-1996)
31   1996     (Special)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
96-  6-14-    Adds § 2-18.7, report on position vacancies
32   1996
96-  6-14-    Amends § 41-28.1, aerial advertising prohibited, exceptions
33   1996
              Amends §§ 14-12.1, 14-12.2, 14-12.9, 14-12.12, 14-12.22, 14-12.23, 29-1.3, 29-
96-  6-14-    2.2, 29-2.3, 29-2.4, 29-2.8; adds §§ 29-2.1A, 29-2.2A, 29-2.2B, 29-4.4A,
34   1996     relating to public works infrastructure requirements including fees and
              services and relating to drainage, flood and pollution control, grading,
              grubbing, stockpiling, soil erosion and sediment control
96-  6-14-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Central Oahu
35   1996     (Special)
96-  6-14-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for the primary urban
36   1996     center (Special)
96-  6-14-    Amends § 17-5.1, updating city electrical code by adopting 1996 edition of the
37   1996     National Electrical Code (Eff. 8-13-1996)
96-  6-14-    Repeals Ch. 19 and adds a new Ch. 19, plumbing code (Eff. 8-13-1996)
38   1996
96-  6-14-    Authorization for general obligation bonds and bond anticipation notes and
39   1996     authorization for refunding bonds (Special)
96-  6-14-    Adds Art. 52 to Ch. 6, fee for convicted persons (shall be repealed two years
40   1996     after its effective date (6-14-1998); repealed on 6-14-1998)
96-  6-14-    Amends § 10-2.7, fees for community garden (Eff. 7-1-1996)
41   1996
96-  6-14-    Amends Sec. 3 of Ord. 93-109 by deleting the automatic repeal provision (6-30-
42   1996     1996), thereby making Ch. 1, Art. 19, permanent
96-  6-14-    Appropriations for FY 1996-97 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-1996)
43   1996     (Special)
96-  6-14-    Appropriations for FY 1996-97 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-1996) (Special)
44   1996
96-  6-14-    Adds Art. 53 to Ch. 6, special events fund (Eff. 7-1-1996)
45   1996
96-  7-9-1996 Amends portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
46
96-  7-9-1996 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for East Honolulu
47            (Special)
96-  7-9-1996 Amends portion of zoning map No. 7, Pearl City-Halawa (Special)
48
96-  7-31-    Repeals Ch. 10, Art. 6, beach and inland camping facilities
49   1996
96-  7-31-    Amends §§ 18-3.1, 18-4.1, 18-4.2, 18-4.6, 18-5.3, 18-5.4, 18-5.6, 18-6.1, 18-
50   1996     6.2, 18-6.3, 18-6.4, 18-7.4, relating to fees and permits for building,
              electrical, plumbing and sidewalk codes
96-  7-31-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for East Honolulu
51   1996     (Special)
96-  7-31-    Amends § 3-2.7, art in city buildings
52   1996
96-  8-23-    Amends § 13-6.2, regulations affecting peddlers
53   1996
96-  8-23-    Amends §§ 15-2.18 (Amended by Ord. 17-51), 15-24.10 (Repealed by Ord. 14-25),
54   1996     15-24.11, 15-29.1, 15-29.2, 15-29.3, 15-29.6, relating to parking for disabled
              persons
96-  8-23-    Amends § 15B-2.1, fare structure; adds § 15B-2.9, authorizing police officers
55   1996     to ride on city buses without paying a fare
              Establishes a two-year pilot project to use volunteers to assist the Honolulu
96-  8-23-    police department in enforcing the city and State disabled parking laws on
56   1996     public and private property. (Eff. 11-1-1996 and terminates on or before 11-1-
              98) (Ord. 99-01 established a permanent volunteer disabled parking enforcement
              program.)
96-  10-10-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 6, Red Hill-Fort Shafter (Special)
57   1996
              Amends §§ 1-2.4, 1-19.2, 1-19.3, 1-19.4, 2-3.2, Ch. 2, Art. 6, title, 2-6.1
              title, 2-6.2, 2-17.1, 2-19 (Amended by Ord. 13-39), 2, 3-2.6, 3-6.4, 3-6.8
              (Repealed by Ord. 12-1), 4-2.2, 4-2.3, 4-2.4, 4-4.3, 4-4.7, 6-40.1, 8-1.2, 8-
              12.3, 8-12.7, 9-2.2, 9-4.2 title, 9-7.3, 10-1.3, 10-4.1, 11-1.2, 11-1.3
              (Repealed by Ord. 24-20), 13-1.1, 13-4.4, 13-6.2, 13-8.3 (Repealed by Ord. 25-
              22), 13-8.4, 14-1.2, 14-5.12, 14-6.3, 14-12.6, 14-12.19, 14-21.6, 14-23.2, 14-
96-  10-10-   27.1, 14-31.2, 14-31.3, 14-32.3, 15-4.6, 15-6.7, 15-7.4, 15-14.8, 15-15.1, 15-
58   1996     16.4, 15-16.6, 15-19.22, 15-19.37, 15-20.1, 15-21.12, 15-24.1, 15-24.18, 15-
              24.21, 15-25.1, 15-26.10, 15B-2.3, 15B-6.1, 16-2.4, 16-10.4, 17-6.1, 18-3.1,
              18-5.4, 18-6.5, 18-7.3, 20-3.1, 22-6.2, 22-7.3, 22-8.1, 25-1.3, 26-1.3, 26-1.4,
              26-1.9, 30-1.2, 33-1.5, 33-1.6, 35A-2.6, 36-2.7, 38-6.11, 40-7.1, 40-7.2, 41-
              8.3, 40-8.6, 41-10.3, 41-10.4, 41-14.2, 43-6.6 (Repealed by Ord. 25-27),
              relating to technical amendments to the ROH. Amendment to § 15B-2.3 takes
              effect on 4-1-1997.
96-  10-10-   Adds Art. 4 to Ch. 41, prohibiting the sale of certain products that contain
59   1996     ephedrine
96-  10-10-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
60   1996
96-  10-10-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 8, Waipahu (Special) (Unilateral agreement was
61   1996     amended by Ord. 00-61.)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
              Amend §§ 21-3.30, 21-3.60, 21-3.70, 21-3.70-1, 21-3.70-2, 21-3.70-3, 21-3.70-4,
              21-3.70-7, 21-3.70-10, 21-3.70-11, 21-3.70-14, 21-3.80, 21-3.90-1, 21-3.90-3,
              21-3.120, 21-3.130, 21-3.140-1, 21-3.150, 21-3.160-2, 21-4.10, 21-4.30, 21-
96-  10-31-   4.40, 21-4.70, 21-6.20-1, 21-6.50-11, 21-7.10-6, 21-7.10-7, 21-7.20-1, 21-7.30-
62   1996     4, 21-7.70-1, 21-8.10, 21-8.20, 21-8.30, 21-8.30-5, 21-8.30-6, 21-8.30-8, 21-
              9.1; Tables 21-3.1(A), 21-7.1, 21-7.2, 21-7.3, 21-7.4, 21-7.5, 21-7.7; repeals
              §§ 21-3.60-3, Ch. 21, Art. 5; adds new Ch. 21, Art. 5, various amendments to
              the land use ordinance (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
96-  10-31-   Amends unilateral agreement incorporated in Ord. 93-66 which amends a portion
63   1996     of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki (Special)
96-  11-27-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 17, Mokuleia-Haleiwa (Special)
64   1996
96-  11-27-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 24, Waimanalo (Special)
65   1996
96-  11-27-   Adds Art. 28 to Ch. 2, relating to city motor vehicles (prohibits take-home use
66   1996     of a city motor vehicle by most executive agency heads and deputy heads) (Eff.
              1-2-1997)
96-  11-27-   Amends §§ 15B-3.1, 15B-3.5, relating to conduct of passengers on city transit
67   1996     buses and special transit service vehicles and violation/penalties
96-  11-27-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special)
68   1996
96-  11-27-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 8, Waipahu (Special)
69   1996
96-  11-27-   Amends §§ 24-2.2, 24-2.3, relating to development plan special provisions for
70   1996     the primary urban center
96-  12-18-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki (Special)
71   1996
              Amends §§ 21-2.20, 21-3.90-3, 21-7.80-2, 21-9.1, Table 21-3.1(C), Exhibits 21-
              7.13 and 21-7.15; renumbers §§ 21-7.80 to 21-7.80-1, 21-7.80-3 to 21-7.80-4,
96-  12-18-   21-7.80-4 to 21-7.80-5, 21-7.80-5 to 21-7.80-6, 21-7.80-6 to 21-7.80-7, 21-
72   1996     7.80-7 to 21-7.80-8, Table 21-7.6 to Table 21-7.6(C); adds §§ 21-7.80, 21-7.80-
              3; 21-7.80-9, 21-8.30-9, Tables 21-7.6(A) and (B); repeals § 21-7.80-1 and
              Exhibit 21-7.14, relating to the Waikiki special district (Repealed by Ord. 99-
              12)
96-  12-19-   Adds Art. 28 to Ch. 14, maintenance of private streets and roads
73   1996
96-  12-19-   Amends portion of development plan land use map for the primary urban center
74   1996     (Special)
96-  12-19-   Amends portion of development plan land use map for Koolaupoko (Special)
75   1996
96-  12-19-   Amends portion of development plan land use map for Koolaupoko (Special)
76   1996
              Amends §§ 41-27.4, 41-27.5, possession, use, and sale of pepper sprays for
96-  12-19-   self-defense (license issued to sellers shall be valid until one year from the
77   1996     date of its issuance or until January 21, 1997, whichever last occurs, and
              shall be renewable)
96-  12-19-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili (Special)
78   1996
96-  12-20-   Amends portion of development plan land use map for Waianae (Special)
79   1996
97-           Adds Art. 5 to Ch. 41, prohibiting the manufacture, possession, sale and
01   1-2-1997 distribution of certain products that contain gamma hydroxybutyrate (Sec. 3 of
              Ord. 97-01 was amended by Ord. 98-46)
97-  2-12-    Adds Art. 11 to Ch. 3 and adds § 15B-6.7; repeals Art. 5, Ch. 13; amends
02   1997     various sections to conform to dissolution of public transit authority (Eff. 7-
              1-1997) (§§ 15B-6.3 through 15B-6.7 repealed by Ord. 23-21)
              Adds § 3-9.6, relating to boards, commissions and committees of the City and
97-  2-12-    County of Honolulu (to provide for the removal of members of boards,
03   1997     commissions and committees who have not exercised due diligence in the
              performance of their duties; shall not apply to any failure to attend a meeting
              held before the effective date of this ordinance)
97-  2-12-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 2, Kahala-Kuliouou (Special) (Unilateral
04   1997     agreement was amended by Ord. 99-08)
97-  2-28-    Amends §§ 15-14.1, 15-15.1; repeals 15-14.9, relating to the traffic code
05   1997
97-  2-28-    Amends §§ 15-23.2 and 15-23.2A, relating to off-street municipal parking
06   1997     facilities
97-  3-31-    Adds § 14-6.4A, determination of residential user discharge (Eff. 6-2-1998)
07   1997
97-  3-31-    Amends § 38-3.3, bidding not required, leasing to private developers (when
08   1997     directed by council, requires the city to appraise real property proposed to be
              leased or rented for a housing project)
97-  3-31-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
09   1997
97-  4-30-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Ewa (Special)
10   1997
97-  4-30-    Adds Art. 8 to Ch. 34, panoram business regulation (Eff. 1-1-1998)
11   1997
97-  4-30-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Crestview) (Special)
12   1997
97-  4-30-    Amends § 13-4.7, relating to litter (authorizes the city to impose civil fines
13   1997     for violations regarding failure of property owners to maintain their premises
              and the sidewalk area abutting their property line free of litter)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
              Amends § 2-4.2, additional powers, duties and functions of the budget and
97-  4-30-    fiscal services director (to allow payment of taxes and other fees by
14   1997     electronic means and to permit the budget and fiscal services director to
              establish a fee for the acceptance of electronic payments)
97-  5-16-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for North Shore
15   1997     (Special)
              Repeals § 16-1.1 (1991 edition of the Uniform Building Code) and adopts § 16-
97-  5-16-    1.1 (1994 edition of the Uniform Building Code); repeals Ch. 16, Art. 9, equal
16   1997     access for persons with disabilities; amends §§ 16-4.3, 16-5.1, 16-5.4, 16-5.5,
              Table No. 16-5G, building code (Eff. 8-14-1997); Article 5 of Chapter 16 was
              moved to Chapter 16B
97-  5-16-    Amends §§ 3-2.6, 11-1.2, 11-1.3 (Repealed by Ord. 24-20), to reflect that the
17   1997     department of human resources has been renamed the department of community and
              social resources
97-  5-16-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for the Primary Urban
18   1997     Center (Special)
97-  5-16-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili (Special)
19   1997
97-  5-16-    Amends §§ 41-14.1, 41-14.2, 41-14.3, 41-14.5, relating to smoking (subject to
20   1997     certain exceptions, extends prohibitions against smoking in Ch. 41, Art. 14, to
              most indoor areas of the city) (Eff. 6-15-1997)
97-  5-16-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for the Primary Urban
21   1997     Center (Special)
97-  5-16-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
22   1997     (Special)
97-  5-16-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for East Honolulu and
23   1997     Koolaupoko (Special)
97-  5-22-    Adds Art. 29 to Ch. 2, relating to housing projects (prohibits presale or
24   1997     prelease of a dwelling unit in a proposed housing project on city property
              before council approval of the development agreement)
97-  6-12-    Amends § 1-17.12, relating to sexual harassment training (Eff. 7-1-1997)
25   1997
97-  6-12-    Amends § 10-1.2, park rules, relating to metered parking at Kapiolani Park
26   1997
97-  6-12-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Central Oahu
27   1997     (Special)
97-  6-12-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Central Oahu
28   1997     (Special)
97-  6-12-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
29   1997     (Special)
97-  6-12-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for the primary urban
30   1997     center (Special)
97-  6-12-    Amends § 16-1.1, relating to the building code (requiring the implementation of
31   1997     adequate safety measures for excavation and fill work for certain construction)
97-  6-12-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for the primary urban
32   1997     center (Special)
97-  6-12-    Amends §§ 6-52.1, 6-52.3, relating to fees imposed on certain convicted persons
33   1997     (Repealed on 6-14-1998)
97-  6-12-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
34   1997     (Special)
97-  6-12-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
35   1997     (Special)
97-  6-12-    Appropriations for FY 1997-98 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-1997) (Special)
36   1997
97-  6-12-    Appropriations for FY 1997-98 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-1997)
37   1997     (Special)
97-  6-12-    Appropriations for FY 1997-98 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-1997)
38   1997     (Special)
97-  6-12-    Authorization for general obligation bonds and bond anticipation notes
39   1997     (Special)
97-  6-12-    Adds Art. 54 to Ch. 6, relating to creation of a sewer revenue bond improvement
40   1997     fund (Eff. 7-1-1997)
97-  6-12-    Adds Art. 55 to Ch. 6, relating to fees for civil service examinations (Eff. 7-
41   1997     1-1997 and shall terminate on 6-12-1998)
97-  6-12-    Repeals Art. 48, Ch. 6, motor vehicle registration fund; amends §§ 15A-4.1 and
42   1997     15A-6.2 to require registration fees and reconstructed vehicle inspection fees
              be deposited into the general fund (Eff. 7-1-1997)
97-  6-12-    Amends §§ 6-53.2 and 6-53.3, relating to the special events fund (to include
43   1997     the revenues and expenditures of the Honolulu Zoo, Waikiki Shell, and the
              municipal golf courses) (Eff. 7-1-1997)
97-  6-12-    Amends Ord. 85-90, relating to the City and County of Honolulu solid waste
44   1997     disposal facility special fund (Eff. 7-1-1997) (Ord. 85-90 was further amended
              by Ords. 99-22, 00-26, 01-29, 02-28, and 03-09)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
97-  6-12-    Amends §§ 9-4.1 and 9-4.2, relating to refuse collection and disposal charges
45   1997     (Eff. 7-1-1997)
97-  6-30-    Authorization to reimburse the general fund for the payment of principal and
46   1997     interest on certain general obligation bonds issued to finance facilities for
              the wastewater system and plants
97-           Amends § 18-3.1, relating to building permits (exempts certain one-story
47   7-1-1997 detached buildings accessory to crop production in agriculturally zoned
              districts from the building permit requirement)
97-  7-1-1997 Improvement district assessment levy for Makaha sewers (Special) (Amended by
48            Ord. 98-05)
97-  8-22-    Repeals Ch. 24, Art. 3, and adds a new Ch. 24, Art. 3, development plan for Ewa
49   1997     (Eff. 10-21-1997)
97-  8-22-    Amends Ch. 16A, housing code
50   1997
97-  8-22-    Amends unilateral agreement incorporated in Ord. 93-44 which amends a portion
51   1997     of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
97-  8-22-    Repeals Ch. 41, Art. 3, dancing schools
52   1997
97-  8-22-    Amends §§ 15A-2.1, 15A-2.2, permit and license fees for driving motor vehicles
53   1997     (Eff. 7-1-1997)
97-  9-17-    Adds Art. 30 to Ch. 2, personal services contracts (the first annual report
54   1997     required to be submitted for FY 1998)
              Amends §§ 8-2.2, 8-12.1, 8-12.4, 8-12.7, relating to real property tax
97-  10-8-    deadlines (to move back certain real property tax deadlines, including the
55   1997     deadlines for the assessment lists and the real property tax appeals; [shall
              apply beginning with the 1997-1998 tax year])
97-  10-8-    Amends §§ 8-4.2, 8-10.20, relating to real property tax assessment (deletes
56   1997     references to repealed chapters and provides that the mayor’s declaration of a
              natural disaster is a basis for property tax relief to property owners)
97-  10-8-    Amends Ch. 3, Art. 9, title, §§ 3-9.2, 3-9.3, 3-9.4 titles, Table 16-5G, §§ 41-
57   1997     5.3 and 41-14.4 (technical revisions)
97-  10-17-   Authorizes issuance of general obligation refunding bonds (Special)
58   1997
97-  10-29-   Amends portion of development plan land use map for the Primary Urban Center
59   1997     (Special)
97-  10-29-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for the Primary Urban
60   1997     Center (Special)
97-  10-29-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Central Oahu
61   1997     (Special)
97-  10-29-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
62   1997     (Special)
97-  10-29-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
63   1997     (Special)
97-  10-29-   Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolauloa
64   1997     (Special)
              Amends §§ 31-1.1 through 31-1.4, 31-2.2 and 31-3.2, enterprise zones (to
97-  10-29-   clarify that enterprise zone incentives authorized by the city shall apply only
65   1997     to the extent authorized by, and only to enterprise zones as delineated by the
              city)
97-  10-30-   Adds Art. 13 to Ch. 13, use of animals in solicitations in the Waikiki special
66   1997     district
97-  11-26-   Amends title to Art. 5, Ch. 40; and amends §§ 40-5.1 through 40-5.3, relating
67   1997     to implements that may be used to make graffiti
97-  12-17-   Amends portion of the development plan land use map for the primary urban
68   1997     center (Special)
97-  12-17-   Amends portion of State land use district boundary map at Laie (Special)
69   1997
97-  12-17-   Adds Art. 20 to Ch. 1, relating to the city’s drug and alcohol abuse training
70   1997     program (Eff. 7-1-1998)
97-  12-17-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 21, Kualoa-Waiahole-Kahaluu (Special)
71   1997
97-  12-17-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 11, Wahiawa-Whitmore (Special)
72   1997
97-  12-17-   Amends portion of the development plan public facilities map for the primary
73   1997     urban center (Special)
              Amends §§ 21-3.30, 21-3.40, 21-3.70-12, 21-4.10, 21-5.20, 21-5.20-2, 21-5.30-4,
97-  12-17-   21-5.50-1, 21-5.60-1, 21-5.70-1, 21-5.90-3, 21-5.100-1, 21-5.110-1, 21-9.1;
74   1997     Tables 21-5.1-A, 21-5.1-B, 21-5.2-A, 21-5.3-A, 21-5.3-B, 21-5.4-A, 21-5.5-A,
              21-5.5-B, 21-7.6(C); Exhibits 21-7.13, 21-7.16, 21-7.17, 21-7.18, miscellaneous
              minor technical amendments to the LUO (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
97-  12-17-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special)
75   1997
98-  1-15-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Crestview) (Special) (Unilateral
01   1998     agreement was amended by Ord. 98-69)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
98-  2-12-    Amends § 2-17.2, relating to the executive operating budget (changes the dollar
02   1998     threshold triggering the need for council approval of transfers of funds between
              characters of expenditures within an activity)
98-  2-12-    Renumbers § 21-4.40-20 as § 21-4.40-19; adds § 21-4.40-20; amends Table 21-5.4-
03   1998     A and § 21-9.1, relating to the transfer of development rights for certain
              historic properties (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
98-  2-12-    Repeals Ch. 29, Art. 3, minors engaged in street trade
04   1998
98-  2-12-    Amendment to improvement district assessment levy for Makaha sewers (Special)
05   1998     (Amended by Ord. 98-51)
98-           Amends Appendix A, “Sewer Service Charge Schedules,” § 14-6.4A, and repeals Sec.
06   3-4-1998 4 of Ord. 97-07 relating to the effective date (updates the city’s sewer service
              charge schedules and makes conforming amendments) (Eff. 6-2-1998)
98-  3-4-1998 Adds § 2-8.2, creating a volunteer adopt-a-block graffiti and litter removal
07            program (Eff. 7-2-1998)
98-  3-4-1998 Amends unilateral agreement incorporated in Ord. 94-81 which amends a portion of
08            zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Point-Kahe-Nanakuli (Special)
98-  3-4-1998 Amends Ord. 97-38, appropriations for FY 1997-98 executive capital budget
09            (amendment No. 1) (Special)
98-  3-23-    Repeals and adds Ch. 41, Art. 13, relating to the advertisement and distribution
10   1998     of cigarettes and tobacco products in a school zone
98-  3-23-    Amends §§ 21-5.10-1, 21-5.20-5, 21-9.1 and Table 21-5.1-A relating to cemetery
11   1998     caretakers (amends LUO to permit dwellings for caretakers as an accessory use to
              cemeteries) (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
98-  3-23-    Amends §§ 13-7.1, 13-7.2, 13-7.4; adds § 13-7.6, relating to handbilling in the
12   1998     Waikiki special district
98-  3-23-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili (Special)
13   1998
98-  3-23-    Amends unilateral agreement incorporated in Ord. 89-28 which amends a portion of
14   1998     zoning map No. 6, Red Hill-Ft. Shafter (Special)
98-  4-20-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City (Special)
15   1998
98-  4-20-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City (Special)
16   1998
98-  4-20-    Amends §§ 38-6.6, 38-7.1; adds § 38-6.12, relating to the lease and rental
17   1998     policy for city facilities
98-  5-21-    Adds Art. 9 to Ch. 34, relating to lap dancing establishments
18   1998
98-  5-21-    Amends § 14-6.3, relating to sewer service charge schedules (providing for an
19   1998     annual review of the sewer service charge schedule)
98-  5-21-    Amends § 2-17.3, relating to moneys earned on investment of funds (allowing
20   1998     crediting of funds other than the general fund for the moneys earned on the
              investment of city funds)
98-  5-21-    Repeals §§ 6-47.1, 6-47.3; renumbers § 6-47.2 as § 6-47.1; and amends § 14-8.2,
21   1998     relating to sewer funds (abolishing the wastewater system facility charge fund)
98-  5-21-    Repeals § 29-4.6, abolishing the litter control fund (Eff. 7-1-1998)
22   1998
98-  6-9-1998 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for the Primary Urban
23            Center (Special)
98-  6-9-1998 Amends portion of zoning map No. 6, Red Hill-Fort Shafter (Special)
24
98-  6-9-1998 Appropriations for FY 1998-99 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-1998) (Special)
25
98-  6-9-1998 Amends § 30-4.7, to renew ultra-low flush toilet rebate program (Sec. 4 was
26            repealed by Ord. 00-05)
98-  6-9-1998 Appropriations for FY 1998-99 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-1998)
27            (Special)
98-  6-9-1998 Appropriations for FY 1998-99 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-1998) (Special)
28            (Amended by Ord. 99-07)
98-  6-9-1998 Authorization for general obligation bonds and bond anticipation notes (Special)
29
98-  6-9-1998 Repeals Art. 31, Ch. 6, housing assistance fund (Eff. 6-30-1998)
30
98-           Amends §§ 6-53.1, 6-53.3, relating to the special events fund (provides for the
31   6-9-1998 appropriation of excess funds in the special events fund by council resolution
              as single purpose moneys)
98-  6-9-1998 Adds Art. 56 to Ch. 6, special reserve fund
32
98-  6-9-1998 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for the Primary Urban
33            Center (Special)
98-  6-9-1998 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for the Primary Urban
34            Center (Special)
98-  6-9-1998 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
35            (Special)
98-  6-9-1998 Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for the Primary Urban
36            Center (Special)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
98-  6-9-1998 Amendment to improvement district assessment levy for Kahaluu sewers (Special)
37            (Amends Ord. 95-60, relating to the cost of authorized improvements)
98-  6-30-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for the Primary Urban
38   1998     Center (Special)
98-  6-30-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for the Primary Urban
39   1998     Center (Special)
98-  6-30-    Amends portion of development plan land use map for Central Oahu (Special)
40   1998
98-  6-30-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for East Honolulu
41   1998     (Special)
98-  6-30-    Adds Art. 14 to Ch. 13, unlawful signs within street rights-of-way and public
42   1998     malls, and amends § 16-1.1(6) by amending the amendments to § 105 of the
              Uniform Building Code, 1994 Edition, to add a new subdivision 105.3.5
98-  7-23-    Adds Art. 31 to Ch. 2, seals and logotypes of executive agencies
43   1998
98-  7-23-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special) (UA
44   1998     was amended by Ord. 06-26)
98-  7-23-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 23, Kailua-Lanikai-Keolu (Special)
45   1998
              Sec. 3 of Ord. 97-01, prohibiting the possession, sale and distribution of
98-  7-23-    certain products that contain gamma hydroxybutyrate, was amended in order that
46   1998     the city’s anti-drug policy, penalties and enforcement options be maintained
              in the event of the repeal or weakening of the State’s anti-drug policy
98-  7-23-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu (Special)
47   1998
98-  7-23-    Amends § 37-1.5, relating to the disposal of city real property
48   1998
98-  7-23-    Adds Art. 7 to Ch. 4, report on status of anticipated or ongoing collective
49   1998     bargaining
98-  8-18-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
50   1998     (Special)
98-  8-18-    Amendment to improvement district assessment levy for Makaha sewers (Special)
51   1998
98-  8-18-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu (Special)
52   1998
              Amends §§ 14-31.2, 14-31.3, 14-31.4, 14-31.5, 14-31.7, and 14-31.8, relating
98-  8-18-    to banners displayed on lampposts (permitting the display of banners on
53   1998     lampposts along certain streets surrounding the Hawaii Convention Center for
              events held at the center)
98-  8-20-    Adds Ch. 35, incentives for businesses to create new jobs (Repealed by Ord.
54   1998     25-15); amends §§ 18-6.5 and 18A-2.4, waiving certain permit fees for a
              qualified business
98-  10-1-    Amends portion of the development plan land use map for Central Oahu (Special)
55   1998
98-  10-1-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 22, Heeia-Maunawili (Special)
56   1998
98-  10-1-    Amends portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
57   1998
98-  10-1-    Amends §§ 21-3.90-3, 21-7.60-1, 21-7.60-4, 21-7.60-12, 21-7.60-13, Table 21-
58   1998     7.4; adds Exhibit 21-7.10-A, relating to the Chinatown special district, land
              use ordinance (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
98-  10-28-   Adds Art. 32 to Ch. 2, city video monitoring of public activity
59   1998
              Amends §§ 21-4.40-8A, 21-4.40-13, 21-4.40-29, 21-4.40-33, 21-4.40-40, 21-
98-  11-20-   5.100-1, Tables 21-5.5-A and 21-5.5-B; adds § 21-4.40-7A, relating to the
60   1998     regulation of uses in industrial and industrial-commercial mixed use districts
              (LUO) (Repealed by Ord. 99-12)
98-  11-20-   Amends portion of zoning map No. 8, Waipahu (Special)
61   1998
              Amends §§ 6-15.2 and 6-15.6, relating to the furnishing of electronic data
98-  11-20-   processing services (allowing the department of information technology to
62   1998     determine which type of medium is best suited for distributing public data
              electronically)
98-  11-20-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 2, Kahala-Kuliouou (Special)
63   1998
98-  11-20-   Amends § 14-21.6; repeals Ch. 2, Art. 19, to conform the ROH 1990 to the
64   1998     Hawaii Public Procurement Code and its related rules
98-  11-20-   Amends portion of the development plan land use map for the Primary Urban
65   1998     Center (Special)
98-  12-17-   Adds Art. 15 to Ch. 29, and amends § 29-11.2, publication dispensing racks in
66   1998     the Waikiki special district (Repealed by Ord. 02-10)
98-  12-17-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 1, Hawaii Kai (Special)
67   1998
98-  12-17-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
68   1998
98-  12-17-   Amends unilateral agreement incorporated in Ord. 98-01 which amends a portion
69   1998     of zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Crestview) (Special)
99-  2-11-    Amends § 15-29.1, definitions; and adds § 41-28.7, volunteer disabled parking
01   1999     enforcement program (§ 41-28.7 repealed by Ord. 03-40)
99-  3-12-    Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
02   1999     Urban Center (Special)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
99-  3-12-    Amends § 38-9.4, special performances (increases the maximum admission price
03   1999     per student for special performances at the Neal S. Blaisdell Center Concert
              Hall)
99-  3-12-    Amends unilateral agreement incorporated in Ord. 4320 (Special)
04   1999
99-  3-12-    Adds Art. 11 to Ch. 38, lease and permit policy for the grounds of City Hall
05   1999     and the Honolulu Municipal Building; and amends § 13-6.2, regulations
              affecting peddlers
99-  3-9-1999 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for East
06            Honolulu (Special)
99-  3-9-1999 Amends Ord. 98-28, appropriations for FY 1998-99 executive capital budget
07            (amendment No. 1) (Special)
99-  3-30-    Amends unilateral agreement incorporated in Ord. 97-04 which amends a portion
08   1999     of zoning map No. 2, Kahala-Kuliouou (Special)
99-  3-30-    Adds Art. 19 to Ch. 41, relating to lasers and laser products (establishes
09   1999     reasonable restrictions on the sale, possession, and use of lasers in the
              city)
99-  3-30-    Amends § 2-15.2, relating to fees to be assessed by the Royal Hawaiian Band
10   1999     (repeals the fee for performance by the Royal Hawaiian Band at vessel arrival
              or departure)
99-  3-30-    Authorization for general obligation bonds (Special)
11   1999
99-  5-10-    Repeals Ch. 21, land use ordinance, and adds a new Ch. 21, which streamlines
12   1999     the land use permitting process and ensures that adequate controls and review
              mechanisms are in place for certain proposed land uses
99-  5-10-    Amends portion of the development plan public facilities map for Central Oahu
13   1999     (Special)
99-  5-27-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for the Primary Urban
14   1999     Center (Special)
99-  5-27-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for the Primary Urban
15   1999     Center (Special)
99-  5-27-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
16   1999     (Special)
99-  5-27-    Amends portion of development plan public facilities map for Central Oahu
17   1999     (Special)
99-  5-28-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City (Special)
18   1999
99-  5-28-    Repeals Art. 4, Ch. 24, East Honolulu development plan, and adds a new Art. 4,
19   1999     Ch. 24, which adopts a revised development plan for East Honolulu (Eff. 7-27-
              1999)
              Establishes a transportation pilot project to determine the feasibility of
99-  5-28-    using public-private transportation partnerships to provide essential
20   1999     transportation services in areas currently underserved by the city transit bus
              system
99-  5-28-    Amends § 2-8.2, adopt-a-block graffiti and litter removal program
21   1999
              Amends § 9-7.4, glass incentive program; repeals Ch. 6, Art. 49, recycling
99-  6-3-1999 fund; adds new Ch. 6, Art. 49, solid waste special fund; and amends Ord. 85-
22            90, as amended by Ord. 97-44, solid waste special fund (Eff. 7-1-1999) (Ord.
              85-90 was further amended by Ords. 00-26, 01-29, 02-28, and 03-09)
99-           Adds Art. 57 to Ch. 6, golf fund (creating a special fund for the management,
23   6-3-1999 operation and maintenance of the municipal golf courses); amends § 6-53.2,
              relating to the purpose of the special events fund (Eff. 7-1-1999)
99-  6-10-    Amends § 15A-4.1, increasing the annual fee for the registration of a motor
24   1999     vehicle (Eff. 7-1-1999)
99-  6-22-    Appropriations for FY 1999-2000 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-1999) (Special)
25   1999
99-  6-22-    Appropriations for FY 1999-2000 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-1999)
26   1999     (Special)
99-  6-22-    Appropriations for FY 1999-2000 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-1999)
27   1999     (Special)
99-  6-22-    Authorizating the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
28   1999     anticipation notes (Special)
99-  6-22-    Amends § 20-1.1, increasing permit fees (amended by Ord. 15-45; Am. Ord. 17-
29   1999     14), and § 6-11.1, increasing fees for copying maps, plans, and diagrams and
              conducting searches of real property tax records (Eff. 7-1-1999)
99-  6-22-    Amends Table No. 18-A, increasing fees for the issuance of building permits
30   1999     (Eff. 7-1-1999)
99-  6-22-    Amends §§ 6-41.1, 22-1.1, 22-1.2, and 25-5.2, increasing fees or fee schedules
31   1999     for permits and services provided by the department of planning and permitting
              (Eff. 7-1-1999)
99-  6-22-    Amends §§ 9-1.1, 9-1.2, 9-1.4, 9-2.2, 9-2.3, 9-2.9, 9-2.10, 9-3.3, 9-3.5, 9-
32   1999     4.2, 9-4.3, 9-4.4, 9-4.6, 9-5.1, 9-6.1, 9-7.2, 9-7.3, and 14-30.3, relating to
              collection and disposal of refuse (Eff. 7-1-1999)
99-  6-22-    Amends § 9-4.2(f), relating to disposal charges (Eff. 7-1-1999)
33   1999
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
99-  6-22-    Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
34   1999     Urban Center (Special)
99-  6-22-    Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
35   1999     Urban Center (Special)
99-  6-22-    Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for Koolauloa
36   1999     (Special)
99-  6-22-    Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for Central Oahu
37   1999     (Special)
99-  6-22-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 6, Red Hill-Fort Shafter (Special)
38   1999
99-  6-22-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 23, Kailua-Lanikai-Keolu (Special)
39   1999
99-  6-22-    Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
40   1999     Urban Center (Special)
99-  6-22-    Amends § 6-56.2, relating to the special reserve fund
41   1999
99-  6-22-    Adds § 8-10.23 to Ch. 8, Art. 10, establishing a seven-year real property tax
42   1999     exemption for qualifying construction work (applies to tax years beginning 7-1-
              2000 and ending on 6-30-2012)
99-  6-30-    Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
43   1999     Urban Center (Special)
99-  6-30-    Amends § 17-3.5, meter installation (relating to charging of electric vehicles)
44   1999
99-  6-30-    Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the North
45   1999     Shore (Special)
99-  8-2-1999 Adds Art. 10 to Ch. 34, nightclubs (establishes reasonable regulations for
46            teenage and nude dancing nightclubs)
99-  8-5-1999 Amends a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special)
47
99-  8-5-1999 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
48            Urban Center (Special)
99-  8-5-1999 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for Central Oahu
49            (Special)
99-  8-5-1999 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for Central Oahu
50            (Special)
              Amends for a period of two years, subject to an extension, the affordable
99-  8-5-1999 housing conditions in existing unilateral agreements to permit the sale of
51            affordable housing units free from any conditions related to buyer eligibility
              and restrictions on transfer (Amended by Ord. 01-33)
99-  8-5-1999 Amends §§ 13-13.1 through 13-13.4; adds § 13-13.2A, relating to the use of
52            animals in solicitations in the Waikiki special district
99-  8-5-1999 Adds Art. 17 to Ch. 41, providing for the abatement of prostitution-related
53            public nuisances
99-  8-25-    Amends Ord. 86-88 (Hawaii Kai Marina zone change) by deleting Condition 4 of
54   1999     the unilateral agreement as a condition of the rezoning
99-  8-25-    Requires the department of information technology to establish an “Internet
55   1999     Payments and Online Services Program” as a pilot program
99-  10-6-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu (Special)
56   1999
99-  10-6-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 1, Hawaii Kai (Special)
57   1999
99-  10-6-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki (Special)
58   1999
99-  10-6-    Amends §§ 17-1.2, 17-2.1, 17-3.1, 17-3.3, 17-3.6, 17-4.2, 17-5.1, Electrical
59   1999     Code, and adopts the 1999 Edition of the National Electrical Code (Eff. 12-5-
              1999)
99-  11-4-    Amends the unilateral agreement incorporated in Ord. 92-81 which amends a
60   1999     portion of zoning map No. 13, Makakilo (Special)
99-  11-4-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 23, Kailua-Lanikai-Keolu (Special)
61   1999
99-  11-26-   Amends §§ 10-4.1 through 10-4.7; repeals § 10-4.8; and adds §§ 10-4.9, 10-4.10,
62   1999     10-4.11, municipal golf course fees (Eff. 1-1-2000)
99-  11-26-   Amends §§ 21-7.40 and 21-2.140-1, relating to the regulation of signs
63   1999
99-  11-26-   Amends § 41-14.2(m), to prohibit smoking at the Waikiki Shell except for
64   1999     designated smoking areas
99-  11-26-   Amends § 9-4.3, refuse collection and disposal charges
65   1999
99-  11-26-   Adds Art. 23 to Ch. 41, unofficial age identification card
66   1999
99-  11-26-   Deletes unilateral agreement incorporated in Ord. 84-53 (Special)
67   1999
99-  11-26-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 2, Kahala-Kuliouou (Special)
68   1999
99-  11-26-   Adds Art. 8 to Ch. 4; repeals §§ 24-3.10 and 24-4.10, public infrastructure
69   1999     maps
99-  12-16-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Point-Nanakuli (Special)
70   1999
99-  12-16-   Adds Art. 33 to Ch. 2, relating to the establishment of a first source program
71   1999     (Repealed by Ord. 25-17)
99-  12-16-   Repeals Ch. 24, Art. 7, Koolauloa development plan, and adds a new Ch. 24, Art.
72   1999     7, Ko‘olau Loa sustainable communities plan (Eff. 2-14-2000)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
99-  12-16-   Repeals Ch. 19 and adds a new Ch. 19, plumbing code (Eff. 2-14-2000) (Repealed
73   1999     by Ord. 22-25)
99-  12-16-   Amends a portion of the development plan land use map for the Primary Urban
74   1999     Center (Special)
99-  12-16-   Amends a portion of the development plan land use map for Central Oahu
75   1999     (Special)
00-  2-7-2000 Amends § 1-12.1, definitions, purchase of recycled paper products
01
00-  3-30-    Amends §§ 13-7.2, 13-7.3, 13-7.4; repeals and reenacts Attachment A, relating
02   2000     to handbilling (amending the areas in which handbilling is permitted in the
              Waikiki special district)
00-  3-30-    Repeals and adds Ch. 16, Art. 1, uniform building code, 1997 edition (Eff. 6-
03   2000     28-2000; later amended by Ord. 15-45; Ord. 17-14) and 28-1.3
00-  3-30-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili (Special)
04   2000
00-  3-30-    Amends §§ 30-4.1 and 30-4.7, relating to water conservation (amending rebate
05   2000     program; to terminate on 7-1-2003)
00-  3-30-    Amends §§ 14-17.8, 14-21.1, 14-21.3, 14-21.4, 14-21.8, 14-22.1, 14-22.2, 14-
06   2000     22.4, 14-24.2; adds 14-21.9, relating to improvement districts (streamling the
              improvement district process)
00-  3-30-    Repeals Ch. 6, Art. 28, special trust fund for Kukui Plaza
07   2000
              Adds Art. 16 to Ch. 29, performing on public sidewalks (establishing guidelines
00-  4-11-    for persons who perform on public sidewalks in Waikiki without charge) (Eff. 7-
08   2000     10-2000) This ordinance shall be repealed three years after its approval (4-11-
              2003)
00-  4-19-    Adds § 21-5.500A; amends § 21-10.1 and Table 21-3 (Repealed by Ord. 25-2),
09   2000     establishing real estate offices and travel agencies as permitted uses in the
              resort zoning district (LUO)
00-  4-19-    Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the North
10   2000     Shore (Special)
00-  4-19-    Amends Ch. 25 title, §§ 25-1.3, 25-3.3, 25-4.1, 25-4.2, 25-5.1 through 25-5.5,
11   2000     and 25-7.1, relating to the special management area use permit procedures
              (§§25-3.3, 25-4.1, 25-4.2, 25-5.1, 25-5.3 through 25-5.5 repealed by Ord. 23-4)
00-  4-19-    Amends a portion of State land use district boundary map at Ewa (Special)
12   2000
00-  4-28-    Adds Ch. 28, special improvement districts
13   2000
00-  5-10-    Repeals Art. 9, Ch. 24, Waianae development plan, and adds a new Art. 9, Ch.
14   2000     24, which adopts the Waianae sustainable communities plan (Eff. 7-9-2000)
00-  5-10-    Repeals Art. 8, Ch. 24, North Shore development plan, and adds a new Art. 8,
15   2000     Ch. 24, which adopts the North Shore sustainable communities plan (Eff. 7-9-
              2000)
00-  5-10-    Amends §§ 24-3.1, 24-3.3, 24-3.5 to 24-3.9, 24-3.11, Ewa development plan, and
16   2000     certain sections of the Ewa plan
00-  5-10-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu (Special)
17   2000
00-  6-6-2000 Appropriations for FY 2000-2001 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-2000) (Special)
18            (Amended by Ord. 01-31)
00-  6-6-2000 Appropriations for FY 2000-2001 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-2000)
19            (Special) (Amended by Ord. 01-32)
00-  6-6-2000 Appropriations for FY 2000-2001 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-2000)
20            (Special) (Amended by Ord. 01-03)
00-  6-7-2000 Amends a portion of zoning map No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili (Special)
21
00-           Amends §§ 27-2.4, 27-2.16, 27-3.2, 27-3.4, 27-3.7 through 27-3.10, 27-4.4, 27-
22   6-7-2000 4.10, 27-5.4, 27-6.8, 27-7.1, 27-7.3 through 27-7.6, 27-7.8, relating to
              community facilities districts
00-  6-7-2000 Adds Art. 15 to Ch. 41, prohibiting bidi cigarettes (Eff. 8-6-2000)
23
00-  6-7-2000 Authorizing the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
24            anticipation notes (Special)
00-  6-7-2000 Amends § 6-51.2, relating to concession fees for the Hanauma Bay Nature
25            Preserve (Eff. 7-1-2000)
00-           Amends Ord. 85-90, as amended by Ords. 97-44 and 99-22, relating to revenues
26   6-7-2000 from the solid waste disposal facility account (Ord. 85-90 was further amended
              by Ord. 01-29, 02-28, and 03-09)
00-  6-7-2000 Amends § 9-4.2, relating to disposal charges (Eff. 7-1-2000)
27
00-  6-7-2000 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
28            Urban Center (Special)
00-  6-7-2000 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
29            (Special)
00-  6-7-2000 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
30            (Special)
00-  6-7-2000 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
31            (Special)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
00-  6-7-2000 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for Koolaupoko
32            (Special)
00-  6-7-2000 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
33            Urban Center (Special)
00-  6-7-2000 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
34            Urban Center (Special)
00-  6-7-2000 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
35            Urban Center (Special)
00-  6-7-2000 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
36            Urban Center (Special)
00-  6-7-2000 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for Waianae
37            (Special)
00-  6-7-2000 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the North
38            Shore (Special)
00-  6-7-2000 Amends §§ 18-3.1, 18-4.1, and 18-5.6, relating to fees and permits for building,
39            electrical, plumbing and sidewalk codes
00-  6-20-    Establishes Waikiki special improvement district No. 1 (Eff. 7-1-2000) (Amended
40   2000     by Ord. 01-22)
00-  6-27-    Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for Central Oahu
41   2000     (Special)
00-  7-27-    Improvement district assessment levy for Waimano Sewers (Special)
42   2000
00-  7-27-    Amends § 41-1.3, by authorizing police to physically arrest persons using
43   2000     intoxicating liquor in certain public places
00-  7-27-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
44   2000
00-  7-27-    Amends § 8-10.23, relating to a real property tax exemption for certain
45   2000     qualifying construction work
00-  7-27-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 1, Hawaii Kai (Special)
46   2000
00-  8-25-    Repeals Art. 6, Ch. 24, Koolaupoko development plan, and adds a new Art. 6, Ch.
47   2000     24, which adopts the Koolaupoko sustainable communities plan
00-  10-12-   Amends § 2-17.2, relating to the execution of the executive operating and capital
48   2000     budget ordinances [allows the transit management services contractor to transfer
              funds between characters of expenditure without council approval]
00-  11-2-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki (Special)
49   2000
00-  11-2-    Adds Art. 2 to Ch. 41, advertisement of intoxicating liquor and liquor products
50   2000
00-  11-2-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City (Special)
51   2000
00-  11-2-    Amends § 8-1.18, relating to real property tax refund accounts, funds, and
52   2000     payments
00-  11-2-    Amends §§ 35-2.3, 35-2.4, 35-2.5, relating to real property tax rebates for
53   2000     businesses creating new jobs (Repealed by Ord. 25-15)
00-  11-2-    Amends §§ 40-8.3, 40-8.7, by increasing the number of members in the arborist
54   2000     advisory committee and updating the city’s register of exceptional trees
00-  11-2-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 13, Barber’s Point-Kahe-Nanakuli (Special)
55   2000
00-  11-2-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio Mauka (Mililani) (Special)
56   2000
00-  11-2-    Amends a portion of State land use district boundary map at Waipio (Special)
57   2000
00-  11-2-    Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
58   2000     Urban Center (Special)
00-  11-30-   Amends § 29-16.8, relating to performing on public sidewalks in Waikiki
59   2000     (eliminates the exception which allows certain city-sponsored performers to
              perform without a permit) (Repealed 4-11-2003)
00-  11-30-   Adds Art. 16 to Ch. 41, prohibiting the sale or giving away of herbal cigarettes
60   2000     to persons under eighteen years of age (Eff. 1-29-2001)
00-  11-30-   Amends the unilateral agreement incorporated in Ord. 96-61 which amends a portion
61   2000     of zoning map No. 8, Waipahu (Special)
00-  11-30-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 24, Waimanalo (Special)
62   2000
00-  12-6-    Amends § 8-10.5, real property tax exemption for the homes of totally disabled
63   2000     veterans
00-  12-6-    Amends §§ 8-6.1 and 8-7.4, relating to real property taxation (lands dedicated
64   2000     for golf course use; shall apply to the tax years beginning 7-1-2001)
00-  12-7-    Amends §§ 8-6.1 and 8-10.20, relating to real property taxation (deletes the real
65   2000     property tax exemption for public service companies; shall apply to the tax years
              beginning 7-1-01)
00-  12-7-    Amends § 8-7.1, relating to real property taxation (adds “public service” as a
66   2000     new general land class and defining language; shall apply to tax years beginning
              with the 2001-2002 tax year)
00-  12-8-    Adds Art. 18 to Ch. 41, additional areas of significant prostitution-related
67   2000     activity
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
00-  12-8-    Amends §§ 12-4.1, 12-4.2, 12-4.3, 12-4.9; repeals § 3-5.1, relating to stray
68   2000     dogs (increases the penalties for repeat violations)
00-  12-8-    Amends § 15-16.6, relating to storage parking of commercial vehicles (Eff. 6-6-
69   2000     2001)
00-  12-8-    Amends the unilateral agreement incorporated in Ord. 86-88 which amends a
70   2000     portion of zoning map No. 1, Hawaii Kai (Special)
00-  12-8-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 17, Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa (Special)
71   2000
00-  12-11-   Adds Art. 7 to Ch. 12, regulation of dangerous dogs (Eff. 7-1-2001)
72   2000
00-  12-11-   Amends §§ 12-2.2, 12-2.4, 12-2.6, 12-2.7, 12-2.10, 12-2.11, relating to animal
73   2000     nuisances
00-  12-11-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki (Special)
74   2000
01-  2-5-2001 Amends a portion of the development plan land use map for the Primary Urban
01            Center (Special)
01-  3-6-2001 Amends §§ 28-3.2, 28-3.4, and 28-3.6, relating to special improvement districts
02
01-  3-6-2001 Amends Ord. 00-20, appropriations for FY 2000-01 executive capital budget
03            (amendment No. 1) (Special)
01-  3-29-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Point-Nanakuli (Special)
04   2001
01-  3-29-    Adds § 15-13.13, relating to parking placards
05   2001
01-  3-29-    Amends § 8-1.14, relating to confidential real property tax records
06   2001
01-  3-29-    Amends a portion of zoning map Nos. 12 and 13, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point and
07   2001     Makakilo (Special)
01-  3-29-    Amends § 41-2.3, relating to advertisement of alcohol
08   2001
01-  3-29-    Amends § 34-2.1; repeals §§ 41-4.2 and 41-4.3, relating to hotel guest
09   2001     registration
01-  3-29-    Amends §§ 28-4.1 through 28-4.3, relating to special improvement districts
10   2001
01-  3-29-    Amends §§ 22-9.2 and 22-9.5, relating to memorials and names for city parks,
11   2001     sites, and facilities
01-  4-19-    Amends §§ 21-2.90-2, 21-10.1, and Table 21-3 (Repealed by Ord. 25-2); adds
12   2001     § 21-5.610A (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), relating to elderly housing (LUO)
01-  4-19-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 17, Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa (Special)
13   2001
01-  4-19-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special)
14   2001
01-  4-19-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Crestview) (Special)
15   2001
01-  4-19-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 17, Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa (Special)
16   2001
01-  4-19-    Amends §§ 15-24.2 and 15-26.1, relating to the traffic code (amends the penalty
17   2001     and enforcement provisions relating to putting glass or other injurious
              substances on a highway)
01-  4-19-    Amends § 41-12.3, relating to prohibited activities in the city
18   2001
01-  4-19-    Adds Art. 24 to Ch. 41, wearing of masks or disguises
19   2001
01-  4-19-    Amends §§ 15B-2.1, 15B-2.2, 15B-2.3, and 15B-4.5, relating to fares on the city
20   2001     transit system (Eff. 7-1-2001)
01-  5-9-2001 Amends § 38-11.3, relating to the use of the grounds of City Hall and the
21            Honolulu Municipal Building
01-           Amends Sec. 3 of Ord. 00-40 and Sec. 9(c) of the Waikiki business improvement
22   5-9-2001 district plan, attached as Exhibit A, relating to the Waikiki special
              improvement district No. 1
01-  6-4-2001 Amends § 8-10.19, relating to historic residential real property
23
01-  6-4-2001 Appropriations for FY 2001-2002 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-2001)
24            (Special)
01-  6-4-2001 Appropriations for FY 2001-2002 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-2001)
25            (Special)
01-  6-4-2001 Appropriations for FY 2001-2002 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-2001) (Special)
26            (Amended by Ord. 02-21)
01-  6-4-2001 Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
27            anticipation notes (Special)
01-  6-4-2001 Authorizes the issuance and sale and specifies certain terms of general
28            obligation commercial paper (Special) (Amended by Ords. 04-36 and 10-15)
01-           Amends Sec. 11 of Ord. 85-90, as amended by Ords. 97-44, 99-22, and 00-26,
29   6-4-2001 relating to revenues from the solid waste disposal facility account (Ord. 85-90
              was further amended by Ord. 02-28 and 03-09)
01-  6-4-2001 Adds Art. 48 to Ch. 6, relating to the solid waste improvement bond fund (Eff.
30            7-1-2001)
01-  6-20-    Amends Ord. 00-18, appropriations for FY 2000-01 legislative budget (Special)
31   2001
01-  6-29-    Amends Ord. 00-19, appropriations for FY 2000-01 executive operating budget
32   2001     (Special)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
01-           Amends Secs. 2 and 6 of Ord. 99-51 to: add a definition of “owner-occupant”; and
33   7-2-2001 extend the waiver of restrictions on the sale and transfer of affordable housing
              units
01-  7-2-2001 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
34            Urban Center (Special)
01-           Adds § 3-6.8, to require each city management or supervisory officer or employee
35   7-2-2001 to complete a training program on the standards of ethical conduct (Eff. 7-1-
              2001)
01-  7-2-2001 Amends § 15-21.8, to conform the vehicle height restriction in the city traffic
36            code to State law
01-  7-2-2001 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
37            Urban Center (Special)
01-  7-2-2001 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for Central Oahu
38            (Special)
01-  7-2-2001 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
39            Urban Center (Special)
01-  7-26-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 17, Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa (Special)
40   2001
01-  7-26-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki (Special)
41   2001
01-  7-26-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Crestview) (Special) (Amends Ords.
42   2001     91-11 and 92-19 by amending a unilateral agreement and addendum incorporated
              therein by reference)
01-  8-9-2001 Amends §§ 10-1.1, 10-1.2, 10-1.6, 12-4.1, 12-4.4; adds § 10-1.7, relating to
43            dogs in city parks
01-  8-9-2001 Add § 2-18.8, relating to park land acquisition
44
01-  8-9-2001 Amends § 13-6.4, penalty for the violation of regulations affecting peddlers
45            (maximum penalty for imprisonment reduced from one year to 30 days)
              Adds Art. 14 to Ch. 32; amends § 32-2.2; repeals § 32-8.6, relating to the
01-  8-9-2001 building energy efficiency standards (establishes roof heat gain requirements
46            for new low-rise residential buildings and certain additions to existing low-
              rise residences) (Eff. 9-8-2001)
              Amends Table 3-1, §§ 32-5.3, 32-6.3, 32-8.3, 32-8.4, 32-9.3, 32-9.4, 32-10.3,
01-  8-9-2001 32-11.3, relating to building energy efficiency standards (updates and revises
47            the city’s building energy efficiency standards for nonresidential and high-rise
              residential buildings) (Eff. 12-7-2001) (Re-numbered as Ch. 16B)
01-  8-9-2001 Amends § 15-4.6, use of bicycles, skateboards, roller skates and similar devices
48            restricted (corrects reference numbers)
01-  9-26-    Amends § 15-13.9, authority to store vehicles, and § 15-14.1, stopping, standing
49   2001     or parking prohibited in specified places (traffic code)
01-  9-26-    Amends § 15-16.5, City Hall and satellite off-street parking
50   2001
01-  9-26-    Amends §§ 3-6.1 and 3-6.7, relating to the Ethics Commission
51   2001
              Repeals existing Exhibit A and adds a new Exhibit A following § 2-18.2; adds
01-  9-26-    Exhibit B following § 2-18.3; amends §§ 2-18.3, 8-10.9, 14-6.3, 14-7.3, 14-10.3,
52   2001     14-10.4, 30-4.7; repeals Appendices A, B, and D of the General Appendix, Vol.
              III, and reenacts them as Appendices 14-B, 14-C, and 14-D, relating to technical
              revisions
01-  11-1-    Amends Ch. 20, Art. 2, Title; §§ 20-2.1, 20-2.2, 20-2.3, 20-2.5; adds § 20-2.3A,
53   2001     relating to fire safety in existing business buildings (Eff. 1-1-2002)
01-  11-1-    Amends §§ 1-23.2, relating to the city seal (authorizing the manufacture or
54   2001     reproduction for display, or the noncommercial display on the USS Honolulu)
01-  11-1-    Amends § 1-16.3, relating to ordinance revision
55   2001
01-  11-1-    Amends § 15-13.13, relating to parking placards
56   2001
01-  11-26-   Amends §§ 6-44.3 and 6-44.4, relating to fees and charges for services of
57   2001     special duty police officers (Eff. 1-25-2002)
01-  11-26-   Amends §§ 12-1.1 and 12-1.3, relating to cockfighting and penalties thereto
58   2001
01-  11-26-   Improvement district assessment levy for Kaneohe Bay sewers (Special)
59   2001
              Amends §§ 8-10.1 and 8-11.1; adds § 8-10.27, establishing an exemption from real
01-  11-26-   property taxation for public service companies, providing for the application
60   2001     for the exemption, and providing that the exempt properties are not subject to
              the minimum tax. (For tax year 2002-2003, the deadline for filing the claim for
              exemption shall be November 30, 2001.)
01-  11-26-   Amends § 15-21.11, relating to the traffic code (modifying the current
61   2001     restrictions on trucks carrying loads of certain weight using portions of
              Kaneohe Bay Drive)
01-  12-28-   Amends §§ 15B-2.6 and 15B-4.5, relating to suspension of special transit service
62   2001     fares for promotional and demonstration purposes
01-  12-28-   Adds Art. 9 to Ch. 40, alarm systems (Eff. 4-27-2002)
63   2001
01-  12-28-   Amends §§ 14-1.1, 14-1.2, 14-1.8, and 14-5.1, relating to public works
64   2001     infrastructure requirements including fees and services by amending Articles 1
              and 5 relating to public sewers
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
01-  12-28-   Amends § 9-4.2, relating to refuse disposal charges
65   2001
              Amends § 21-9.80-4 (LUO), relating to the Waikiki special district [extending
01-  12-28-   the deadline from 12-31-2001 to 12-31-2006 for submission to DPP of an
66   2001     application for a project needing planned development-resort or planned
              development-commercial approval]
02-  2-13-    Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
01   2002     Urban Center (Special)
02-  2-13-    Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
02   2002     Urban Center (Special)
02-  2-13-    Amends §§ 4-8.1 through 4-8.4, public infrastructure maps, to clarify the role
03   2002     of DPP in reviewing council-proposed revisions to the maps
02-  2-13-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu (Special)
04   2002
02-  2-13-    Amends §§ 12-7.1 and 12-7.3; repeals §§ 12-7.2, 12-7.4 and 12-7.5; adds § 12-
05   2002     7.2; renumbers § 12-7.6 to § 12-7.4, § 12-7.7 to § 12-7.5, § 12-7.8 to § 12-7.6,
              § 12-7.9 to § 12-7.7, relating to dangerous dogs
02-  02-21-   Amends §§ 41-14.1 through 41-14.4, 41-14.6, 41-14.9, to extend the prohibitions
06   2002     against smoking in Ch. 41, Art. 14, to additional areas of the city (Eff. 7-1-
              2002)
02-  3-6-2002 Amends § 15-7.2, to promote public safety by establishing more appropriate speed
07            limits on certain streets
02-  3-6-2002 Amends § 15-13.13, relating to fees for parking placards
08
02-  3-6-2002 Amends a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special) (UA
09            was amended by Ord. 02-58.)
02-  3-28-    Adds Ch. 13, Art. 11 (Eff. 3-28-2002); repeals Ch. 13, Arts. 11A and 15,
10   2002     relating to publication dispensing racks (Eff. 7-1-2002) (The uncodified portion
              of Part II was repealed by Ord. 14-7)
02-  4-16-    Amends § 3-8.2, relating to standards of conduct (allows members of boards and
11   2002     commissions to continue to participate in the customary activities of their
              professions)
02-  4-16-    Amends a portion of the development plan land use map for the Primary Urban
12   2002     Center (Special)
02-  5-3-2002 Amends a portion of zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City (Special)
13
              Adds new Art. 5A to Ch. 14 and new Art. 34 to Ch. 2; amends §§ 9-1.2, 9-1.5, 9-
02-           1.7, 9-2.4, 9-3.5, 14-1.2, 14-1.3, 14-1.8, 14-5.19, 14-8.2, 14-12.2, 14-12.23,
14   5-3-2002 relating to waste (addresses commercial fats, oils, and grease waste and
              commercial cooking oil waste) (Eff. 10-15-2002, except Sec. 16 which shall take
              effect 5-3-2002)
02-  5-3-2002 Amends §§ 1-19.5, 1-19.7, 1-19.8 (Repealed by Ord. 24-21), 3-6.3, 3-6.5, 3-6.8,
15            relating to ethics (Eff. 7-1-2002)
02-  5-3-2002 Amends a portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu (Special)
16
02-  5-3-2002 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
17            Urban Center (Special)
02-  5-3-2002 Amends § 15B-2.1, relating to transit bus passes (allowing DTS to create a
18            program for the issuance of college and university bus passes)
02-  5-10-    Amends § 21-9.90-4 and Table 21-9.7 (LUO), relating to the Haleiwa special
19   2002     district (establishing drive-thru facilities as a permitted use)
02-  6-14-    Amends a portion of the development plan land use map for Central Oahu (Special)
20   2002
02-  6-14-    Amends Ord. 01-26, appropriations for FY 2001-2002 legislative budget (Special)
21   2002
02-  6-14-    Amends a portion of the State land use district boundary map at Honouliuli
22   2002     (Special)
02-  6-14-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special)
23   2002
02-  6-14-    Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for Central Oahu
24   2002     (Special)
02-  6-14-    Appropriations for FY 2002-2003 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-2002)
25   2002
02-  6-14-    Appropriations for FY 2002-2003 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-2002)
26   2002
02-  6-14-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
27   2002     anticipation notes (Special)
02-  6-14-    Amends Sec. 11 of Ord. 85-90, as amended by Ords. 97-44, 99-22, 00-26, and 01-
28   2002     29, relating to revenues from the solid waste disposal facility account (Ord.
              85-90 was further amended by Ord. 03-09)
02-  6-14-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 10, Waipio (Mililani) (Special)
29   2002
02-  6-14-    Amends § 6-20.2, relating to fees for the disposal of abandoned and derelict
30   2002     vehicles and beautification of highways
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
02-  6-14-    Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for Central Oahu
31   2002     (Special)
02-  6-14-    Amends § 9-4.2, disposal charges for businesses and federal, State and city
32   2002     agencies
02-  6-14-    Appropriations for FY 2002-2003 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-2002)
33   2002     (Certain line items vetoed by the mayor were overridden by the city council;
              certain line item vetoes were sustained)
02-  6-27-    Amends § 32-14.2, relating to low-rise residential roof heat gain requirements
34   2002     (technical and nonsubstantive amendments) (Re-numbered as Ch. 16B)
02-  6-27-    Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
35   2002     Urban Center (Special)
02-  6-27-    Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
36   2002     Urban Center (Special)
02-  7-12-    Amends Ch. 13, Art. 4, litter control (clarifies and strengthens the
37   2002     enforceability of the city’s litter control ordinance)
02-  7-30-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 1, Hawaii Kai (Special)
38   2002
02-  7-30-    Amends §§ 8-7.1, 8-7.3, and 8-10.23, relating to real property taxation (shall
39   2002     apply to the tax years beginning July 1, 2004 and thereafter)
02-  7-30-    Amends a portion of the State land use district boundary map at Kokokahi
40   2002     (Special)
02-  7-30-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 23, Kailua-Lanikai-Keolu (Special)
41   2002
02-  7-30-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City (Special)
42   2002
02-  7-30-    Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
43   2002     Urban Center (Special)
02-  7-30-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili (Special)
44   2002
02-  8-21-    Amends §§ 8-2.1, 8-2.2, 8-7.1, 8-9.1, 8-11.1; repeals § 8-10.3, relating to
45   2002     real property tax valuations (shall apply to the tax years commencing July 1,
              2003 and thereafter)
02-  8-21-    Amends § 30-4.7, relating to water conservation (extends the rebate program for
46   2002     ultra-low flush toilets from July 1, 2003 to July 1, 2008)
02-  10-10-   Repeals and adds a new Art. 1 to Ch. 20 (§ 20-1.1), adoption of the State fire
47   2002     code; amends §§ 20-3.1 and 20-3.2; repeals §§ 20-3.2, 20-3.4, 20-3.5, and Ch.
              20, Art. 4, relating to fire protection and fireworks
02-  10-10-   Establishes the Fort Street Mall special improvement district No. 2
48   2002
02-  10-10-   Amends § 28-3.6, special assessment notice to owners of land
49   2002
02-  10-10-   Amends §§ 13-10.3, 15-2.4, 15-6.7, 15-25.1, relating to Fort Street Mall
50   2002     (addresses vehicular travel on the mall)
02-  10-10-   Amends §§ 10-1.1, 13-1.1, 13-10.2, relating to parks (provides that a “public
51   2002     park” or “park” generally does not include a “mall”)
02-  10-30-   Adds a new Ch. 33A, impact fees for traffic and roadway improvements in Ewa
52   2002
02-  10-30-   Amends §§ 17-3.2, 17-3.5, 17-5.1; adds § 17-3.5A, relating to the electrical
53   2002     code (amends the electrical code of the City and County of Honolulu and adopts
              the 2002 Edition of the National Electrical Code) (Eff. 12-29-2002)
02-  10-30-   Amends Ch. 3, Art. 5, Title; §§ 3-5.1 through 3-5.5; §§ 12-2.4, 12-6.1, 12-6.3
54   2002     through 12-6.5, and § 12-6.7, relating to animal control (clarifies and
              strengthens ordinance provisions regarding animal control)
02-  10-31-   Amends §§ 14-8.2, 14-8.3, 38-4.1, addresses and clarifies certain transactions
55   2002     between the city and the board of water supply
02-  11-27-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 6, Red Hill-Fort Shafter (Special)
56   2002
02-  11-27-   Amends §§ 8-7.1 and 8-7.3 by making technical nonsubstantive amendments to the
57   2002     ROH
02-  11-27-   Amends the unilateral agreement in Ords. 93-94 and 02-09 (zoning map No. 12,
58   2002     Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point) (Special)
02-  11-27-   Repeals Ord. 4336 relating to the Sunset PD-H District No. R-41 at Waialee,
59   2002     North Shore and amends Ord. 86-119 relating to zoning map No. 18, Kawailoa-
              Waialee (Special)
              Amends §§ 14-7.1, 14-7.3, and Appendix 14-C, relating to cesspools (providing
02-  11-27-   for the city to pump cesspools only on a per-call basis, rather than on a
60   2002     periodic basis, after June 30, 2004, and adjusting the cesspool charge
              schedules)
02-  11-27-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special)
61   2002
02-  12-20-   Repeals Art. 5, Ch. 24, Central Oahu development plan, and adds a new Art. 5,
62   2002     Ch. 24, which adopts the Central Oahu sustainable communities plan (Eff. 2-18-
              2003)
02-  12-20-   Amends §§ 21-2.90-2, 21-3.50, 21-5.290 (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), 21-5.510
63   2002     (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), 21-10.1, and Table 21-3 (Repealed by Ord. 25-2); adds
              §§ 21-5.10A and 21-8.60, relating to the regulation of agricultural uses
02-  12-20-   Adds § 38-2.15, competitive sealed proposals
64   2002
02-  12-20-   Amends § 20-2.3A, relating to fire safety in existing telecommunications
65   2002     buildings
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
02-  12-20-   Amends § 2-15.2, relating to performances by the Royal Hawaiian Band
66   2002     (reinstating a fee for performances at vessel arrivals or departures)
02-  12-20-   Amends § 15B-2.1, relating to transit bus passes (allowing DTS to issue
67   2002     unrestricted bus passes to city employees)
02-  12-20-   Amends §§ 8-10.17, 8-10.18, 8-11.1; adds § 8-10.25, relating to the real
68   2002     property tax exemption for low- and moderate-income housing (shall apply to tax
              years beginning 7-1-2004)
03-  2-12-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Crestview) (Special)
01   2003
03-  3-11-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Point-Kahe-Nanakuli (Special)
02   2003
03-  3-28-    Amends Ch. 28, Art. 6, title, §§ 38-6.2 through 38-6.12, 38-7.1, 38-7.3 through
03   2003     38-7.7, 38-8.1, 38-9.2 through 38-9.7; deletes § 38-7.2, relating to the
              department of enterprise services
03-  5-1-2003 Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
04            Urban Center (Special)
03-           Amends § 8-10.1; adds § 8-10.26, relating to real property taxes (establishes an
05   5-1-2003 exemption from real property taxation for property used for certain types of
              nonprofit organization thrift shops) (Shall apply to tax years beginning 7-1-04)
03-  6-19-    Adds § 15-4.11, operation of motorized devices restricted
06   2003
03-  6-19-    Adds § 10-2.9, fees for the use of facilities at Waipio Peninsula Soccer Park,
07   2003     Central Oahu Regional Park facilities, Hans L’Orange baseball facility, and
              other facilities for special events
03-  6-19-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
08   2003     anticipation notes (Special)
03-  6-19-    Amends Sec. 11 of Ord. 85-90, as amended by Ords. 97-44, 99-22, 00-26, 01-29,
09   2003     and 02-28, relating to revenues from the solid waste disposal facility account
03-  6-19-    Amends § 10-2.8, increasing fees for the Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve (Eff. 7-1-
10   2003     2003)
03-  6-19-    Amends Appendix 14-D, updating the city’s wastewater system facility charge
11   2003     schedule (Eff. 7-1-2003)
              Amends §§ 6-11.1, 6-27.1, Ch. 6, Art. 40 title, §§ 6-40.2, 6-41.1, 14-12.12, 14-
03-  6-19-    12.22, 14-13.1, 14-14.8, 14-14.10, Table No. 18-A, §§ 22-1.1, 22-1.2, 23-1.12,
12   2003     25-5.2, 26-1.4, 29-2.4 relating to fees for permits and services administered by
              the department of planning and permitting
03-  6-19-    Amends § 6-20.2, relating to the highway beautification and disposal of
13   2003     abandoned vehicles revolving fund (increases the highway beautification fee from
              $3.75 to $5) (Eff. 7-1-2003)
03-  6-19-    Amends § 12-5.1, relating to a spay/neuter clinic for dogs and cats (increases
14   2003     the fees to make the program self-sufficient) (Eff. 7-1-2003)
03-  6-19-    Amends a portion of the development plan public facilities map for the Primary
15   2003     Urban Center (Special)
03-  6-19-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 21, Kualoa-Waiahole-Kahaluu (Special)
16   2003
03-  6-19-    Appropriations for FY 2003-2004 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-2003)
17   2003
03-  6-19-    Appropriations for FY 2003-2004 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-2003)
18   2003
03-  6-19-    Amends § 15B-2.1, relating to city bus fares
19   2003
03-  6-19-    Amends § 9-4.2, relating to refuse and other solid waste disposal charges (Eff.
20   2003     7-1-2003)
03-  6-19-    Amends §§ 6-51.2 and 6-51.4, relating to the Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve fund
21   2003     (Eff. 7-1-2003)
03-  6-19-    Appropriations for FY 2003-2004 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-2003)
22   2003
03-  7-16-    Amends §§ 41-10.3 and 41-10.4, relating to air guns (making it unlawful for any
23   2003     person to display or carry an air gun on public property unless it is properly
              secured)
03-  7-16-    Adds Art. 11 to Ch. 41, relating to replica guns
24   2003
              Amends § 15-24.14, relating to an exception for the transportation of explosives
03-  7-16-    through tunnels (allows operating divisions of the United States Department of
25   2003     Defense or its contractors to transport munitions and explosives through
              Interstate H-3)
03-  8-20-    Adds Art. 6A to Ch. 13; amends §§ 13-1.1, 13-6.1, 13-6.2, 13-6.4, and 15-13.6,
26   2003     relating to peddling (authorizes, under certain circumstances, a merchant of a
              store to peddle on an abutting portion of a Chinatown sidewalk or mall)
              Amends §§ 15B-2.1 through 15B-2.3, 15B-2.5, 15B-2.7, 15B-2.8, 15B-3.1, 15B-4.5,
03-  9-26-    15B-6.1, 15B-6.3, 15B-7.1; adds § 15B-2.10, relating to public transit fares
27   2003     (modifies the bus fare structure and increases certain fares) (§§ 15B-2.8, 15B-
              6.3, 15B-7.1 repealed by Ord. 23-21)
              Amends §§ 8-11.1, 8-13.1 and Art. 13 title, 8-13.2, 8-13.4, 8-13.5; repeals § 8-
03-  10-8-    13.3; adds new §§ 8-13.3 and 8-13.6, relating to a real property tax credit for
28   2003     low-income, elderly households and shall apply to the tax year beginning July 1,
              2004 and the tax years thereafter
03-  10-8-    Amends § 10-1.7, relating to animals in public parks (corrects a statutory
29   2003     cross- reference)
03-  10-15-   Amends § 3-9.6; adds new Art. 12, sunshine training law
30   2003
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
03-  10-28-   Amends §§ 41-1.1 and 41-1.2, relating to intoxicating liquor in public places
31   2003
03-  10-28-   Amends § 14-6.3 (re-numbered § 14-6.2) and Appendix 14-B; repeals § 14-6.2,
32   2003     relating to wastewater (updates the city’s sewer service charge schedules) (Sec.
              4 of Ord. 03-32 shall take effect on 1-1-05)
03-  11-20-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 21, Kualoa-Waiahole-Kahaluu (Special)
33   2003
03-  11-20-   Adds Arts. 9 and 10 to Ch. 4 ; amends § 4-3.4, relating to agencies of the
34   2003     legislative branch
03-  11-20-   Amends §§ 41-10.4 and 41-11.2, relating to the display of guns
35   2003
03-  11-20-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 23, Kailua-Lanikai-Keolu (Special)
36   2003
              Amends §§ 21-2.40-1, 21-2.90-1, 21-2.90-2, 21-2.130, 21-2.140-1, 21-4.30, 21-
              4.60, 21-4.70-1, 21-4.110, 21-5.10 (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), 21-5.90 (Repealed by
03-  11-20-   Ord. 25-2), 21-7.20, 21-7.40, 21-7.60, 21-7.70, 21-9.30-5, 21-10.1; Tables 21-3
37   2003     (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), 21-3.4, 21-3.5; Figures 21-3.2, 21-3.10, 21-4.1, 21-
              10.4, making miscellaneous minor, technical or nonsubstantive revisions to the
              land use ordinance
03-  11-19-   Amends §§ 21-9.80-4, 21-9.80-5, 21-9.80-6, 21-9.80-7; Tables 21-6.3, 21-9.6(A),
38   2003     (B), (C); Figures 21-9.1, 21-9.2 (LUO), relating to the Waikiki special district
03-  12-18-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Point-Kahe-Nanakuli (Special)
39   2003
03-  12-18-   Amends §§ 2-27.2, 2-27.3; adds §§ 2-27.6 and 2-27.7; and deletes § 41-28.7,
40   2003     relating to volunteers (establishing a volunteer policing program within HPD)
03-  12-18-   Amends § 15-24.22, relating to the transporting of animals (requiring that
41   2003     horses and cattle be transported within enclosed vehicles) (Eff. 6-15-2004)
03-  12-24-   Amends § 15A-3.1, relating to the motor vehicle weight tax (increases the motor
42   2003     vehicle weight tax rate) (Eff. 1-1-2004)
04-  2-12-    Adds Art. 5 to Ch. 30, relating to water (prohibits the introduction of
01   2004     unnecessary chemical additives, considered to be medication, into Oahu’s
              drinking water supply)
04-  2-12-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City (Special)
02   2004
04-  2-27-    Repeals Art. 14 of Ch. 8, reporting of Honolulu real property interests owned or
03   2004     acquired by foreign persons
04-  3-24-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City (Special)
04   2004
04-  4-7-2004 Amends a portion of zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City (Special)
05
04-  4-7-2004 Amends a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special)
06
04-  4-7-2004 Amends § 9-4.2, disposal charges for businesses and federal, State and city
07            agencies (disposal discount for recycling operations)
04-  4-7-2004 Amends a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special) (UA
08            was amended by Ord. 06-25)
              Amends §§ 21-9.10-2, 21-9.10-4, 21-9.10-5, 21-9.10-7 through 21-9.10-9, 21-9.10-
04-  4-7-2004 11; repeals § 21-9.10-13; and adds a new § 21-9.10-13, relating to flood hazard
09            districts (to conform with current language in the National Flood Insurance
              Program [NFIP] regulations) (LUO) (Repealed by Ord. 14-9)
04-  4-29-    Amends §§ 9-1.7 and 9-1.11, relating to city government recycling (requiring
10   2004     city agencies to engage in recycling) (Eff. 7-1-2004)
04-  5-12-    Amends §§ 37-1.1, 37-1.6, 37-1.9; adds § 37-1.11, relating to the sale of city
11   2004     real property (imposes conditions on the proposed sale of high value city real
              property)
04-  5-27-    Amends §§ 14-10.1, 14-10.2, and Appendix 14-D; adds § 14-10.6, relating to
12   2004     wastewater system facility charges (reduces the wastewater system facility
              charges for low-income housing projects)
04-  5-27-    Amends §§ 15-26.1 through 15-26.4, 15-26.9, and 15-26.12, relating to
13   2004     administrative fines (allows for the issuance of administrative citations for
              violations of the traffic code) (Eff. 7-1-2005)
04-  6-21-    Repeals Art. 2 of Ch. 24, and adds a new Art. 2, which adopts the development
14   2004     plan for the Primary Urban Center (Repealed by Ord. 25-16)
04-  6-21-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
15   2004     anticipation notes (Special)
04-  6-21-    Amends § 9-4.2, relating to the collection and disposal of refuse (increases the
16   2004     unit charge at disposal facilities) (Eff. 1-1-2005)
04-  6-21-    Adds § 8-10.27, relating to historic property (establishes a partial real
17   2004     property tax exemption for historic commercial properties) (Eff. 7-1-2005)
04-  6-21-    Amends Ord. 03-22, appropriations for FY 2003-04 executive operating budget
18   2004     (amendment No. 1) (Special)
04-  6-21-    Amends Ord. 03-17, appropriations for FY 2003-04 legislative budget (Special)
19   2004
04-  6-21-    Amends the purpose of the Pauahi Project Expend, HI R-15 fund
20   2004
04-  6-21-    Amends §§ 15-16.5, 15-22.4, 15-22.8, 15-23.2, 15-23.2A, relating to parking fees
21   2004     (increases public parking fees) (Eff. 7-1-2004)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
04-  6-21-    Amends Ch. 6, Art. 26 title and §§ 6-26.3 and 6-26.4, relating to special funds
22   2004     (amends the housing and community development rehabilitation loan revolving
              fund)
04-  6-21-    Appropriations for FY 2004-2005 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-2004) (Special)
23   2004
04-  6-21-    Appropriations for FY 2004-2005 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-2004)
24   2004     (Special)
04-  6-21-    Appropriations for FY 2004-2005 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-2004)
25   2004     (Special)
04-  7-29-    Adds Art. 12 to Ch. 16, relating to the building code (encourages indigenous
26   2004     Hawaiian architecture)
04-  7-29-    Amends §§ 18-4.1, 29-1.3, 29-2.2, 29-3.1, relating to permits (authorizes, under
27   2004     certain conditions, the director of DPP to require the submittal of an
              engineering slope hazard report with a grading or building permit application)
04-  8-4-2004 Allows certain owners and lessees of agricultural land to request real property
28            tax compromises for tax year July 1, 2004 through June 30, 2005
04-  8-26-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 24, Waimanalo (Special)
29   2004
04-  8-26-    Amends §§ 21-9.60-8 and 21-9.60-9, relating to the Chinatown special district
30   2004     (LUO) (allows one- and two-family dwellings if located above the ground floor)
04-  10-6-    Amends § 8-10.3, relating to real property taxation (modifies the existing
31   2004     homeowner exemption for real property taxes) (shall apply to the tax years
              beginning July 1, 2005)
04-  10-6-    Amends §§ 15-2.16, 15-22.3 through 15-22.7, 15-22.9, 15-22.11, 15-23.2, 15-
32   2004     23.2A, relating to parking
04-  10-6-    Amends §§ 38-3.1, 38-3.3, 38-3.4, 38-4.1, 38-4.2; repeals § 38-3.2, relating to
33   2004     the leasing of city real property without public bidding for housing and human
              services
04-  10-6-    Amends §§ 8-7.1, 8-10.24; repeals and adds new § 8-7.3; adds new § 8-10.28,
34   2004     relating to real property taxation (relates to agricultural lands) (shall apply
              to tax years beginning July 1, 2005)
04-  10-13-   Amends §§ 8-7.1 and 8-10.24, relating to real property taxation (clarifies real
35   2004     property tax ordinance provisions regarding the classification of time share
              units for tax purposes) (shall apply to tax years beginning July 1, 2005)
04-  10-27-   Amends Ord. 01-28, authorizing the city to issue general obligation commercial
36   2004     paper to clarify and facilitate the use of such debt (Special) (Amended by Ord.
              10-15)
              Amends § 14-7.3 and Appendix 14-C, relating to cesspool charges (establishes
04-  10-27-   reduced per-call cesspool pumping service charges for eligible low-income
37   2004     households) (shall apply retroactively to per-call cesspool service provided by
              the city on or after July 1, 2004) (certain households entitled to rebates in
              accordance with Section 5 of Ord. 04-37)
04-  10-27-   Amends § 8-10.15; adds Art. 58 to Ch. 6, relating to real property taxation of
38   2004     military housing (shall apply to the tax years beginning July 1, 2004)
              Relating to real property taxation (for tax year 2004-2005 only, to waive
              penalties and interest for delinquent real property taxes owed for real property
04-  10-27-   classified agricultural that is actually used for agricultural purposes, if the
39   2004     taxes levied are not paid when due and the owner of the property either applies
              for and is granted a real property tax compromise, or appeals the assessment and
              the appeal is upheld) (shall apply to the tax year July 1, 2004 to June 30,
              2005)
04-  11-10-   Amends § 15-23.2A, relating to attendant parking facilities (amends the monthly
40   2004     parking rates at the city’s attendant parking facilities)
04-  11-29-   Adds § 1-7.10, relating to the absence of the mayor from the city (requires the
41   2004     mayor to notify the council when the mayor will be absent from the city)
04-  12-15-   Amends §§ 12-2.2 and 12-2.5, relating to animal nuisances (regulates peafowl
42   2004     consistent with the regulation of chickens) (shall take effect ninety days after
              its approval, March 15, 2005)
04-  12-15-   Amends §§ 8-13.1, 8-13.2, and 18-13.3, relating to the county tax credit
43   2004     (requires that the property owner qualify for “very low income” set by HUD)
              (shall apply to the tax year beginning July 1, 2005)
04-  12-15-   Adds § 8-4.3, relating to the payment of real property taxes by persons called
44   2004     to active military duty
04-  12-15-   Amends a portion of zoning map Nos. 12, 13, and 14, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point,
45   2004     Makakilo, and Barber’s Point-Nanakuli (Special)
04-  12-15-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special)
46   2004     (“School Site” zone change designated on Exhibit A-1 shall become effective on
              July 2, 2007)
05-  2-9-2005 Repeals Ch. 38, residential condominium, cooperative housing and residential
001           planned development leasehold conversion
05-  2-9-2005 Adds to Ch. 8 a new Art. 16, relating to real property taxation (establishes a
02            one-time tax credit for septic tank system)
05-           Amends § 8-2.1 and adds to Ch. 6 a new Art. 59, land conservation fund (enables
003  3-9-2005 real property taxpayers to voluntarily contribute moneys for land conservation
              purposes) shall apply to tax years beginning July 1, 2005)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
05-  3-9-2005 Amends § 8-10.3, relating to real property tax exemption for homes
004
05-  3-31-    Amends §§ 35A-1.1, 35A-1.3, 12-1.9 (Automatically repealed on 3-16-2017 per Ord.
005  2005     16-38), 35A-1.9, 35A-1.11, 12-1.15 (Repealed by Ord. 16-38), 35A-1.14, relating
              to taxicabs (addresses taxicab regulation)
05-  3-31-    Amends § 14-8.2, relating to the expenditure of moneys from the sewer fund
006  2005     (prohibits the use of moneys in the sewer fund to reimburse the general fund for
              expenses incurred in prior fiscal years)
05-  3-31-    Amends §§ 12-7.2, 12-7.3, and 12-4.9, relating to dogs (strengthens the current
007  2005     city ordinance to protect the public better from dangerous dogs and to deter dog
              owners from violating the ordinance)
              Amends §§ 6-46.2 and 6-46.3, amending the housing development special fund
05-  3-31-    (enables the exchange of land acquired using moneys from the housing development
008  2005     special fund if the exchange is for the development of housing in the City and
              County of Honolulu)
05-  4-21-    Amends §§ 8-12.7, 8-12.11, and adds § 8-12.14, relating to real property tax
009  2005     appeals (allows the director of budget and fiscal services to settle certain
              real property tax appeals) (shall apply to the tax year beginning July 1, 2006)
05-  5-26-    Amends § 15-14.1, relating to parking (re-establishes stopping, standing or
010  2005     parking prohibitions on Ala Wai Boulevard at certain intersections where parking
              is now allowed)
05-  5-26-    Amends Ord. 04-24, appropriations for FY 2004-2005 executive operating budget
011  2005     (amendment No. 1) (Special)
05-  6-17-    Amends Ord. 04-25, appropriations for FY 2004-2005 executive capital budget
012  2005     (amendment No. 1) (Special)
05-  6-22-    Appropriations for FY 2005-2006 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-2005) (Special)
013  2005
05-  6-22-    Appropriations for FY 2005-2006 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-2005)
014  2005     (Special)
05-  6-22-    Authorizing the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
015  2005     anticipation notes (Special)
05-  6-22-    Amends § 15A-3.1, relating to motor vehicle weight tax (effective with vehicle
016  2005     weight taxes assessed for the registration period beginning 1-1-2006)
05-  6-22-    Amends §§ 38-6.2, 38-7.1, and 38-9.3, relating to the department of enterprise
017  2005     services (amends the lease and rental policy for the Neal S. Blaisdell Center
              and the Waikiki Shell)
05-  6-22-    Repeals Appendix 14-B and adds a new Appendix 14-B, relating to sewer service
018  2005     charges (updates the city’s sewer service charge schedules) (Eff. 7-1-2005)
05-  6-22-    Amends Appendix 14-D, relating to wastewater system facility charge (updating
019  2005     the city’s wastewater system facility charge schedule) (Eff. 7-1-2005)
05-  6-22-    Adds to Ch. 38 a new Art. 12 and amends § 38-3.1, relating to telecommunications
020  2005     facilities on city property (Eff. 7-1-2005)
05-  6-22-    Amends § 10-3.2, relating to filming (addresses the fee for filming at a park or
021  2005     recreational facility) (Eff. 7-1-2005)
05-  6-22-    Adds a new Ch. 10A, amends § 10-2.1, and repeals §§ 10-2.2 and 10-2.3, relating
022  2005     to botanical gardens (establishes regulations for use and authorizes DPR to
              establish fees for use)
05-  6-22-    Appropriations for FY 2005-2006 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-2005)
023  2005     (Special)
05-  7-15-    Amends § 20-1.1, relating to the fire code of the City and County of Honolulu
024  2005
05-  7-15-    Amends Ch. 6, Art. 44 title, §§ 6-44.1 and 6-44.5; adds a new § 6-44.6, relating
025  2005     to fees for police services (authorizes HPD to charge fees for providing
              additional police services at special activities)
              Amends §§ 8-13.1, 8-13.2, and 8-13.3, relating to the county tax credit (makes
05-  8-22-    the tax credit available to more homeowners by raising the income ceiling and
026  2005     lowering the tax liability threshold for homeowners) (shall apply to the tax
              year beginning July 1, 2007) (Amended by Ord. 06-08)
05-  8-23-    Adds to Ch. 6 a new Art. 60, establishing a general excise and use tax surcharge
027  2005     for the City and County of Honolulu
05-  8-23-    Amends § 21-5.370, relating to the off-site joint development of two or more
028  2005     zoning lots (Repealed by Ord. 25-2)
05-  10-13-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 4, Nuuanu-McCully (Special)
029  2005
05-  10-13-   Amends §§ 8-1.18 and 8-12.12, relating to real property taxation
030  2005
05-  11-21-   Amends § 15-2.4, relating to authorized emergency vehicles (includes any vehicle
031  2005     used by the department of the medical examiner in the performance of the
              department’s official duties)
05-  11-21-   Amends § 17-5.1, relating to the electrical code (amends the electrical code of
032  2005     the City and County of Honolulu and adopts the 2005 Edition of the National
              Electrical Code) (Eff. 1-20-2006)
              Amends § 1-17.2, repeals Ch. 4, Art. 1, and adds to Ch. 3 a new Art. 13,
05-  11-21-   relating to lobbyists (transfers from the council to the ethics commission the
033  2005     duties and obligations regarding the registration and restriction of lobbying
              activities) (Eff.12-21-2005)
05-  11-21-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki (Special)
034  2005
05-  11-21-   Amends §§ 1-19.3 and 1-19.5, relating to the addition of unpaid civil fines to
035  2005     taxes, fees, or charges collected by the city
05-  11-21-   Amends § 40-5.3, relating to graffiti (increases the maximum fine for
036  2005     violations)
05-  12-22-   Amends § 16-1.1, relating to the building code (amends the building code in
037  2005     relation to equal access to rest room facilities)
05-  12-22-   Amends § 13-8.2, relating to structures on public sidewalks (increases the
038  2005     allowable height of newsstands on public sidewalks and makes conforming
              amendments)
05-  12-22-   Amends § 10-3.2, relating to filming (addresses the fee for commercial filming
039  2005     activities at a park or recreational facility)
05-  12-22-   Amends § 1-8.1; adds § 1-8.3; and renumbers §§ 1-8.3 and 1-8.4 to §§ 1-8.4 and
040  2005     1-8.5, relating to intergovernmental agreements (requires council approval of
              action plans concerning certain federal moneys)
05-  12-22-   Amends § 8-1.18, relating to real property taxes (extends the number of years an
041  2005     adjustment may be made due to errors in the amount of taxes assessed)
06-1 2-8-2006 Amends Ord. 05-014, appropriations for FY 2005-06 executive operating budget
              (amendment No. 1) (Special)
06-  2-8-2006 Amends § 22-9.3, relating to the naming of city parks, sites and facilities
02            (Sec. 4 of Ord. 06- 02 provides that it shall be repealed on July 31, 2006)
06-  2-8-2006 Amends Ord. 05-023, appropriations for FY 2005-06 executive capital budget
03            (amendment No. 1) (Special)
06-  2-27-    Amends §§ 8-10.1 and 8-10.3, relating to real property tax exemptions for low-
04   2006     income elderly persons (shall apply to the tax years beginning July 1, 2007)
06-  2-27-    Amends § 15-13.11, relating to mopeds (authorizes appropriate parking for
05   2006     mopeds)
06-  2-27-    Adds § 2-9.3, green building standards for city facilities
06   2006
              Amends § 8-10.3, relating to the homeowner’s exemption for real property
06-  2-27-    taxation (provides tax relief to homeowners by increasing the real property tax
07   2006     exemption for real property occupied as the owner’s principal home) (shall apply
              to tax years beginning July 1, 2007)
06-  2-27-    Amends § 8-13.2, relating to the county tax credit (expands the availability of
08   2006     the real property tax credit) (shall apply to the tax year beginning July 1,
              2006) (Amends Ord. 05-026)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
06-  3-9-2006 Amends §§ 9-1.2, 9-1.4; and adds § 9-1.12, establishing an islandwide curbside
09            recycling program (Eff. 1-1-2007)
06-  3-10-    Amends § 8-11.1, establishing a new way of setting real property rates
10   2006
              Adds § 15-13.14, relating to motor vehicles parked on public streets, highways,
06-  3-15-    or pedestrian malls (makes it unlawful for persons to tamper with or remove
11   2006     parts from motor vehicles parked on public streets, highways, or pedestrian
              malls)
06-  3-15-    Amends §§ 15A-2.1 and 15A-2.2, relating to permit and license fees for driving
12   2006     motor vehicles (establishes a fee for the issuance of a provisional driver’s
              license)
06-  3-15-    Amends § 15-13.9, relating to the parking of vehicles (authorizes the police
13   2006     department and the department of customer services to remove certain vehicles
              parked on public streets and highways and grassy areas adjacent to streets)
06-  3-15-    Amends §§ 1-8.1 and 1-8.2, relating to intergovernmental relations
14   2006
06-  3-15-    Amends §§ 21-2.140-1, 21-4.110, 21-8.20 (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), 21-8.20-1
15   2006     (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), and 21-10.1 (LUO), relating to ohana dwellings
              (deletes the maximum floor area restrictions for ohana dwelling units)
06-  4-28-    Amends § 18-6.5, relating to the waiver of building permit fees (waives
16   2006     building permit fees for the replacement of dilapidated homes on Hawaiian home
              lands)
06-  4-28-    Adds § 15A-3.3, exempts buses used as homeless shelters from the motor vehicle
17   2006     weight tax
06-  4-28-    Amends Ords. 06-1 and 05-014, appropriations for FY 2005-06 executive operating
18   2006     budget (amendment No. 2) (Special)
06-  4-28-    Amends §§ 8-13.1 and 8-13.3, relating to the county tax credit (shall apply to
19   2006     the tax years beginning July 1, 2007)
06-  5-31-    Amends § 10-1.2, park rules, relating to parking meter violations
20   2006
              Allows the city’s one-time tax credit against real property tax liability to be
06-  5-31-    granted to additional property owners who have replaced their cesspools with
21   2006     septic tank systems on their respective properties (shall be repealed 120 days
              after its approval, 9-28-2006)
06-  5-31-    Amends § 38-12.1, relating to the lease of city property for telecommunications
22   2006     facilities
06-  6-20-    Amends Ch. 6, Art. 56 title, and §§ 6-56.1 through 6-56.5, relating to the
23   2006     special reserve fund by changing the name of the fund, revising certain
              provisions, and clarifying its administration
06-  6-20-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 5, Kalihi-Nuuanu (Special)
24   2006
06-  6-20-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special)
25   2006
06-  6-20-    Amends Ords. 94-57 and 98-44, which amend a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa
26   2006     Beach- Iroquois Point, by amending conditions in two existing unilateral
              agreements related to a future child-care facility for Ewa by Gentry (Special)
06-  6-20-    Adds § 9-1.13, relating to an integrated solid waste management plan
27   2006
06-  6-20-    Amends a portion of zoning map Nos. 13 and 14, Makakilo and Barber’s Point-
28   2006     Kahe- Nanakuli (Special)
06-  6-20-    Amends a portion of the State land use district boundary map at Kapolei
29   2006     (Special)
06-  6-23-    Relates to real property tax valuations (a one-time real property tax discount
30   2006     is established for the 2006-07 tax year) (shall apply to the tax year beginning
              July 1, 2006)
06-  6-23-    Appropriations for FY 2006-2007 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-2006) (Special)
31   2006
06-  6-23-    Appropriations for FY 2006-2007 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-2006)
32   2006     (Special)
06-  6-23-    Appropriations for FY 2006-2007 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-2006)
33   2006     (Special)
06-  6-23-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
34   2006     anticipation notes (Special)
06-  6-23-    Adds § 38-6.13; amends §§ 38-7.1 and 38-9.3, relating to the co-promotion of
35   2006     events by the department of enterprise services
06-  6-23-    Amends § 10-2.1, relating to admission fees for the Honolulu zoo (increases
36   2006     nonresident admission fees)
06-  6-23-    Adds to Ch. 6 a new Art. 61, relating to the transit fund
37   2006
06-  8-3-2006 Amends §§ 8-12.6 and 8-12.7, relating to real property taxation (provides for
38            additional boards of review)
06-           Amends § 15-24.20, relating to parades (limits the number of certain parades or
39   9-1-2006 other activities in the Waikiki special district) (shall not apply to parades
              or activities scheduled to occur before January 1, 2007)
06-  9-1-2006 Amends § 9-1.1, relating to solid waste (establishes new recycling, reuse,
40            composting and waste diversion goals for the city for its solid waste)
06-  9-1-2006 Adds § 9-1.14, relating to solid waste (requires the city to increase the
41            tonnage of municipal solid waste converted to energy by the year 2010)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
06-  9-1-2006 Amends § 38-7.1, relating to the lease and rental of city facilities
42
06-  9-1-2006 Amends § 8-13.3, relating to the county tax credit
43
06-  9-1-2006 Amends Ord. 06-32, appropriations for FY 2006-2007 executive operating budget
44            (amendment No. 1) (Special)
06-  11-13-   Amends § 38-3.1, clarifying when a lease for real property acquired by eminent
45   2006     domain proceedings may be renewed or extended for more than one year
06-  11-13-   Improvement district assessment levy for Kailua Road sewers (Special)
46   2006
06-  12-1-    Adds to Ch. 10 a new Art. 10, relating to the rental of surfboard lockers on
47   2006     Kuhio Beach
06-  12-1-    Amends § 41-18.1 and Art. 18, Exh. B, relating to prostitution (amends the
48   2006     downtown prostitution-free zone established in accordance with HRS 712-1207)
              Amends §§ 15-23.2 and 15-23.2A, relating to metered and attendant parking
06-  12-21-   facilities (Kaimuki 1 facility)(shall take effect upon the department of
49   2006     transportation services’ written announcement, signed by the director of
              transportation services, of the conversion of the Kaimuki 1 [12th Avenue/11th
              Avenue] from metered to attendant parking)
06-  12-22-   Adds to Ch. 15B a new Art. 9, and amends § 4-8.3, relating to requirements for
50   2006     transit stations (Ch. 15B, Art. 9 repealed by Ord. 23-21)
06-  12-27-   Amends § 40-8.7, relating to exceptional trees (amends the register of
51   2006     exceptional trees)
06-  12-27-   Amends § 15B-3.1, relating to prohibited activities on city buses and special
52   2006     transit vehicles (regulates the use of electronic devices)
06-  12-27-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Point-Kahe-Nanakuli (Special)
53   2006
07-           Amends §§ 6-60.1 and 4-8.3, relating to transit (selects the transportation
001  1-6-2007 mode for the city’s locally preferred alternative) (Part IV, Sec. 7, was
              amended by Ord. 09-1)
              Adds § 12-7.8, relating to the reporting of dog bites (requires the reporting
07-2 3-8-2007 of dog bite incidents to facilitate the prevention of multiple attacks by a
              dangerous dog)
07-3 3-8-2007 Amends § 15-13.10 and adds § 15-13.15, relating to motor vehicles (addresses
              dangerous motor vehicles parked near schools)
              Amends §§ 8-7.1 and 8-7.3, relating to real property taxation (amends certain
07-4 3-9-2007 provisions relating to the dedication of lands for agricultural use; except for
              those petitions approved for remittance pursuant to § 4 of Ord. 07-4, shall
              apply to the tax years beginning July 1, 2008)
     3-30-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 18, Kawailoa-Waialee (Special) (Sec. II and
07-5 2007     Exhibit “B” of Ord. 95-19 are repealed, and all conditions set forth in the UA
              and Declaration for Conditional Zoning dated 5-17-1995 are released.)
     3-30-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 4, Nuuanu-McCully (Special) (Sec. II and
07-6 2007     Exhibit “B” of Ord. 93-08 are repealed, and all conditions set forth in the UA
              and Declaration for Conditional Zoning dated 2-11-1993 are released.)
     4-26-    Amends § 8-10.1; adds § 8-10.29, establishing a tax exemption for properties
07-7 2007     designated as kuleana land (shall apply to the tax years beginning July 1,
              2008)
07-8 4-26-    Amends § 21-9.30-4; repeals and replaces Exhibits 21-9.1 and 21-9.2 (LUO),
     2007     relating to the Hawaii Capital Special District
07-9 4-26-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 4, Nuuanu-McCully (Special)
     2007
07-  5-17-    Amends §§ 8-7.1, 27-3.6, and 40-7.2, relating to the designation of real
10   2007     property tax classifications
07-  5-17-    Amends § 15A-3.3, relating to shelter buses (amends the definition of shelter
11   2007     bus)
07-  5-17-    Amends § 6-29.4, simplifying grant reporting requirements
12   2007
              Amends §§ 15B-1.1, 15B-2.1 through 15B-2.3, 15B-2.5, 15B-2.6, 15B-2.8, 15B-2.9,
07-  5-17-    15B-3.1, 15B-3.2, 15B-3.4, 15B-3.5, 15B-4.5; and adds to Ch. 15B a new Art. 10,
13   2007     relating to the city ferry system (§§ 15B-2.8, 15B-3.4, 15B-10.1 through 15B-
              10.6 repealed by Ord. 23-21)
07-  5-17-    Amends Table 21-3, the Master Use Table (LUO), relating to vacation cabins
14   2007     (Repealed by Ord. 25-2)
07-  5-17-    Amends Table 21-3, the Master Use Table (LUO), relating to amusement and
15   2007     recreation facilities, indoor (Repealed by Ord. 25-2)
07-  5-17-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 22, Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili (Special)
16   2007
07-  6-20-    Amends § 10.1.2, relating to park rules (makes it unlawful for any person to
17   2007     fail to comply with signs and notices posted in public parks)
07-  6-20-    Adds to Ch. 6 a new Art. 62, creating a clean water and natural lands fund for
18   2007     land conservation
07-  6-20-    Adds to Ch. 6 a new Art. 63, creating an affordable housing fund to provide and
19   2007     maintain affordable housing for persons earning less than 50 percent of the
              median household income in the city
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
07-  6-20-    Amends §§ 8-13.2, 8-13.3, 8-13.5, and 8-13.6, relating to the county tax credit
20   2007     (shall apply to tax years beginning July 1, 2008)
07-  6-20-    Provides a one-time real property tax credit of $200 to eligible owners of real
21   2007     property (shall apply to the tax year July 1, 2007 to June 30, 2008)
              Repeals Art. 1 of Ch. 16 and adds a new Art. 1; amends § 16-2.3, Art. 3 title, §§
07-  6-20-    16-3.1 through 16-3.8, adds a new § 16-3.9, and amends §§ 16-3.10, 16-3.11, and
22   2007     16-8.5, relating to the building code (shall take effect 90 days after the date
              of approval, September 18, 2007)
07-  6-20-    Appropriations for FY 2007-2008 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-2007) (Special)
23   2007
07-  6-20-    Appropriations for FY 2007-2008 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-2007)
24   2007     (Special)
07-  6-20-    Appropriations for FY 2007-2008 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-2007)
25   2007     (Special)
07-  6-20-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
26   2007     anticipation notes (Special)
07-  6-20-    Amends § 6-56.3, relating to the reserve for fiscal stability fund (provides for
27   2007     the deposit of interest earned on the deposits of this fund to this fund) (Eff.
              7-1-2007)
07-  6-20-    Adds to Ch. 6 a new Art. 64, relating to the establishment of a special reserve
28   2007     fund for other post-employment benefits (Eff. 7-1-2007) (Repealed by Ord. 15-7)
07-  6-20-    Repeals Appendix 14-B and adds a new Appendix 14-B, relating to sewer service
29   2007     charges (updates the city’s sewer service charge schedules) (Eff. 7-1-2007)
07-  6-20-    Amends §§ 8-13.1 through 8-13.3, relating to the real property tax credit for
30   2007     low-income homeowners (shall apply to tax years beginning July 1, 2008)
07-  6-20-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa-Beach-Iroquois Point (Special)
31   2007
07-  7-20-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki (Special)
32   2007
07-  7-20-    Amends §§ 12-4.3 and 12-6.5, relating to the sterilization of dogs and cats
33   2007     (requires dogs and cats to be sterilized before their adoption from the city’s
              animal control contractor)
07-  7-20-    Amends portions of boundaries of the special management area map for Ewa
34   2007     (Special) (Amends Ord. 94-63)
07-  7-20-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special)
35   2007
07-  8-30-    Amends § 8-3.3, relating to the penalty for delinquent real property taxes
36   2007
07-  10-4-    Amends §§ 4-8.1 through 4-8.4, relating to public infrastructure maps
37   2007
07-  10-4-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 15, Lualualei-Makaha (Special)
38   2007
07-  10-4-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Crestview) (Special)
39   2007
07-  10-4-    Amends § 1-8.2, relating to intergovernmental relations (modifies the approval
40   2007     process for certain intergovernmental agreements)
07-  10-29-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 1, Hawaii Kai (Special)
41   2007
07-  10-29-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Point-Kahe-Nanakuli (Special)
42   2007
07-  10-29-   Amends §§ 3-6.3, 3-8.4, and 3-8.5; and adds to Ch. 3 a new Art. 14, relating to
43   2007     civil fines for violations of the ethics law (Eff. 11-28-2007)
07-  10-29-   Amends the Fort Street Mall special improvement district plan, designated as
44   2007     Exhibit A in Ord. 02-48
07-  11-26-   Amends §§ 9-1.3 through 9-1.6 and 9-1.10; adds a new § 9-1.15, relating to solid
45   2007     waste (establishes a curbside recycling pilot project and program)
07-  11-26-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki (Special)
46   2007
07-  11-26-   Amends §§ 8-1.2, 8-12.7, 8-12.11, and 8-12.14, relating to real property
47   2007     assessment (simplifies the appeal process, where appeals may be settled by the
              director)
07-  11-26-   Amends §§ 8-12.9 and 8-12.10, relating to real property tax assessment re filing
48   2007     a notice of appeal to the board of review
07-  11-26-   Amends §§ 8-2.1 and 8-2.3, relating to real property assessment (provides for
49   2007     electronic notification of the assessment)
07-  12-28-   Amends § 8-2.1, relating to the real property assessment notice (shall apply to
50   2007     the tax years beginning July 1, 2009)
08-1 2-7-2008 Amends § 18-6.5, relating to building permits and fees (exempts photovoltaic
              solar electric power systems from the payment of certain permit fees)
08-2 2-7-2008 Adds to Ch 13 a new Art. 17, relating to aggressive panhandling
08-3 3-6-2008 Amends § 15-19.12, relating to the traffic code (eliminates the minimum height
              requirement for auxiliary driving lamps)
08-4 3-6-2008 Amends § 15B-2.6, relating to public transit fares (authorizes the council to
              suspend public transit fares for periods of up to one fiscal year)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
08-5 3-6-2008 Amends § 8-12.11, relating to real property assessment appeals
08-6 3-6-2008 Amends §§ 3-1.2 and 3-1.4; adds § 3-1.5; and renumbers § 3-1.5 to 3-1.6, relating
              to temporary vacancies on boards, commissions or committees
08-7 5-1-2008 Amends § 2-18.6, relating to line-item budget details
              Repeals Art. 24 of Ch. 2; adds new Art. 24, department of planning and permitting
08-8 5-1-2008 (relating to council proposals to amend the general plan, development plans, the
              zoning ordinances, and the subdivision ordinance)
08-9 6-18-    Amends § 35A-1.9, relating to taxicabs (allows the director of customer services
     2008     to establish a fuel surcharge for taxis)
08-  6-18-    Provides a one-time real property tax credit of $100 to eligible owners of real
10   2008     property (shall apply to the tax year July 1, 2008 to June 30, 2009)
08-  6-18-    Appropriations for FY 2008-2009 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-2008) (Special)
11   2008
08-  6-18-    Appropriations for FY 2008-2009 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-2008)
12   2008     (Special)
08-  6-18-    Appropriations for FY 2008-2009 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-2008)
13   2008     (Special)
08-  6-18-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
14   2008     anticipation notes (Special)
              Relates to real property taxation and: (a) provides that the “Improved
              Residential” class in the 2008 assessment notice is the “Residential” class in §
08-  6-18-    8-7.1(c)(1)(A); and (b) confirms that for the 2008-2009 tax year only, any
15   2008     reference to the “Residential” class in the assessment list and subsequent
              documents used or issued by the director of budget and fiscal services is a
              reference to the “Improved Residential” class that appears in the 2008 assessment
              notices (shall apply to the tax year July 1, 2008 through June 30, 2009)
08-  6-18-    Adds to Ch. 4 a new Art. 11, establishing for council standing committees the
16   2008     number of members necessary to establish a quorum to do business and the number
              of members necessary to make any action of the committee valid
08-  6-18-    Amends § 6-42.2, relating to the city’s deferred compensation program
17   2008
08-  6-18-    Adds to Ch. 1 a new Art. 21, relating to city advertisements (requiring all city
18   2008     advertisements to include a statement that the ads are paid for by the taxpayers
              of the City and County of Honolulu)
08-  8-7-2008 Amends § 21-2.70, relating to the transmission of planning commission
19            recommendations to the council (LUO)
              Amends §§ 15B-1.1, 15B-2.1 through 15B-2.3, 15B-2.5 through 15B-2.7, 15B-3.1,
              15B-3.2, 15B-4.1 through 15B-4.7, 15B-6.1, 15B-6.2, 15B-6.3, 15B-6.4 through 15B-
08-  9-4-2008 6.7, 15B-7.1, 15B-8.1 through 15B-8.9, 15B-10.1 through 15B-10.6, relating to
20            public transit (clarifies operations of TheBus and TheHandi-Van and establishes
              procedures for improved and efficient operations) (§§ 15B-6.3 through 15B-6.7,
              15B-7.1, 15B-10.1 through 15B-10.6 repealed by Ord. 23-21)
08-           Adds to Ch. 1 a new Art. 22, relating to Hawaiian language signs of the city
21   9-4-2008 (requires that all city signs with Hawaiian names and language include the proper
              Hawaiian spelling)
08-  9-4-2008 Amends § 10-1.1, relating to public parks (defines camping)
22
08-           Adds to Ch. 10 a new Art. 11, relating to public parks (establishes procedures
23   9-4-2008 governing the disposition of abandoned and unattended property on park land)
              (Repealed by Ord. 11-29)
08-           Amends § 1-8.2, relating to intergovernmental agreements (requires that a copy of
24   9-4-2008 the final or draft version of an intergovernmental agreement be provided to the
              council before the council’s approval)
08-  9-29-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Point-Kahe-Nanakuli (Special)
25   2008
08-  9-29-    Amends portions of zoning map Nos. 13 and 14, Makakilo and Barber’s Point- Kahe-
26   2008     Nanakuli (Special)
08-  9-29-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 14, Barber’s Point-Kahe-Nanakuli (Special)
27   2008
08-  10-30-   Adds to Ch. 2 a new Art. 35, requiring the city to purchase ENERGY STAR qualified
28   2008     products when such products are available and cost effective
08-  10-30-   Amends §§ 15A-2.1 and 15A-2.2, relating to permit and license fees for driving
29   2008     motor vehicles (establishes the fee for issuance of driver licenses) (Eff. 11-3-
              2008)
08-  11-21-   Amends a portion of zoning map Nos. 12 and 13, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point and
30   2008     Makakilo (Special)
08-  11-21-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special)
31   2008
              Adds to Ch. 2, Art. 9, a new § 2-9.4, relating to electrical energy consumption
08-  12-18-   by city agencies and operations (establishes an annual reporting requirement
32   2008     detailing and evaluating the city’s annual overall energy usage and conservation
              efforts) (Repealed by Ord. 16-29)
08-  12-18-   Amends § 1-8.1, relating to intergovernmental agreements (includes certain
33   2008     arrangements with nongovernmental entities as intergovernmental agreements that
              may be subject to council approval)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
     2-12-    Amends Part IV, Section 7, of Ord. 07-001, relating to transit, to require the
09-1 2009     city administration to submit to the council certain information regarding the
              request for proposals or invitation for bids for the mass transit project
09-2 2-12-    Amends § 8-12.11, relating to real property taxation (conforms language to Ord.
     2009     07-47)
09-3 3-12-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 18, Kawailoa-Waialee (Special)
     2009
              Repeals § 13-9.3; adds §§ 21-9.100, 21-9.100-1 through 21-9.100-4; and amends §§
09-4 3-25-    2-24.1 and 21-9.20-6, relating to transit-oriented development (provides for the
     2009     establishment of transit-oriented development special districts and accompanying
              land use regulations around rapid transit stations)
09-5 3-25-    Amends §§ 21-2.140-1, 21-7.20, 21-7.40, and 21-7.60, relating to signs
     2009
              Adds to Ch. 15, Art. 24, a new § 15-24.23, prohibiting the use of certain mobile
09-6 5-7-2009 electronic devices while operating motor vehicles (Eff. 7-1-2009); expired 10-
              25-2017. See Ord. 17-39
09-7 5-7-2009 Amends §§ 14-31.2 and 14-31.5, relating to banners (amendments made to the
              definition of “authorized street” shall be repealed on July 31, 2009)
09-8 5-7-2009 Amends § 18-5.3, relating to building permits
09-9 6-10-    Amends §§ 3-8.4 and 3-8.5, relating to civil fines for violations of the ethics
     2009     laws (Eff. 7-10-2009)
09-  6-26-    Appropriations for FY 2009-2010 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-2009) (Special)
10   2009
09-  6-26-    Appropriations for FY 2009-2010 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-2009)
11   2009     (Special)
09-  6-26-    Appropriations for FY 2009-2010 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-2009)
12   2009     (Special)
09-  6-26-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
13   2009     anticipation notes (Special)
09-  6-26-    Adds to Ch. 6 a new Art. 65, relating to the transit improvement bond fund
14   2009
09-  6-26-    Amends § 15A-3.1, relating to motor vehicle weight tax (increases the motor
15   2009     vehicle weight tax)
09-  6-26-    Amends § 6-20.2, relating to highway beautification and disposal of abandoned
16   2009     vehicles revolving fund (increases the highway beautification and disposal of
              abandoned vehicles fee)
09-  6-26-    Amends §§ 15B-2.1 and 15B-2.10, relating to public transit (amends the fare
17   2009     structure of TheBus) (Eff. 7-1-2009)
09-  6-26-    Repeals and reenacts §§ 10-4.2 and 10-4.3, relating to fees for use of municipal
18   2009     golf courses (increases golf fees) (Eff. 7-1-2009)
09-  6-26-    Amends § 10-2.1, relating to admission fees for the Honolulu Zoo (increases the
19   2009     admission fees for the Honolulu Zoo and deletes the sale of the annual family
              pass) (Eff. 7-1-2009)
09-  6-26-    Amends §§ 10-1.2, 10-2.4, 10-2.6, and 10-2.8, relating to the department of
20   2009     parks and recreation (amends the fee for attendant/custodial services, Honolulu
              Zoo parking meter rates, and Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve admission fees)
09-  6-26-    Amends § 6-44.3, relating to fees for special duty requests (increases
21   2009     administrative fees and the amount of the special duty workers’ compensation
              fund)
09-  6-26-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special)
22   2009
09-  7-30-    Amends § 38-12.2; amends and renumbers § 38-12.3 to § 38-12.4; and adds a new §
23   2009     38-12.3, relating to telecommunications facilities on city property
              Amends §§ 8-10.1 and 8-10.9 and adds a new § 8-10.30, relating to the real
09-  7-30-    property taxation exemption for schools (modifies the requirements to include
24   2009     nonprofit and for-profit child care centers) (shall apply to tax years beginning
              July 1, 2010)
09-  7-30-    Adds to Ch. 15B a new Art. 11, relating to public transit (allows public use of
25   2009     designated public transit facilities for a fee) (Repealed by Ord. 23-21)
09-           Adds § 21-5.500A (Repealed by Ord. 25-2) and amends Table 21-3 (Repealed by Ord.
26   9-9-2009 25-2) and § 21-10.1, relating to plant nurseries (clarifies LUO provisions
              relating to plant nurseries)
09-  9-29-    Adds to Ch. 10 a new Art. 12, relating to fees for after-school programs
27   2009
09-  9-29-    Amends §§ 15B-2.1, 15B-2.7, and 15B-4.5, relating to public transit (amends the
28   2009     public transit fare provisions for disabled persons)
09-  9-29-    Amends § 17-5.1, adoption of the national electrical code (Eff. 11-28-2009)
29   2009
09-  9-29-    Repeals Ch. 32, building energy efficiency standards, and adds a new Ch. 32 (now
30   2009     numbered Ch. 16B), building energy conservation code (Eff. 11-28-2009) (Repealed
              by Ord. 23-25)
09-  9-29-    Amends § 8-10.12, relating to the real property tax exemption for alternate
31   2009     energy improvements (shall apply to tax years beginning July 1, 2010)
09-  10-30-   Amends §§ 8-7.1, 8-7.5, 8-10.1, 8-10.3, and 8-10.4, relating to real property
32   2009     taxation (adds “homeowner” as a new general land class; shall apply to tax years
              beginning July 1, 2010)
09-  10-30-   Amends § 21-5.450, relating to meeting facilities in industrial districts
33   2009     (removes the 1,000-foot separation and three-month vacancy restrictions for
              meeting facilities located in industrial districts) (Repealed by Ord. 25-2)
09-  12-31-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 17, Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa (Special)
34   2009
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
09-  12-31-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki (Special)
35   2009
     2-11-    Amends § 12-5.1, relating to the public spay and neuter fees for dogs and cats
10-1 2010     (increases the fees charged for spay and neuter services) (shall apply to spay/
              neuter certificates sold on July 1, 2010 and thereafter)
     2-11-    Amends §§ 9-1.2 and 9-4.2, relating to disposal charges for city-operated or city-
10-2 2010     contracted transshipment facilities (allows the city to charge for disposal of
              refuse at transshipment facilities)
     3-31-    Amends § 15-22.8, relating to street usage permits (amends the street usage permit
10-3 2010     fees relating to the enclosure or obstruction of parking meter spaces incidental to
              construction)
10-4 3-31-    Amends §§ 10-1.1, 10-1.2, and 10-1.3, regulating tents in the parks maintained by
     2010     the City and County of Honolulu
10-5 3-31-    Amends §§ 10-1.1 and 10-1.2, regulating shopping carts in the parks maintained by
     2010     the City and County of Honolulu
              Amends §§ 18-7.3 and 18-7.4, relating to fees and permits for building, electrical,
10-6 5-6-2010 plumbing and sidewalk codes (increases the fines for unpermitted building
              activities) (shall apply to violations that occur after May 6, 2010)
10-7 5-6-2010 Amends a portion of zoning map No. 9, Waipio (Crestview) (Special)
10-8 6-24-    Provides a one-time real property tax credit of $100 to eligible owners of real
     2010     property (shall apply to the tax year July 1, 2010 to June 30, 2011)
10-9 6-24-    Amends §§ 8-3.1 and 8-11.1, to adjust the minimum real property tax
     2010
10-  6-24-    Appropriations for FY 2010-2011 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-2010) (Special)
10   2010
10-  6-24-    Appropriations for FY 2010-2011 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-2010)
11   2010     (Special)
10-  6-24-    Appropriations for FY 2010-2011 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-2010) (Special)
12   2010
10-  6-24-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond anticipation
13   2010     notes (Special)
10-  7-20-    Amends § 8-7.5, relating to real property tax assessments (permits dedication for
14   2010     residential use in mixed-use zoning and transit-oriented development areas for real
              property tax purposes) (shall apply to tax years beginning on July 1, 2011)
10-  7-20-    Amends Ord. 01-28, to amend the authorization for the city to issue general
15   2010     obligation commercial paper to clarify and facilitate the use of such debt
              (Special)
              Amends §§ 9-1.2, 9-1.4, 9-1.6, 9-2.2, 9-2.3, 9-2.6, 9-2.7, 9-3.2, 9-3.4, 9-5.1, 9-
10-  8-30-    7.2, and 9-7.3; repeals § 9-1.10; adds §§ 9-4.8, 9-5.3, and 9-5.4, relating to
16   2010     bulky wastes (allows the city to assess fines for incorrect placement of bulky
              wastes) (shall take effect on January 1, 2011)
10-           Amends a portion of the Oahu water management plan (OWMP), enacted by Ord. 90-62
17   9-2-2010 and codified as Chapter 30, Articles 1, 2, and 3; and adds Article 2A, Waianae
              watershed management plan
10-           Amends a portion of the Oahu water management plan (OWMP), enacted by Ord. 90-62
18   9-2-2010 and codified as Chapter 30, Articles 1, 2, and 3; and adds Article 2B, Ko‘olau loa
              watershed management plan
              Amends §§ 21-2.20, 21-2.60, 21-2.70, 21-2.90-1, 21-2.100, 21-2.140-1, Table 21-3
              (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), §§ 21-4.30, 21-4.110, 21-5.350 (Repealed by Ord. 25-2),
10-  9-2-2010 21-5.380 (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), 21-5.450 (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), 21-5.700
19            (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), Table 21-6.1, §§ 21-7.20, 21-8.30, Exhibit 21-9.10-A,
              §§ 21-9.80-4 and 21-10.1; adds §§ 21-5.80A, 21-5.510A, and 21-8.20A, miscellaneous
              amendments and additions to the land use ordinance
10-           Amends § 22-3.9, relating to improvements in unapproved streets, provides for
20   9-2-2010 council acceptance of streets and roadways that are constructed by developers in
              conformity with city standards
10-           Amends § 22-7.9, relating to park dedication (allows developers of highrise
21   9-2-2010 multiple-family developments to meet their park dedication requirements by
              providing a private park and playground on a level other than the ground level)
              Amends § 8-12.12, relating to real property taxation (provides for the payment of
10-           interest on the amount of taxes refunded to a taxpayer where the taxpayer receives
22   9-2-2010 a final determination from the board of review that is wholly or partly in favor of
              the appealing taxpayer) (shall apply only to certain tax refunds made to the
              taxpayer from and after September 2, 2010)
10-           Amends §§ 40-8.4, 40-8.5, and 40-8.7, relating to exceptional trees (clarifies the
23   9-2-2010 powers, duties, and procedures of the arborist advisory committee and amends the
              register of exceptional trees)
10-  9-2-2010 Amends § 21-4.30, relating to agricultural fences (increases the allowable height
24            of fences on certain agricultural lands)
10-  10-5-    Adds a new Art. 6 to Ch. 20; amends § 20-1.1, regulating the use of fireworks (Eff.
25   2010     1-2-2011)
10-  10-27-   Amends § 13-1.1 and adds a new Art. 18 to Ch. 13, relating to the regulation of
26   2010     sidewalks, to provide for pedestrian safety by establishing a pedestrian use zone
10-  10-27-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 12, Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point (Special)
27   2010
10-  10-27-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 23, Kailua-Lanikai-Keolu (Special)
28   2010
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
              Amends §§ 22-9.3 and 22-9.5, to amend the requirements for the naming of city
10-  10-27-   parks, sites and facilities to allow a portion of a park, site or facility to be
29   2010     named for a person who has made significant service contributions to the
              community
10-  10-27-   Amends § 8-7.5, relating to real property tax assessments (clarifies dedications
30   2010     for residential use for real property tax purposes) (shall apply to tax years
              beginning on July 1, 2011)
              Amends §§ 8-7.1 and 8-7.5, relating to real property taxation (replaces
10-  10-27-   “homeowner” and “nonhomeowner” real property tax classifications with the
31   2010     “residential” real property tax classification) (shall apply to tax years
              beginning July 1, 2011)
10-  12-22-   Amends §§ 23-1.5, 23-1.7, 23-1.8, 25-1.3, 25-3.3, 25-5.2, 25-5.4, and 25-5.5;
32   2010     adds § 25-6.1, relating to shoreline setbacks and the special management area
              (miscellaneous amendments) (§ 25-3.3 repealed by Ord. 23-4)
              Amends §§ 12-4.1 and 12-4.4, relating to the regulation of dogs (conforms the
11-1 2-7-2011 Revised Ordinances to federal regulations regarding the exemption of service dogs
              from a leash requirement)
     3-11-    Amends § 1-8.2, relating to intergovernmental agreements (allows city departments
11-2 2011     to use facilities owned by other government entities to hold public meetings or
              hearings)
11-3 5-3-2011 Repeals Art. 8 of Ch. 24 and adds a new Art. 8 to adopt a new North Shore
              Sustainable Communities Plan
11-4 5-3-2011 Amends a portion of zoning map No. 17, Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa (Special)
11-5 5-4-2011 Provides a one-time real property tax relief to eligible property owners of real
              property (Special)
     6-21-    Amends § 9-4.2, by terminating the discount on disposal charges recyclers receive
11-6 2011     for disposing of recycling residue and by exempting community cleanup events from
              solid waste disposal charges (Superceded by Ord. 11-25)
              Repeals § 8-10.22 and adds a new § 8-10.22 (re-numbered § 8-10.19) to add
11-7 6-8-2011 definitions and clarifying provisions to facilitate enforcement of real property
              tax exemption requirements for historic residential real property dedicated for
              preservation
11-8 6-21-    Amends § 15A-2.2 by increasing the fee for issuance of driver’s license and
     2011     duplicate permit or license
11-9 6-21-    Appropriations for FY 2011-2012 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-2011) (Special)
     2011
11-  6-21-    Appropriations for FY 2011-2012 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-2011)
10   2011     (Special)
11-  6-21-    Appropriations for FY 2011-2012 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-2011)
11   2011     (Special)
11-  6-21-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
12   2011     anticipation notes (Special)
11-  6-21-    Amends § 15-16.5, relating to city hall and satellite off-street parking
13   2011
11-  6-21-    Amends § 10-4.2, increasing golf fees
14   2011
11-  6-21-    Amends § 38-7.1, repeals § 38-9.3, and adds a new § 38-9.3, increasing facility
15   2011     rental rates at the Neal S. Blaisdell Center and Waikiki Shell
11-  6-21-    Amends § 10-2.1 by increasing the admission fees for the Honolulu Zoo
16   2011
11-  6-21-    Repeals Appendix B and Appendix D of Chapter 14, adds a new Appendix B and
17   2011     Appendix D updating the city’s sewer service charge and wastewater system
              facility charge schedules
11-  6-21-    Amends Chapter 1, Article 8 title, and §§ 1-8.1 and 1-8.2 by requiring council
18   2011     approval for certain private agreements
11-  6-21-    Amends § 10-2.9 and § 10-2.9 title, providing for fees for the use and rental of
19   2011     parks and recreational facilities
11-  6-21-    Adds a new section § 10-2.10 relating to fees for campsite use
20   2011
11-  6-21-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
21   2011     anticipation notes for the Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation capital
              budget ordinance (Special)
11-  6-27-    Appropriations for FY 2011-2012 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
22   2011     operating budget (Eff. 7-1-2011) (Special)
11-  6-27-    Appropriations for FY 2011-2012 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
23   2011     capital budget and program (Eff. 7-1-2011) (Special)
11-  6-27-    Amends § 6-61.4, to provide for the reimbursement to the general fund or highway
24   2011     fund from the transit fund for expenditures related to the development of a
              locally preferred alternative for a mass transit project
11-  6-27-    Amends § 9-4.2, to change the discount on disposal charges that recyclers receive
25   2011     for disposing recycling residue (Supersedes Ord. 11-6)
11-  9-2-2011 Amends § 8-7.3 by revising the availability of real property tax incentives for
26            dedicated agricultural land
11-  9-28-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 24, Waimanalo (Special)
27   2011
              Amends §§ 25-1.3 and 25-3.3, relating to the special management area ordinance to
11-  10-20-   expedite and facilitate work on projects that have been or may have been delayed
28   2011     due to Special Management Area permitting requirements (§ 25-3.3 repealed by Ord.
              23-4)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
11-  12-9-    Amends § 13-1.1, adds a new Art. 19, repeals §§ 29-18.2, 29-18.7, and Chapter
29   2011     10, Art. 11 to clarify definitions and establish a procedure for the removal and
              disposal of personal property stored on public property
11-  12-14-   Amends §§ 21-7.40, 21-9.80-4, 21-9.80-6, 21-2.110-2, Tables 21-9.6(A) and 21-9.6
30   2011     (B), and Exhibit 21-9.13, and repeals § 21-9.80-7, to amend the provisions in
              the Land Use Ordinance pertaining to the Waikiki special district
11-  12-14-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki (Special)
31   2011
              Amends §§ 3-6.3, 3-6.4, 3-6.5, 3-6.6, 3-6.8 (Repealed by Ord. 12-1), and adds
12-1 2-9-2012 new §§ 3-6.9 and 3-6.10, by providing definitions and amend procedures related
              to the Ethics Commission
12-2 3-1-2012 Amends §§ 10-1.1, 10-1.2, 10-1.3, and 10-3.2, by adding definitions and amend
              restrictions related to commercial activities at city beach parks
12-3 3-2-2012 Repeals Chapter 24, Article 9 and reenacts a new Article 9, by amending the
              Wai’anae Sustainable Communities Plan
12-4 3-2-2012 Repeals Chapter 20, Article 1 and reenacts a new Article 1, by amending the
              State fire code
12-5 3-2-2012 Amends §§ 3-12.4 and 3-12.5, by amending procedures related to Sunshine law
              training program requirements
12-6 4-3-2012 Amends § 15-13.6, by amending time limits for itinerant vendors on streets and
              highways
     5-10-    Amends §§ 43-1.2, 43-6.6 (Repealed by Ord. 25-27), 43-10.2, 43-10.5, and
12-7 2012     Appendix 43-A, by amending public works infrastructure requirements, and fees
              for public sewer services
12-8 5-10-    Amends Chapter 34 by adding a new Article 9, related to regulation of plastic
     2012     bags (Eff. 7-1-2015)
12-9 5-10-    Amends § 10-2.4, clarifying when fees are charged for use of certain city
     2012     recreational facilities
12-  5-25-    Repeals § 8-10.4, repealing the tax exemption for air pollution control
10   2012     facilities
12-  5-25-    Repeals § 8-10.11, repealing the tax exemption for pulp and paper manufacturers
11   2012
12-  5-25-    Clarifies definitions of real property and improvements and redevelopment
12   2012     options in §§ 38-3.5 and 38-3.4 with respect to the Affordable Housing
              Preservation Initiative (Special)
12-  5-25-    Amends §§ 15-23.2, 15-23.2A, and 15-23.5, amending parking fees and use of
13   2012     revenues for certain city parking facilities
12-  5-25-    Amends § 8-7.5, amending definitions related to dedication of property for
14   2012     residential use
12-  5-25-    Creates a new Article 29 in Chapter 14, establishing a Complete Streets policy
15   2012     for the City and County of Honolulu
12-  5-25-    Amends § 8-7.3, amending provisions concerning the dedication of agricultural
16   2012     land
12-  6-15-    Amends Ord. 01-28, clarifying and facilitating the City’s use of general
17   2012     obligation commercial paper
12-  6-22-    Appropriations for FY 2012-2013 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-2012) (Special)
18   2012
12-  6-22-    Appropriations for FY 2012-2013 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-2012)
19   2012     (Special)
12-  6-22-    Appropriations for FY 2012-2013 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-2012)
20   2012     (Special)
12-  6-22-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
21   2012     anticipation notes for amounts appropriated for the FY 2012-2013 executive
              capital budget (Special)
12-  6-22-    Appropriations for FY 2012-2013 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
22   2012     operating budget (Special)
12-  6-22-    Appropriations for FY 2012-2013 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
23   2012     capital budget (Special)
12-  6-22-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
24   2012     anticipation notes for amounts appropriated for the FY 2012-2013 Honolulu
              Authority for Rapid Transportation capital budget (Special)
12-  6-22-    Amends § 3-6.8, expanding the ethics training requirement to all city personnel
25   2012
12-  7-25-    Amends §§ 10-1.1 and 10-1.3, relating to expressive activities in parks
26   2012
12-  7-25-    Amends § 15-25.1, relating to parking regulations for mopeds on the Fort Street
27   2012     Mall
12-  8-15-    Amends §§ 10-1.2 and 10-1.3, regulations relating to commercial activities at
28   2012     certain city beach parks
12-  8-31-    Amends § 8-10.1, relating to requirements and penalty provisions relating to
29   2012     certain real property tax exemptions
12-  8-31-    Amends Chapter 30 by adding a new Article 2C, relating to the Ko‘olau Poko
30   2012     Watershed Management Plan
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
12-  8-31-    Amends §§ 3-6.8, 3-6.9, 3-8.4, 3-8.5, 3-8.6, and 3-8.7, clarifying application
31   2012     of the City’s ethics laws
12-  9-27-    Repeals Article 24 of Chapter 6, relating to farmers home administration loan
32   2012     fund
12-  9-27-    Amends the title of Article 6A, Chapter 13, and amends §§ 13-6A.1 and 13-6A.2,
33   2012     relating to peddling in certain designated areas
              Makes the following amendments to Chapter 16, relating to the building code:
              repeals and reenacts new Articles 1, 5 and 12; reenacts a new Article 9;
12-  10-18-   amends the title of Article 6; amends §§ 16-2.3, 16-3.1, 16-3.2, 16-3.3, 16-
34   2012     3.4, 16-3.5, 16-3.6, 16-3.8, 16-3.10, 16-6.2, 16-6.6, 16-7.1, 16-7.3, 16-7.8,
              16-7.9, 16-10.3, 16-10.4; 16-11.3; 16-11.5; repeals and reenacts new §§ 16-7.5
              and 16-7.6; and enacts new Articles 13 and 14
12-  10-18-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 17, Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa (Special)
35   2012
12-  10-18-   Amends §§ 6-18.2, 15-16.5, and 15-23.5, relating to the Joint Management
36   2012     Traffic Center Garage and deposit of certain revenues therefrom into the bus
              transportation fund
12-  11-29-   Amends § 9-4.2, relating to termination of the recycling residue discount
37   2012     (Eff. July 1, 2013)
12-  12-21-   Amends § 17-3.1, relating to the electrical code
38   2012
12-  12-21-   Amends § 9-1.13, relating to the preparation of integrated solid waste
39   2012     management plans
12-  12-21-   Amends § 40-9.1, relating to alarm systems
40   2012
13-1 3-7-2013 Amends § 18-6.5, relating to permit fees for photovoltaic solar electric power
              systems (Eff. 30 days after 3-7-2013)
              Amends § 1-8.3, relating to approval of consolidated plan and annual action
13-2 3-7-2013 plans relating to Community Planning and Development programs of the U.S.
              Department of Housing and Urban Development
13-3 3-7-2013 Amends § 16-1.1, relating to the building code
13-4 4-8-2013 Amends Chapter 2 by adding a new Article 36, and amends § 22-2.3, relating to
              street lighting
13-5 4-8-2013 Amends § 41-14.2, relating to the prohibition of smoking at certain city beach
              parks
13-6 4-8-2013 Repeals Article 9 of Chapter 41, relating to permitting for palmistry
13-7 4-8-2013 Amends Chapter 6 by adding a new Article 52, relating to the Grants in Aid
              Fund
13-8 4-19-    Amends Chapter 13 by adding a new Article 16, relating to nuisances on public
     2013     sidewalks
13-9 4-26-    Amends §§ 40-7.4 and 40-7.5, relating to the disposal of weeds, garbage, trash
     2013     and waste from property
13-  4-19-    Amends § 21-2.40-1, Table 21-3 (Repealed by Ord. 25-2) and § 21-5.360
10   2013     (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), relating to hotels within the BMX-3 district under
              the Land Use Ordinance
13-  4-19-    Amends a portion of Zoning Map No. 3 (Moiliili-Kaimuki) (Special)
11   2013
13-  5-1-2013 Amends §§ 10-1.1, 10-1.2 and 10-1.7, relating to public parks and shoreline
12            access
13-  5-20-    Amends a portion of Zoning Map No. 12 (Ewa-Iroquois Pt.) (Special)
13   2013
13-  5-23-    Repeals Article 1 of Chapter 6, relating to the Municipal Stores Revolving
14   2013     Fund
13-  5-23-    Amends § 2-18.6, relating to line-item budget details
15   2013
13-  6-14-    Amends §§ 6-41.1, 18-6.1, and 23-1.12, relating to fees for certain permits
16   2013     and services
13-  6-21-    Amends §§ 6-45.2, 6-45.4, and 6-45.5 relating to requirements concerning the
17   2013     rental assistance fund
13-  6-21-    Appropriations for FY 2013-2014 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-2013) (Special)
18   2013
13-  6-21-    Appropriations for FY 2013-2014 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-2013)
19   2013     (Special)
13-  6-21-    Appropriations for FY 2013-2014 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-2013)
20   2013     (Special)
13-  6-21-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
21   2013     anticipation notes for amounts appropriated for the FY 2013-2014 executive
              capital budget (Special)
13-  6-21-    Appropriations for FY 2013-2014 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
22   2013     operating budget (Eff. 7-1-2013) (Special)
13-  6-21-    Appropriations for FY 2013-2014 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
23   2013     capital budget (Eff. 7-1-2013) (Special)
13-  6-21-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
24   2013     anticipation notes for amounts appropriated for the FY 2013-2014 Honolulu
              Authority for Rapid Transportation capital budget (Special)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
13-  6-21-    Addresses agricultural dedications for real property taxation purposes
25   2013     (Special) (to be repealed 11-1-2016)
13-  7-22-    Repeals Chapter 24, Article 3 and reenacts a new Article 3, and adopts the
26   2013     revised ’Ewa Development Plan
13-  7-21-    Amends §§ 41-14.1, 41-14.2, and 41-14.3, relating to the prohibition of smoking
27   2013     in certain places
13-  7-21-    Amends §§ 41-14.1, 41-14.2, 41-14.3, and 41-14.9, relating to the prohibition
28   2013     of smoking in certain places
13-  7-23-    Creates a new Article 15 in Chapter 1, relating to online access to city forms
29   2013     (Eff. 7-1-2014)
13-  8-23-    Repeals § 15-25.1(d), relating to parking on Banyan Court Mall
30   2013
13-  8-23-    Amends § 15B-2.1(b), relating to the islandwide public transit fare structure
31   2013
13-  9-26-    Amends § 8-10.3(e), repealing the in lieu of home exemption (to be repealed 6-
32   2013     30-2039)
13-  9-26-    Amends § 8-7.1, relating to real property tax classification
33   2013
13-  10-24-   Amends portion of Zoning Map No. 4 (Nuuanu-McCully) (Special)
34   2013
13-  10-24-   Amends portion of Zoning Maps No. 22 (Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili) and No. 23
35   2013     (Kailua-Lanikai-Keolu) (Special)
13-  10-24-   Amends portion of Zoning Map No. 17 (Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa) (Special)
36   2013
13-  11-27-   Amends portion of Zoning Map No. 4 (Nuuanu-McCully) (Special)
37   2013
13-  11-27-   Amends portion of Zoning Maps No. 9 (Waipio (Crestview)) and No. 10 (Waipio
38   2013     (Mililani)) (Special)
13-  11-27-   Creates a new Article 19 in Chapter 2, relating to open data requirements
39   2013
13-  11-27-   Amends § 6-52.4 and Ord. 13-7, Section 3, by amending certain provisions
40   2013     relating to grants in aid
13-  12-20-   Amends § 8-7.1, relating to real property tax classification
41   2013
14-1 2-10-    Amends § 3-8.4, relating to financial disclosure reporting requirements
     2014
14-2 3-28-    Amends §§ 13-11.11 and 13-11.13, prohibiting certain uses of publication
     2014     dispensing racks
14-3 3-28-    Adds new section 40-9.10, and amends §§ 40-9.1 and 40-9.2, relating to alarm
     2014     system permits
              Adds new sections 22-1.5 and 33-1.5A, and amends §§ 6-27.1, 6-40.2, 6-41.1, 14-
14-4 3-28-    12.12, 14-12.22, 14-13.1, 14-14.8, 14-14.10, 18-6.2, 18-7.5, 22-1.1, 22-1.2,
     2014     23-1.12, 25-5.2, 26-1.4, 29-2.4, 33A-1.3, relating to fees for certain permits
              and services administered by the department of planning and permitting
14-5 3-28-    Adds a new section 15-13.16 and amends § 15-13.6, authorizing certain parking
     2014     stalls for mobile food vendors. (Eff. 9-27-2014; to be repealed 9-27-2016)
14-6 3-28-    Creates a new Article 11 in Chapter 14, relating to the use of indigenous and
     2014     Polynesian introduced plants in public landscaping
14-7 4-17-    Amends §§ 13-11.3, 13-11.6, 13-11.9, 13-11.10, relating to dispensing racks and
     2014     publication dispensing rack enclosures in Waikiki
14-8 4-30-    Amends portion of Zoning Map No. 7 (Halawa-Pearl City) (Special)
     2014
14-9 5-22-    Repeals §§ 21-9.10, 21-9.10-1 through 21-9.10-14 and reenacts a new § 21-9.10,
     2014     amends § 21-10.1, and creates a new Chapter 21A, relating to flood hazard areas
14-  6-20-    Amends § 21-2.110-2 and adds a new § 21-9.100-5, relating to interim planned
10   2014     development permits for transit-oriented development within close proximity to
              future rail stations
14-  6-20-    Amends portion of Zoning Map No. 11 (Wahiawa-Whitmore) (Special)
11   2014
14-  6-20-    Amends § 10-2.10, amending the fees for camping
12   2014
14-  6-20-    Amends § 9-4.3, relating to refuse collection and disposal charges
13   2014
14-  6-20-    Amends portion of Zoning Map No. 21 (Kualoa-Waiahole-Kahaluu) (Special)
14   2014
14-  6-20-    Amends portion of Zoning Map No. 15 (Lualualei-Makaha) (Special)
15   2014
14-  6-23-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
16   2014     anticipation notes (Special)
14-  6-23-    Appropriations for FY 2014-2015 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-2014) (Special)
17   2014
14-  6-23-    Appropriations for FY 2014-2015 executive operating budget (Eff. 7-1-2014)
18   2014     (Special)
14-  6-23-    Appropriations for FY 2014-2015 executive capital budget (Eff. 7-1-2014)
19   2014     (Special)
14-  6-23-    Appropriations for FY 2014-2015 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
20   2014     operating budget (Eff. 7-1-2014) (Special)
14-  6-23-    Appropriations for FY 2014-2015 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
21   2014     capital budget (Eff. 7-1-2014) (Special)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
14-  6-23-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
22   2014     anticipation notes for capital improvement projects of the Honolulu Authority
              for Rapid Transportation (Special)
14-  7-23-    Amends portion of Zoning Map No. 22 (Heeia-Kaneohe-Maunawili) (Special)
23   2014
              Amends §§ 3-2.7(d), 3-2.8, 6-47.1, 6-50.2 (Repealed by Ord. 16-12), 9-1.11(e),
14-  7-23-    9-3.1(c), 10-2.9, 11-1.2, 11-1.3 (Repealed by Ord. 24-20), 15B-4.1, 35A-5.11
24   2014     and repeals §§ 4-7.2, 10-7.2, and 12-1.22 relating to agency reporting
              requirements
14-  7-23-    Amends §§ 2-27.6, 15-24.11, 15-29.1 through 15-29.5, the article title for
25   2014     Chapter 15, Article 29, and repeals §§ 15-2.18 and 15-24.10 relating to parking
              for persons with disabilities
14-  9-16-    Creates a new Article 15 in Chapter 13, relating to public sidewalks
26   2014
14-  9-16-    Creates a new Article 20 in Chapter 41, relating to urinating and defecating in
27   2014     public
14-  9-16-    Creates a new Article 21 in Chapter 41, relating to urinating and defecating in
28   2014     public
14-  9-25-    Amends §§ 34-14.1 and 34-14.2, relating to the use of bags provided to
29   2014     customers (Eff. 7-1-2015)
14-  10-23-   Amends § 29-4.4 and creates a new § 29-4.8 in Chapter 29, Article 4, relating
30   2014     to grading violations and penalties
14-  10-23-   Amends § 29-2.4A, relating to grading without a permit
31   2014
14-  10-23-   Amends a portion of Zoning Map No. 15 (Lualualei-Makaha) (Special)
32   2014
14-  10-23-   Amends § 8-13.2, relating to the real property tax credit for low-income
33   2014     homeowners
14-  10-23-   Amends § 29-2.2B, relating to stockpiling of soil, and requires the department
34   2014     of facility maintenance to adopt rules having the force and effect of law for
              the implementation of Article 2, Chapter 29 (Section 3, Special)
14-  12-2-    Creates a new Article 15A in Chapter 13, relating to public sidewalks
35   2014
14-  12-2-    Amends §§ 16A-1.1, 16A-1.3, 16A-2.1, 16A-3.1, 16A-10.1, 16A-10.3, and 16A-10.5,
36   2014     repeals Article 9 of Chapter 16A and reenacts a new Article 9, relating to the
              housing code
14-  12-22-   Amends § 14-28.2(a), relating to maintenance of private streets and roads
37   2014
15-1 2-11-    Creates a new Article 15B in Chapter 13, relating to public pedestrian malls in
     2015     the downtown and Chinatown areas
15-2 2-11-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 6, Moanalua (Special)
     2015
15-3 3-5-2015 Amends § 15-23.2, relating to public off-street parking
15-4 3-5-2015 Amends § 8-12.7, relating to real property tax boards of review
15-5 3-5-2015 Amends § 6-51.2, relating to the Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve fund
15-6 3-30-    Adds new section 8-7.6, relating to real property tax relief for properties
     2015     used for low-income rental housing
15-7 3-30-    Repeals Chapter 6 Article 64, relating to the other post-employment benefits
     2015     reserve fund
15-8 4-22-    Creates a new Article 31 in Chapter 6, relating to a regional park fund
     2015
15-9 4-22-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 17, Waialua (Special)
     2015
15-  5-18-    Amends § 28-1.5, relating to special improvement districts
10   2015
15-  5-18-    Establishes the Waikiki Beach Special Improvement District No. 3 (Special)
11   2015
15-  5-20-    Amends §§ 40-8.7 and 40-8.9, relating to exceptional trees
12   2015
15-  5-20-    Amends portions of zoning maps No. 12 and No. 13 (Special)
13   2015
15-           Amends §§ 13-15A.1, 13-15A.2(a), 13-15A.2(d), and Exhibits 2, 3, 10, and 11 in
14   6-3-2015 Article 15A, and creates new Exhibits 14 and 15 in Article 15A, relating to
              sitting or lying on public sidewalks
15-  6-22-    Amends §§ 29-4.2, 29-4.4, 29-4.6, and 29-4.7, relating to public works
15   2015     infrastructure requirements including fees and services
15-  6-22-    Amends §§ 16-10.2(a) and 16-10.4, relating to building code
16   2015
15-  6-22-    Amends § 17-3.6, relating to electrical code
17   2015
15-  6-22-    Amends §§ 18-7.2(a) and 18-7.4, relating to fees and permits for building,
18   2015     electrical, plumbing and sidewalk
15-  6-22-    Amends § 25-9.1, relating to special management area
19   2015
15-  6-22-    Amends §§ 13-4.6(b) and 13-4.7, relating to streets, sidewalks, malls and other
20   2015     public places
15-  6-22-    Amends §§ 40-7.4(a) and 40-7.5, relating to regulated activities within the
21   2015     city
15-  6-22-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
22   2015     anticipation notes for amounts appropriated for the FY 2015-2016 executive
              capital budget (Special)
15-  6-22-    Amends §§ 8-1.2 and 8-10.12(b) and (c), relating to valuation of solar energy
23   2015     and solar water heating improvements for real property tax purposes
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
15-  6-22-    Appropriations for the FY 2015-2016 legislative budget (Special)
24   2015
15-  6-22-    Appropriations for the FY 2015-2016 executive operating budget (Special)
25   2015
15-  6-22-    Appropriations for the FY 2015-2016 executive capital budget (Special)
26   2015
15-  6-22-    Appropriations for the FY 2015-2016 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
27   2015     operating budget (Special)
15-  6-22-    Appropriations for the FY 2015-2016 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
28   2015     capital budget (Special)
15-  6-22-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
29   2015     anticipation notes for amounts appropriated for the FY 2015-2016 Honolulu
              Authority for Rapid Transportation capital budget (Special)
15-  6-22-    Creates a new Article 28 in Chapter 6, relating to the Waipio Peninsula Soccer
30   2015     Park Fund
15-  7-23-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 7, Halawa-Pearl City (Special)
31   2015
15-  7-23-    Amends § 8-7.3, relating to real property taxation of agricultural lands
32   2015
15-  7-23-    Amends § 8-10.3(a), relating to real property tax exemptions for homes
33   2015
15-  7-23-    Amends § 8-1.16, relating to real property tax deadlines
34   2015
15-  8-19-    Creates a new Article 28 in Chapter 15, relating to car sharing
35   2015
15-  8-19-    Amends § 8-10.21, relating to the real property tax exemption for credit unions
36   2015
15-  8-19-    Creates a new Article 55 in Chapter 6, to establish a fund to address mitigation
37   2015     costs relating to the construction of the transit project
15-  8-19-    Creates a new Article 15 in Chapter 16, relating to baby diaper-changing
38   2015     accommodations
15-  8-19-    Creates a new Article 3 in Chapter 41, relating to city-owned streams
39   2015
15-  9-2-2015 Amends § 13-15B.1, relating to public pedestrian malls in the downtown and
40            Chinatown areas
15-  9-14-    Creates new §§ 21-2.140-1(o) and 21-5.720 (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), and amends
41   2015     Tables 21-3 (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), 21-3.2, and 21-6.1, and §§ 21-6.30(d), 21-
              6.40(c), 21-8.20(c) (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), and 21-10.1
15-  10-22-   Creates a new Article 37 in Chapter 2, relating to the Honolulu Zoo
42   2015
15-  10-22-   Amends § 38-3.3, relating to affordable rental leases
43   2015
15-  10-22-   Amends § 15-24.20, relating to parades
44   2015
15-  11-19-   Repeals Article 1, Chapter 2, and creates a new Article 1 in Chapter 2, relating
45   2015     to the adoption of the State fire code
15-  11-20-   Amends Ord. 01-28, relating to general obligation commercial paper (Special)
46   2015
15-  11-20-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 3, Moiliili-Kaimuki (Special)
47   2015
15-  11-20-   Amends the Waikiki Special District Zoning Precinct Boundaries (Special)
48   2015
15-  11-20-   Creates a new Article 38 in Chapter 2, relating to solar photovoltaic systems
49   2015
15-  11-23-   Creates a new section, § 1-11.3, relating to discrimination
50   2015
15-  11-20-   Amends § 8-10.3, relating to real property tax exemptions for homes
51   2015
              Amends Chapter 6, Article 60, relating to the transportation surcharge; repeal
16-1 2-1-2016 of Chapter 6, Article 60 on 12-31-22; enactment of a new Chapter 6, Article 60
              on 1-1-23 (amended by Ord. 17-11)
              Creates two new sections, §§ 15-2.31 and 15-2.32, in Article 2 of Chapter 15,
16-2 2-8-2016 and amends §§ 15-2.16, 15-13.3(a), 15-18.6, 15-22.2, 15-22.8, 15-22.11, relating
              to complete streets
16-3 3-3-2016 Amends § 8-10.3(a), relating to real property tax exemption for homes
16-4 3-16-    Amends § 9-4.2, relating to collection and disposal charges
     2016
16-5 3-21-    Creates a new Article 6, in Chapter 10, relating to cultural sites
     2016
16-6 3-29-    Relates to on-street parking in certain areas of Ewa Beach and prescribes
     2016     reporting requirements for HPD by July 1, 2018 (Sunset on 12-31-18) (Special)
16-7 3-29-    Relates to the renewal for bed and breakfast homes and transient vacation units
     2016     of nonconforming use certificates (Special)
16-8 5-6-2016 Amends § 8-7.6, relating to real property tax relief for properties for low-
              income rental housing
16-9 5-18-    Creates a new section, § 9-1.10, in Article 1 of Chapter 9, and amends § 9-5.1,
     2016     relating to refuse
16-  6-20-    Relates to the disposal of green waste (Sunset on 12-31-2019) (Special)
10   2016
16-  6-20-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
11   2016     anticipation notes for amounts appropriated for the FY 2016-2017 executive
              capital budget projects (Special)
16-  7-1-2016 Creates a new Article 24, in Chapter 6, repeals Article 50 in Chapter 6, and
12            amends §§ 6-53.2(a) and (b), relating to the Honolulu Zoo (Eff. 7-1-2017)
16-  7-1-2016 Appropriations for the FY 2016-2017 legislative budget (Special)
13
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
16-  7-1-2016 Appropriations for the FY 2016-2017 executive operating budget and program
14            (Special)
16-  7-1-2016 Appropriations for the FY 2016-2017 executive capital budget and program
15            (Special)
16-  7-1-2016 Appropriations for the FY 2016-2017 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
16            operating budget (Special)
16-  7-1-2016 Appropriations for the FY 2016-2017 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
17            capital budget (Special)
16-           Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
18   7-1-2016 anticipation notes for amounts appropriated for the FY 2016-2017 Honolulu
              Authority for Rapid Transportation capital budget projects (Special)
              Creates new §§ 14-10.7 and 18-5.8 and amends §§ 14-14.4, 18-6.5, and 22-7.5,
16-  7-21-    relating to incentives for accessory dwelling units production (§§ 14-10.7, 14-
19   2016     14.4(g), and 18-5.8 to be repealed 6-30-18) (repeal date delayed for §§ 14-10.7,
              14-14.4, and 18-6.5 to 6-30-20 by Ord. 17-30 and further delayed to 6-30-25 by
              Ord. 20-20)
16-  7-21-    Amends §§ 8-13.2, 8-13.3, 8-13.5, 8-13.6, relating to the real property tax
20   2016     credit for low income homeowners
16-  7-21-    Creates new sections 8-10.31 and 8-10.32, relating to industrial lands and
21   2016     exemptions, applying to tax years beginning July 1, 2017 and ending June 30,
              2027
16-  8-17-    Amends § 15-16.5, relating to the Kapalama Hale parking facility
22   2016
16-  8-17-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 24 (Waimanalo) (Special)
23   2016
16-  8-17-    Amends § 14-28.2, relating to private streets and roads
24   2016
16-  8-17-    Creates a new Article 6 in Chapter 35A, amends §§ 35A-1.1 and 35A-1.3(a), and
25   2016     repeals §§ 12-1.9 and 12-1.18 (now Chapter 35A), relating to private
              transportation services and drivers (Eff. 1-15-2017)
16-  9-23-    Amends § 21-9.100.5, relating to public housing in transit-oriented development
26   2016     special districts
16-  10-21-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 12 (Ewa Beach-Iroquois Point) (Special)
27   2016
16-  10-21-   Amends portions of boundaries of the special management area map for Ewa
28   2016     (Special)
              Creates new sections 2-1.2, 2-8.3, 2-24.9 through 2-24.15 (and designates those
              sections as a new Part B in Article 24, Chapter 2), 2-24.16 through 2-24.17 (and
              designates those sections as a new Part C in Article 24, Chapter 2), 2-23.2, and
              a new Article 39 in Chapter 2; designates sections 2-24.1 through 2-24.8 as a
              new Part A in Article 24, Chapter 2; amends the title of Chapter 2, the titles
16-  10-21-   of Articles 4, 6, 7, 8, 13, 23, 25, and 29 in Chapter 2; amends §§ 2-3.1(d), 2-
29   2016     4.1, 2-4.2, 2-5.1, 2-5.3, 2-6.1, 2-6.2, 2-7.1, 2-8.1, 2-8.3(b), 2-12.1, 2-13.1,
              2-17.1, 2-18.8(a), 2-21.1, 2-23.1, 2-24.1, 2-24.2, 2-24.4 through 2-24.8, 2-
              25.1, 2-26.3(a), 2-28.1, 2-26.1(b), 2-28.2(b), 2-29.1, 2-30.1 through 2-30.3, 2-
              30.4(a) and (b), 2-30.5(a), 2-31.1, 2-31.2, 9-1.5(a); and repeals §§ 2-8.2, 2-
              12.2, Articles 9, 10, 14, 20, and 22 in Chapter 2, relating to the executive
              branch of the city
16-  10-21-   Amends §§ 21A-1.3, 21A-1.7, 21A-1.8, 21A-1.13, and 21A-1.14, relating to flood
30   2016     hazard areas
16-  10-21-   Creates a new Article 2D in Chapter 30, relating to the Oahu water management
31   2016     plan
16-  10-21-   Amends §§ 15-23.2A(a) and (f), relating to parking attendant facilities
32   2016
16-  11-21-   Amends § 14-19.1, relating to infrastructure
33   2016
16-  11-21-   Amends § 40-8.7, relating to exceptional trees
34   2016
16-  11-21-   Creates a new § 1-8.6 and amends §§ 1-8.1 through 1-8.3, relating to
35   2016     intergovernmental and private grant agreements
16-  12-16-   Amends §§ 6-46.1 through 6-46.3, relating to the housing development special
36   2016     fund
16-  12-16-   Amends § 8-10.18, relating to real property taxation
37   2016
              Creates a new section, § 35A-1.9, amends §§ 35A-1.1, 35A-1.17, 35A-1.20, and the
16-  12-16-   new article created by § 2 of Ord. 16-25 (now numbered as Article 6, Chapter
38   2016     35A); repeals Article 4, Chapter 35A; and repeals Section 7 of Ord. 16-25,
              relating to private transportation services and drivers (Eff. 1-15-2017)
            As per § 7 of the ordinance, amends § 35A-1.3; and repeals § 35A-1.9, relating
              to private transportation services and drivers (Eff. 3-16-2017)
17-1 2-10-    Amends §§ 15B-2.1 and 15B-6.11, relating to public transit (Eff. 7-1-2017) (§
     2017     15B-6.6 repealed by Ord. 23-21)
     2-10-    Amends §§ 8-7.3(e) and (m), relating to real property dedication for government
17-2 2017     owned agricultural land (applies to tax years beginning July 1, 2016 and
              thereafter)
     2-10-    Amends §§ 10-1.1 through 10-1.3, and 10-1.6(d), relating to public parks; and
17-3 2017     directs the director of parks and recreation to draft and submit a bill amending
              ROH Chapter 10, Article 2 within 180 days of the effective date (Special)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
17-4 3-9-2017 Amends a portion of zoning map No. 6 (Red Hill – Fort Shafter) (Special)
17-5 3-9-2017 Creates a new Article 16 in Chapter 16, relating to automated external
              defibrillators (Eff. 1-1-2018)
17-6 3-9-2017 Amends § 8-12.10, relating to real property taxation (applies to tax years
              beginning July 1, 2017 and thereafter)
17-7 3-10-    Creates a new § 15A-4.7 and amends the article title, relating to motor vehicle
     2017     registration (Eff. 7-1-2017)
17-8 4-7-2017 Amends § 14-28.2(b), relating to private streets and roads
17-9 4-7-2017 Amends a portion of zoning map No. 6 (Red Hill-Fort Shafter) (Special)
17-  4-7-2017 Amends a portion of zoning map No. 6 (Red Hill-Fort Shafter) (Special)
10
              Amends Chapter 6, Article 60; repeals Chapter 6, Article 60 on 12-31-2022; repeals
17-           Section 3 in Ord. 16-1 (which would have repealed Chapter 6, Article 60 on 12-31-
11   4-7-2017 2022); amends Chapter 6, Article 60 (Eff. 1-1-2023), as it was enacted in Section
              4 of Ord. 16-1; relating to the transportation surcharge (Section 3 of Ord. 17-11
              was repealed on 9-7-2017 by Ord. 17-48)
17-  4-7-2017 Amends § 8-11.1, relating to real property taxation (applies to tax years
12            beginning 7-1-2017)
17-  4-7-2017 Amends §§ 8-7.1(c)(3) and 8-7.5, relating to real property taxation (applies to
13            tax years beginning 7-1-2018)
17-  4-7-2017 Amends § 20-1.1, relating to the fire code of the City and County of Honolulu
14
17-  5-11-    Amends § 13-15A.2(a), and adds new Exhibits 16 and 17 in Chapter 13, Article 15A,
15   2017     relating to public sidewalks
17-  5-12-    Creates a new Article 40 in Chapter 2, relating to sponsorships (Sunsets on 5-12-
16   2017     2022) (Repealed)
17-  5-12-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 22 (Heeia – Kaneohe –Maunawili) (Special)
17   2017
17-  5-12-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 6 (Red Hill – Fort Shafter) (Special)
18   2017
17-  5-26-    Creates a new Article 17 in Chapter 16, relating to bicycle facilities
19   2017
17-  5-26-    Amends § 21-9.100-2(a), relating to transit-oriented development
20   2017
17-  6-7-2017 Creates a new § 2-13.2, relating to city parks and recreational facilities
21
17-  6-28-    Amends § 16A-2.1, relating to the housing code (Eff. 7-28-2017)
22   2017
17-  6-28-    Amends § 10-2.1, relating to admission fees for the Honolulu Zoo (Retains certain
23   2017     zoo fees in effect on 6-27-2017 until administrative rules are adopted) (Special)
17-  6-28-    Amends § 15A-3.1, relating to motor vehicle weight tax (Eff. 1-1-2018)
24   2017
17-  6-28-    Amends § 15-22.4(a), relating to parking meters
25   2017
17-  6-28-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond anticipation
26   2017     notes for the amounts appropriated in the FY 2017-18 capital budget ordinance
              (Special)
17-  6-28-    Amends § 15B-2.1(b), relating to public transit fare structure of TheBus and
27   2017     TheHandi-Van (Eff. 1-1-2018)
17-  6-28-    Creates a new section, § 29-1.6, and amends §§ 29-1.1, 29-1.2, 29-1.3, 29-2.4(a),
28   2017     and 14-13.1(c), relating to erosion, sediment, and pollution control
17-  6-28-    Amends § 10-4.2, relating to fees for use of municipal golf courses (Eff. 7-1-
29   2017     2017)
17-  6-28-    Amends Section 8 of Ord. 16-19, by changing the sunset date for §§ 14-10.7, 29-2.4
30   2017     (g), and 18-6.5, from 6-30-2018 to 6-30-2020, relating to incentives for accessory
              dwelling units production (Special) (amended by Ord. 20-20)
17-  6-28-    Appropriations for the FY 2017-18 legislative budget (Eff. 7-1-2017) (Special)
31   2017
17-  6-28-    Appropriations for the FY 2017-18 executive operating budget and program (Eff. 7-
32   2017     1-2017) (Special)
17-  6-28-    Appropriations for the FY 2017-18 executive capital budget and program (Eff. 7-1-
33   2017     2017) (Special)
17-  6-28-    Appropriations for the FY 2017-18 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
34   2017     operating budget (Eff. 7-1-2017) (Special)
17-  6-28-    Appropriations for the FY 2017-18 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
35   2017     capital budget (Eff. 7-1-2017) (Special)
17-  6-28-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond anticipation
36   2017     notes for the amounts appropriated for the FY 2017-18 Honolulu Authority for Rapid
              Transportation capital budget (Special)
              Amends §§ 34.14.1 and 34.14-9.2, relating to the use of bags provided to customers
              (in Section 2, the definition of “plastic checkout bag” in § 34.14.1 will be
17-  7-24-    effective 1-1-2020; in Section 3, the new definition of “plastic film bag” in §
37   2017     34.14.1 will be effective 7-1-2018; in Section 4, the amended definition of
              “reusable bag” in § 34.14.1 will be effective 7-1-2018; in Section 5, the
              amendments to § 34.14.2 are effective 7-1-2018)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
17-  7-25-    Amends §§ 40-2.1 through 40-2.3, relating to the maintenance of channels,
38   2017     streambeds, streambanks and drainageways
17-  7-27-    Amends § 15-24.23, relating to mobile electronic devices (Eff. 10-25-2017)
39   2017
              Amends §§ 21-1.20(a), 21-2.20(k), 21-2.40-1(c), 21-2.140-1(i), 21-2.150-2, 21-3.20,
              21-3.50-4(c), 21-3.140-1(c), 21-4.50, 21-4.110(d), 21-5.10A (Repealed by Ord. 25-2),
17-  7-27-    21-5.160(c) (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), 21-5.380(a) (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), 21-5.390
40   2017     (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), 21-5.700 (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), 21-8.20(c), 21-9.80-3(b),
              21-9.80-4(c) and (d), 21-9.100-5(d), 21-10.1, repeals Figure 21-2.1, and enacts a
              new Figure 21-2.1, relating to the land use ordinance
17-  8-21-    Amends § 13-15A.2(a), repeals Exhibit 6-A and Exhibit 15 in Chapter 13, Article 15A,
41   2017     and enacts a new Exhibit 6-A and Exhibit 15, relating to public sidewalks
17-  8-24-    Repeals Article 6 in Chapter 24, and enacts a new Article 6 in Chapter 24, to adopt
42   2017     the revised Koolau Poko Sustainable Communities Plan for the City and County of
              Honolulu
              Amends the city’s spay and neuter clinic program by authorizing the City
              administration, in conjunction with an animal control contractor, to establish a
17-  8-24-    pilot program to reduce the city’s freeroaming cat overpopulation. The pilot program
43   2017     will commence on 9-1-2017 and terminate on June 30, 2018 (see Section 2(c) of this
              ordinance), relating to the public spay and neuter clinic for dogs and cats
              (Special)
17-  8-24-    Creates a new Article 15 in Chapter 3, relating to city boards and commissions
44   2017
17-  8-24-    Amends § 15-16.1, relating to parking time limits
45   2017
17-  8-24-    Amends Chapter 21, Table 21-3 and § 21-5.700(c), relating to wind machines (Repealed
46   2017     by Ord. 25-2)
17-  8-24-    Repeals § 3-6.4, relating to ethics commission staff
47   2017
              Amends § 6-60.2(a) and (b) (as enacted by Ord. 17-11); repeals Section 3 of Ord. 17-
17-  9-7-2017 11; repeals Article 60 of Chapter 6 (Eff. 12-31-2022); and amends Article 60 of
48            Chapter 6 (Eff. 1-1-2023), as it was enacted by Ord. 16-1 and amended by Ord. 17-11,
              relating to the transportation surcharge (Special)
17-  9-8-2017 Amends § 16-1.1, relating to the building code
49
17-  9-8-2017 Creates a new § 21-5.380A and amends § 21-5.380, relating to joint development
50            (Repealed by Ord. 25-2)
17-  9-21-    Creates a new § 15-2.18 and amends § 15-14.1(a), relating to curb ramps
51   2017
17-  9-21-    Creates a new Article 5 in Chapter 15B and a new § 15B-8.4A, and amends §§ 15B-4.1,
52   2017     15B-4.2, 15B-4.5, 15B-6.2, 15B-8.2, 15B-8.3, 15B-8.4(a), 15B-8.7, relating to
              special transit service
17-  10-17-   Amends §§ 41-14.1, 41-14.2, and 41-14.4(a), relating to smoking
53   2017
              Creates new §§ 21-9.100-6 through 21-9.100-12; amends §§ 21-2.110-2, 21-9.20-2, 21-
17-  10-26-   9.100, 21-9.100-1 through 21-9.100-4, and 21-9.20-6; adds new Figures 21-9.3 through
54   2017     21-9.15, a new Table 21-9.8, and new Exhibits 21-9.19 and 21-9.20; and repeals and
              replaces Figure 21-2.1, relating to the transit-oriented development special
              district (Effective: 4-3-2018)
              Creates a new § 21-6.150; amends Article 10 in Chapter 21 (§ 21-10.1), §§ 21-3.90-1
17-  10-26-   (c), 21-3.110-1(c), 21-3.120-2(c), 21-3.140-1(c), 21-5.210 (Repealed by Ord. 25-2),
55   2017     21-5.480 (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), and 21-6.140(b); and repeals and replaces Figures
              21-3.3, 21-3.5, and 21-3.7, relating to miscellaneous land use ordinance amendments
17-  10-26-   Amends a portion of zoning map No. 8 (Waipahu) (Special) (This ordinance takes
56   2017     effect on the effective date of Bill 58 (2017) either in its original or amended
              form)
17-  10-17-   Amends §§ 28-1.5 and 28-2.9, relating to special improvement districts
57   2017
17-  10-17-   Establishes the Waikiki Transportation Management Association Special Improvement
58   2017     District No. 4 (Special)
17-  11-17-   Amends § 21-4.110(b), relating to nonconforming structures
59   2017
17-  11-17-   Amends § 40-3.1, relating to city-owned streams
60   2017
              Creates new §§ 8-10.33, 8-10.34, and 14-10.8; amends §§ 18-6.5 and 22-7.3, relating
     2-15-    to affordable housing incentives (Sunset on 6-30-2027, provided that the following
18-1 2018     will not be repealed: amendments made to §§ 18-6.5(e) and (f) in Section 5 of Ord.
              18-1; and amendments made to §§ 22-7.3(a) through (i) in Section 6 of Ord. 18-1)
              (amended by Ord. 19-8)
18-2 2-15-    Amends § 15-6.7(d), relating to bicycle lanes
     2018
18-3 2-15-    Amends §§ 6-11.1, 6-11.4, and 6-11.5, relating to the fee schedule for public
     2018     records
18-4 2-15-    Creates a new § 10-2.11, relating to Waimanalo Bay Beach Park
     2018
18-5 2-15-    Creates a new Article 12 in Chapter 15B and amends § 15B-1.1, relating to bus stops
     2018     (Effective: 6-15-2018)
              Regulates for an interim period the issuance of building permits for the planning
18-6 3-13-    and development of large residential structures in residential districts in order to
     2018     provide time for the city to establish appropriate policies in its long-range plans
              and zoning ordinances to address the impacts of such structures (Special)
18-7 3-15-    Amends § 40-7.2, relating to the disposal of weeds, garbage, trash, and waste from
     2018     property
18-8 3-15-    Amends § 18-6.5, relating to fees
     2018
18-9 3-15-    Creates a new Article 14 in Chapter 8, relating to real property taxation (applies
     2018     to tax years beginning July 1, 2019 and thereafter)
              Creates a new Chapter 29, amends § 8-10.33 (as enacted by Section 2 of Ord. 18-1),
18-  4-3-2018 relating to establishing an affordable housing requirement; also requests the
10            Department of Planning and Permitting to submit to the Council a status report on
              the effectiveness of Chapter 38, no later than 4-3-2023 (Special)
18-  4-13-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 17 (Mokuleia - Waialua - Haleiwa) (Special)
11   2018
18-  4-13-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 22 (Heeia - Kaneohe - Maunawili) (Special)
12   2018
18-  4-13-    Amends §§ 15-2.2 and 15-2.29, relating to mopeds
13   2018
18-           Creates a new Article 4 in Chapter 20 and amends § 20-1.1, relating to fire safety
14   5-3-2018 (establishing life safety regulations for high-rise residential buildings) (Special)
              (amended by Ord. 19-4)
18-  5-9-2018 Creates a new § 15-24.7, relating to the traffic code and public safety
15
18-  5-9-2018 Amends §§ 10-4.2 and 10-4.3(a), relating to fees for use of municipal golf courses
16            (Effective: 7-1-2018)
18-  5-11-    Amends § 8-7.6(a), relating to real property tax relief for properties used for low-
17   2018     income rental housing, applying to tax years beginning July 1, 2019 and thereafter
18-  5-23-    Amends §§ 40-1.1 and 40-1.3, relating to damage to public property
18   2018
18-  6-21-    Amends § 21-9.80-4(d), relating to planned development-resort and planned
19   2018     development-apartment projects
18-  6-21-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond anticipation
20   2018     notes for the amounts appropriated in the FY 2018-19 capital budget ordinance
              (Special)
18-  6-21-    Amends §§ 18-6.3(b) and (c), and Table 18-A in Chapter 18, relating to fees for
21   2018     certain permits and services administered by the department of planning and
              permitting
18-  6-22-    Appropriations for the FY 2018-19 legislative budget (Effective: 7-1-2018) (Special)
22   2018
18-  6-22-    Appropriations for the FY 2018-19 executive operating budget (Effective: 7-1-2018)
23   2018     (Special)
 
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
18-  6-22-    Appropriations for the FY 2018-19 executive capital budget and program
24   2018     (Effective: 7-1-2018) (Special)
18-  6-22-    Appropriations for the FY 2018-19 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
25   2018     operating budget (Effective: 7-1-2018) (Special)
18-  6-22-    Appropriations for the FY 2018-19 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
26   2018     capital budget (Effective: 7-1-2018) (Special)
18-  6-22-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
27   2018     anticipation notes for the amounts appropriated for the FY 2018-19 Honolulu
              Authority for Rapid Transportation capital budget (Special)
18-  7-25-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 23 (Kailua - Lanikai - Keolu) (Special)
28   2018
18-  8-31-    Amends §§ 15-18.10 and 15-26.10(a), relating to bicycle paths
29   2018
18-  8-31-    Repeals Article 21 in Chapter 2 and creates a new Article 21, relating to the
30   2018     department of customer services
18-  9-27-    Creates a new § 15B-6.8, relating to buses
31   2018
18-  9-27-    Amends § 15-21.11, relating to the use of Kaneohe Bay Drive
32   2018
18-  9-27-    Amends §§ 16-10.1 and 16-10.4, relating to the building code
33   2018
18-  10-11-   Creates a new Article 20 in Chapter 13, relating to obstructions on public
34   2018     sidewalks
18-  10-11-   Creates a new Article 21 in Chapter 13, relating to illegal lodging on City
35   2018     sidewalks and in other public places
18-  10-11-   Creates a new Article 22 in Chapter 2, related to age-friendly Honolulu
36   2018
18-  10-18-   Amends § 3-15.3, relating to city boards and commissions
37   2018
18-  10-18-   Amends § 18-7.5, relating to violations of stop work orders
38   2018
18-  11-1-    Amends Section 3 of Ord. 07-01 and Section 15 of Ord. 01-28, as amended by
39   2018     Ords. 04-36, 10-15, and 15-46, relating to funding for transit (Special)
              (amended by Ords. 19-25 and 21-33)
18-  11-14-   Amends §§ 40-2.2 and 40-2.3, relating to city streams
40   2018
18-  11-28-   Creates a new § 18-5.9 and amends § 18-2.1, relating to building permits
41   2018
18-  12-3-    Creates a new Article 2 in Chapter 37, relating to the acquisition of real
42   2018     property for city facilities and purposes
18-  12-3-    Amends § 15-17.1, relating to crosswalks
43   2018
              Amends §§ 21-9.90, 21-9.90-1 through 21-9.90-6, and Table 21-9.7, repeals and
18-  12-21-   adds new Exhibits 21-9.16, 21-9.17, and 21-9.18 in Chapter 21, and amends a
44   2018     portion of zoning maps No. 17 (Mokuleia - Waialua - Haleiwa), and No. 18
              (Kawailoa - Waialee) (Special)
18-  12-21-   Amends § 14-28.2, relating to private streets and roads
45   2018
18-  12-21-   Prohibits improvements to Ala Moana Regional Park on the makai side of Ala
46   2018     Moana Park Drive that will result in either the widening of existing walkways
              or reduction of grassy areas (Special)
19-1 3-22-    Creates a new Article 30 in Chapter 15, and amends § 15-13.9, relating to
     2019     restricted parking zones. (Effective: 7-1-2019)
19-2 3-22-    Amends a portion of zoning map No. 6 (Red Hill-Fort Shafter) (Special)
     2019
19-3 5-1-2019 Amends §§ 21-3.70-1, 21-6.40, 21-10.1 and Table 21-6.1, relating to detached
              dwellings
              Amends § 20-1.1, § 20-4.3 as enacted by Section 3 of Ordinance 18-14, and the
19-4 5-2-2019 building fire and life safety evaluation form as prescribed in Section 4
              (marked Exhibit A) of Ordinance 18-14 (Special)
19-5 5-3-2019 Amends § 10-1.2, relating to parking meters at public parks
19-6 5-3-2019 Amends portions of the State Land Use District Boundary Map (Kahuku Quadrangle)
              (Special)
19-7 5-14-    Amends § 8-10.3, relating to property tax exemptions (applies to tax years
     2019     beginning July 1, 2020
              Creates a new Chapter 32 “Affordable Rental Housing”; amends § 18-6.5; and
              amends §§ 8-10.33, 8-10.34, 14-10.8, and 22-7.3 as enacted by Ordinance 18-1;
19-8 5-21-    establishes a temporary program to facilitate the development of affordable
     2019     rental housing in the apartment, apartment mixed use, and business mixed use
              zoning districts by relaxing certain zoning and building code standards, and
              offering certain financial incentives (Special)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
19-9 5-24-    Amends § 15-24.20, relating to parades and activities on streets
     2019
19-  6-20-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
10   2019     anticipation notes for the amounts appropriated in the FY 2019-20 capital budget
              ordinance (Special)
19-  6-20-    Creates a new Article 30 in Chapter 41, establishing a domestic violence program
11   2019
19-  6-25-    Appropriations for the FY 2019-20 legislative budget (Effective: 7-1-2019)
12   2019     (Special)
19-  6-25-    Appropriations for the FY 2019-20 executive operating budget (Effective: 7-1-
13   2019     2019) (Special)
19-  6-25-    Appropriations for the FY 2019-20 executive capital budget (Effective: 7-1-2019)
14   2019     (Special)
19-  6-25-    Appropriations for the FY 2019-20 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
15   2019     operating budget (Effective: 7-1-2019) (Special)
19-  6-25-    Appropriations for the FY 2019-20 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
16   2019     capital budget (Effective: 7-1-2019) (Special)
19-  6-25-    Authorizes the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
17   2019     anticipation notes for the amounts appropriated for the FY 2019-20 Honolulu
              Authority for Rapid Transportation capital budget (Special)
              Creates a new Article 2A in Chapter 21, and new §§ 21-2.150-3 and 21-5.730
              (Repealed by Ord. 25-2); amends §§ 8-10.4, 21-2.150-2, 21-4.110-1, 21-4.110-2,
              21-5.640 (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), 21-10.1, and Tables 21-3 (Repealed by Ord. 25-
              2), 21-6.1, 21-6.2, 21-6.3, and 21-9.6(A), relating to short-term rentals, which
              include hosted bed and breakfast homes and unhosted transient vacation units;
19-  6-25-    allows holders of nonconforming use certificates for bed and breakfast homes and
18   2019     transient vacation units to continue to operate their bed and breakfast homes
              and transient vacation units under existing nonconforming use certificate
              regulations; sets forth advertising requirements and prohibitions relating to
              short-term rentals (Special) (most provisions effective 8-1-2019, but others not
              effective until 10-1-2020) (effective dates of Sections 6, 10, 11, and 12
              amended by Ord. 20-30)
19-  7-22-    Amends § 15-13.9, as amended by Ord. 19-1; amends § 15-22.4, § 15-23.2A and §
19   2019     15-28.1; repeals § 15-28.2; amends § 15-28.3, § 15-28.4 and § 15-28.5; and adds
              new § 15-28.7, relating to car-sharing (Eff. 1-18-20)
19-  8-22-    Repeals Chapter 17 and adds new Chapter 17 (Electrical Code), relating to the
20   2019     adoption of the State Electrical Code (Eff. 11-20-19)
              Amends § 18-3.1 by adding a new subsection (c) and amends Table No. 18-A,
19-  9-18-    relating to fees for building permits (establishing an expedited process for
21   2019     "special assignment inspections" (one- and two-family dwelling construction
              ineligible))
19-  9-19-    Amends § 1-8.2 and adds new § 1-8.7, relating to intergovernmental and private
22   2019     grant agreements (requiring Council review of such agreements exceeding $30
              million, whether payable at one time or over time)
19-  9-19-    Amends § 15-13.9, as amended by Ord. 19-1, and amends § 15-15.5, relating to
23   2019     loading zones and bus stops (Eff. 1-1-20)
              Amends Chapter 2 by adding a new article relating to Community Workforce
19-  10-25-   Agreements; and requires the City to negotiate with unions to execute a
24   2019     Community Workforce Agreement for larger public works projects (Eff. 5-30-20)
              (Special) (amended by Ord. 20-14)
19-  11-7-    Amends Section 3 of Ord. 18-39, relating to the limitations on the City subsidy
25   2019     in the Recovery Plan to the capital costs of the Honolulu Rail Transit Project
              (Special) (amended by Ord. 21-33)
19-  11-21-   Adds new article to Chapter 2, establishing a program for extended lifeguard
26   2019     services within the Department of Emergency Services
19-  11-21-   Amends §§ 40-3.1 and 40-3.4, relating to watersheds and water reservoir sites
27   2019
19-  11-21-   Amends § 40-8.5 and § 40-8.7, relating to exceptional trees
28   2019
19-  12-10-   Adds new article to Chapter 15; amends § 15-13.9, as amended by Ords. 19-1, 19-
29   2019     19, and 19-23; and amends § 28-3.3, relating to shared micromobility vehicles
              (Eff. 4-8-20)
19-  12-15-   Amends § 34-9.1; repeals Chapter 41, Article 27; and amends Chapter 41 by adding
30   2019     a new Article 27, relating to plastics (Generally eff. 1-1-21, but §§ 41-27.1
              (a), 41-27.2(c), and 41-27.4 eff. 1-1-22)
19-  12-15-   Amends § 15-2.29, as amended by Ord. 18-13, and amends § 15-19.28, relating to
31   2019     motorcycles and mopeds
19-  12-15-   Amends § 8-7.1, relating to real property taxation (taxing of bed and breakfast
32   2019     homes and transient vacation units) (applies to tax years beginning July 1, 2020
              and thereafter)
              Adds new article to Chapter 7; amends § 3-5.4; amends § 7-2.2; repeals Article 3
              of Chapter 7; adds new section to Chapter 7, Article 4; amends §§ 7-4.1 through
20-1 2-13-    7-4.4; amends Chapter 7, Article 6 by amending the title and adding two new
     2020     sections; amends §§ 7-6.1 and 7-6.2; amends § 7-6.5; amends § 7-6.7; amends § 7-
              7.1; and amends subsection (d) of § 7-7.2, relating to animals (requiring
              microchips for cats and dogs) (Eff. 7-1-20)
20-2 2-13-    Adds new article to Chapter 2, relating to tourism (establishing a "Keep Hawaii
     2020     Hawaii – Promise to Our Keiki pledge")
              Adds new article to Chapter 2, relating to the Office of Climate Change,
20-3 3-5-2020 Sustainability and Resiliency (requiring an annual report on Oahu visitor
              industry sustainability efforts)
20-4 3-5-2020 Amends §§ 42-1.2, 42-1.10, and 42-5.3, relating to unlawful disposal of refuse
              or bulky waste (Eff. 7-1-20)
     3-18-    Amends §§ 6-56.2 and 6-56.4, relating to funds (pertaining to expenditures from
20-5 2020     the reserve for fiscal stability fund during a state of emergency, such as a
              pandemic or widespread health crisis)
     5-20-    Amends § 21-4.110, as amended by Ord. 17-59; amends § 21-5.720 (Repealed by Ord.
20-6 2020     25-2); and amends § 21-8.20 (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), relating to condominium
              property regimes
     5-20-    Repeals Article 1 of Chapter 16; adds new Article 1; repeals Article 9 of
20-7 2020     Chapter 16; adds new Article 9; and amends §16-14.1, relating to the Building
              Code (Eff. 8-18-20)
              Amends §§ 1-21.1 and 1-21.2, relating to City advertisements (excluding liquor
20-8 6-4-2020 commission advertisements from the general requirement that City advertisements
              include a statement that the advertisement is paid for, in whole or part, by
              City taxpayers)
20-9 6-4-2020 Amends §§ 6-63.2 and 6-63.3, relating to the affordable housing fund
20-  6-4-2020 Repeals Chapter 16B; adds new Chapter 16B, relating to the adoption of the State
10            Energy Conservation Code (Eff. 9-2-20) (Repealed by Ord. 23-25)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
20-           Adds new section to Chapter 14, Article 10; amends § 14-10.8; adds new section to
11   6-4-2020 Chapter 18, Article 6; and amends § 18-6.5, relating to affordable housing
              incentives (to be repealed 6-4-21)
20-  6-4-2020 Amends a portion of Zoning Map No. 17 (Mokuleia-Waialua-Haleiwa) at Haleiwa
12            (applicant Haleiwa Kem 7309, LLC) (Special)
              Amends §§ 42-1.1, 42-1.6, 42-2.1, 42-2.2, 14-10.8, 18-6.5, 8-10.36, and 8-10.37,
20-  6-4-2020 relating to affordable rental housing (to be repealed on the repeal date of Ord.
13            19-8 (5-21-24)) (tax exemption applies to tax years beginning July 1, 2020 and
              thereafter)
20-  6-9-2020 Amends the new article in Chapter 2 that was enacted by Ord. 19-24, amends
14            Section 3 of Ord. 19-24, relating to community workforce agreements (Special)
              Amends § 13-15A.2; repeals Exhibit 17 (“Iwilei”) of Chapter 13, Article 15A and
              replaces Exhibit 17 (“Iwilei”); adds Exhibit 18 (“Dillingham”) to the Exhibits of
20-  6-18-    Chapter 13, Article 15A, relating to public sidewalks (expanding the commercial
15   2020     areas subject to the City’s current restrictions on persons sitting or lying on
              public sidewalks to include additional street segments in the Iwilei and
              Dillingham areas)
              Authorizing the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
20-  6-18-    anticipation notes of the City in a maximum principal amount equal to the
16   2020     aggregate of the amounts appropriated in the Capital Budget ordinance of the City
              for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2021
20-  6-18-    Amends § 10-4.2, relating to fees for use of municipal golf courses (Eff. 7-1-20)
17   2020
              Amends §§ 6-41.1 and 18-6.2, Table No. 18-A, as amended by Ord. 19-21, and § 22-
20-  6-18-    1.1; repeals § 22-1.5; and amends §§ 23-1.12, 25-5.2, and § 38-1.10, relating to
18   2020     fees for certain permits and services administered by the Department of Planning
              and Permitting (Eff. 7-1-20)
              Amends Chapter 6, Article 18; amends §§ 6-61.3, 13-4.5, 13-6.6; amends § 15-15.5,
20-  6-18-    as amended by Ord. 19-23; and amends § 15-23.5, relating to funds (redesignating
19   2020     the bus transportation fund as a multi-modal transportation fund) (Eff. 7-1-20)
              (§ 15B-6.3 repealed by Ord. 23-21)
20-  6-18-    Amends Section 8 of Ord. 16-19, as amended by Ord. 17-30, relating to incentives
20   2020     for accessory dwelling unit production (extends the repeal date for §§ 14-10.7,
              14-14.4, and 18-6.5 to 6-30-25)
20-  6-18-    Appropriations for the FY 2020-2021 Legislative Budget (Eff. 7-1-20) (Special)
21   2020
20-  6-18-    Appropriations for the FY 2020-2021 Executive Operating Budget and Program (Eff.
22   2020     7-1-20) (Special)
20-  6-18-    Appropriations for the FY 2020-2021 Executive Capital Budget and Program (Eff. 7-
23   2020     1-20) (Special)
20-  6-18-    Appropriations for the FY 2020-2021 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
24   2020     Operating Budget (Eff. 7-1-20) (Special)
20-  6-18-    Appropriations for the FY 2020-2021 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
25   2020     Capital Budget (Eff. 7-1-20) (Special)
              Authorizing the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
20-  6-18-    anticipation notes of the City in a maximum principal amount equal to the
26   2020     aggregate of the amounts appropriated for the projects in the Honolulu Authority
              for Rapid Transportation Capital Budget ordinance for the fiscal year ending June
              30, 2021 (Special)
              Amends § 15B-1.1; adds new section to Chapter 15B, Article 2, relating to bus
20-  7-23-    passes (establishing a student bus pass pilot program for certain public high
27   2020     school students to attend off-campus or after-school internships) (to be repealed
              6-30-23 or the day following completion of the pilot program)
              Amends § 18-4.1, relating to building permit applications (requiring building
20-  9-17-    permit applicants for residential structures to attest that the construction
28   2020     complies with certain restrictive covenants for the land on which the proposed
              work is to be done)
20-  9-17-    Amends § 18-3.1, relating to permits required (updating list of types of work
29   2020     exempt from having to be authorized by building permits)
20-  9-17-    Amends Section 20 of Ord. 19-18, relating to short-term rentals (delaying the
30   2020     effective date of certain provisions) (Special)
20-  10-22-   Amends §§ 10-2.4 and 10-2.6, relating to public parks (amending fees for
31   2020     attendant and custodian services at recreational facilities)
20-  10-22-   Amends § 10-2.8, relating to Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve (increasing the entrance
32   2020     fee and vehicle parking fee for nonresidents, and establishing an entrance fee
              for licensed motor vehicle carriers entering the Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve)
              Amends § 21-5.290, relating to group living facilities (exempting certain housing
20-  10-22-   facilities located near a large educational institution from the prohibition
33   2020     against having group living facilities located within 1,000 feet of each other)
              (Repealed by Ord. 25-2)
              Amends § 38-7.1, relating to the Department of Enterprise Services (amending
20-  10-22-   rental schedule rates for the Neal S. Blaisdell Center and Tom Moffatt Waikiki
34   2020     Shell to permit adjustments to rental rates and/or substitution of larger
              facilities to allow for required physical distancing to prevent the spread of
              COVID-19) (§ 38-7.1(e) to be repealed 1-1-22)
              Amends § 8-13.3, relating to county tax credit (updating and amending eligibility
20-  10-22-   requirements regarding the verification of income documents needed to approve the
35   2020     application of the real property tax credit to certain low income homeowners)
              (applies to tax years beginning July 1, 2022 and thereafter)
20-  11-23-   Amends §§ 14-8.2, 43-3.1, and 43-6.1, relating to sewer systems (addressing
36   2020     unsewered properties with individual wastewater disposal systems within
              improvement districts)
20-  11-23-   Amends §§ 8-10.1 and 8-10.5, relating to real property taxation (addressing the
37   2020     real property tax exemption for homes of totally disabled veterans)
              Amends § 15-17.1, relating to crosswalks (establishing requirements concerning
20-  11-23-   the City Administration's provision or offer to provide a presentation to the
38   2020     affected neighborhood board prior to the removal or relocation of an established,
              marked crosswalk) (Eff. 7-1-21)
              Adds new § 2-11.2, relating to firefighters and emergency rescue operations
20-  11-23-   (requiring the fire chief to perform additional duties related to rescue company
39   2020     standards to ensure that all rescue company personnel have the necessary
              training, qualifications, and certifications)
20-  12-23-   Amends § 21-9.100-5, relating to interim planned development-transit projects and
40   2020     permits (extensively amends the section)
              Repeals Article 6 (“Off-street Parking and Loading”) of Chapter 21; adds new
              Article 6 to Chapter 21 (“Off-street Parking and Loading”); amends § 21-2.140-1;
              amends Table 21-3 (as amended by Section 6 of Ord. 19-18, Repealed by Ord. 25-2);
20-  12-23-   amends §§ 21-3.80-1, 21-3.90-1, 21-4.30, 21-4.70, 21-4.110, 21-5.40 (Repealed by
41   2020     Ord. 25-2), 21-5.390 (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), 21-5.480 (Repealed by Ord. 25-2),
              21-9.60-7, 21-9.60-9, 21-9.60-11, 21-9.80-4, 21-9.100-5, 21-9.100-8, and 21-10.1,
              relating to off-street parking and loading (comprehensively updating the off-
              street parking and loading requirements in the Land Use Ordinance, including
              motor vehicle and bicycle parking)
20-  12-23-   Amends § 10-1.3, relating to Department of Parks and Recreation permits (relating
42   2020     to gender equity for sports activities requiring a park use permit issued by the
              Department of Parks and Recreation)
20-  12-23-   Amends § 21-3.70-1 and amends § 21-10.1, as amended by Ord. 19-3, relating to
43   2020     detached dwellings (addressing the regulations on large residential structures in
              residential districts) (Eff. 3-1-21)
20-  12-23-   Adds new § 18-5.10 to Chapter 18, Article 5, relating to clean energy projects
44   2020     (developing expedited permitting procedures for consumer clean energy projects in
              order to support rapid consumer adoption of clean energy solutions)
20-  12-23-   Adds new § 10-1.8 to Chapter 10, Article 1, relating to parks (facilitating the
45   2020     administration of the Community Recreational Gardening program)
              Amends Chapter 24, Article 3, to replace Appendix 24-3 (the Ewa Development Plan
20-  12-23-   July 2013) with the amended Ewa Development Plan (July 2013 (amended 2020)), to
46   2020     create consistency with the new East Kapolei Neighborhood Transit-Oriented
              Development Plan and supporting the City's transit-oriented development,
              affordable housing, and rail transit goals)
              Repeals § 2-1.2 and Chapter 2, Article 10 (as enacted by Ord. 20-3); and adds new
20-  12-23-   Article 10 to Chapter 2, relating to the Office of Climate Change, Sustainability
47   2020     and Resiliency (codifying the duties and responsibilities of the Office of
              Climate Change, Sustainability and Resiliency)
              Amends § 20-1.1, relating to fire safety (extending by one year various deadlines
20-  12-23-   in the City's Fire Code that were established by Ord. 18-14 and Ord. 19-4, in
48   2020     light of unexpected business interruptions and job losses associated with
              Hawaii's COVID-19 shutdowns in 2020)
21-1 2-11-    Repeals Article 7 of Chapter 24; adds new Article 7 to Chapter 24, to adopt the
     2021     revised Ko‘olau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan
              Amends § 40-2.3, relating to reporting requirements for inspections of City-owned
21-2 2-11-    streams (requiring the Department of Facility Maintenance's Chief Engineer to
     2021     post on the internet a written report on the status of the inspection of each
              City-owned stream)
              Amends §§ 20-1.1 and 20-4.3, relating to fire safety (amending the City's Fire
     2-11-    Code to further address fire safety in residential high-rise buildings by
21-3 2021     requiring licensed design professionals to provide a copy of an authenticated
              building and life safety evaluation to the Honolulu Fire Department within five
              business days of its completion)
              Amends § 18-6.4, relating to building permits (addressing the processing of
     2-11-    building permit applications by removing the building official's discretion to
21-4 2021     extend the 365-day time period within which a building permit application
              relating to one-family or two-family detached dwellings or duplexes with an FAR
              exceeding 0.6 must be reviewed and approved)
21-5 3-1-2021 Amends a portion of Zoning Map No. 2 (Kahala-Kuliouou) at Wailupe (Council-
              initiated zone change) (Special)
     3-30-    Repeals Article 5 of Chapter 24 ("Central Oahu"); adds new Article 5 to Chapter
21-6 2021     24 ("Development Plans"), to adopt the revised Central Oahu Sustainable
              Communities Plan
              Adds new § 2-12.2 to Chapter 2, Article 12; amends § 13-1.1; adds new § 13-2.12
              to Chapter 15B, Article 2; amends §§ 15B-2.1, 15B-2.10 and 15B-6.1; repeals §§
              15B-2.2, 15B-2.3, 15B-2.5, 15B-2.7, and 15B-2.10; adds new §§ 15B-2.2, 15B-2.3,
21-7 3-30-    15B-2.5, 15B-2.7, and 15B-2.10 (ren. §§ 15B-2.2, 15B-2.3, 15B-2.5, 15B-2.7, and
     2021     15B-2.10); and amends § 15-16.5; relating to public transit (introducing the City
              Payment Card as a means to pay fares, fees, and charges of City transportation
              services and amending the fare structure for the City transit system) (Repeal and
              replacement of § 15B-2.10 eff. 7-1-22)
              Amends § 10-1.3 (as amended by Section 2 of Ord. 20-42), relating to Department
21-8 3-30-    of Parks and Recreation permits (requiring gender equity for certain sports
     2021     activities requiring a park use permit issued by the Department of Parks and
              Recreation)
              Amends §§ 15-2.28 and 15-13.8; amends § 15-13.9 (as amended by Ords. 19-19, 19-
     3-30-    23, and 19-29); amends § 15-13.10, relating to abandoned vehicles (clarifying
21-9 2021     that boat trailers abandoned on a public street or highway are subject to towing
              and storage, and imposing liability for removal expenses of an abandoned vehicle
              on the person who abandons a vehicle)
              Adds new Article 13 to Chapter 15B, relating to automated external defibrillators
21-  3-30-    (requiring the installation and maintenance of an automated external
10   2021     defibrillator with appropriate signage indicating the location of the
              defibrillator in every City rail car) (Eff. 1-1-22)
21-  4-21-    Repeals Article 4 of Chapter 24; adds new Article 4 to Chapter 24, to adopt the
11   2021     revised East Honolulu Sustainable Communities Plan
              Adds new Article 4 to Chapter 32, relating to grants incentivizing the
21-  4-21-    construction of affordable rental housing (providing financial incentives to
12   2021     accelerate the construction of affordable rental housing in the City) (to be
              repealed on the repeal date of ROH Chapter 32, 5-21-24)
21-  5-14-    Amends § 15B-4.5 (as amended by Ord. 20-19), relating to public transit (amending
13   2021     the fare for paratransit services) (fare increase in § 15B-4.5(b) eff. 7-1-22)
21-  5-14-    Amends § 20-1.1 (as amended by Ord. 21-3), relating to fire safety (updating the
14   2021     City's Fire Code) (Eff. retroactively to 2-11-21)
21-  5-14-    Adds new § 15-2.33 to Chapter 15, Article 2; amends § 15-18.6; adds new § 15-
15   2021     18.12 to Chapter 15, Article 18, relating to bicycles (mandating certain
              requirements for bicycle docking stations installed on City property)
              Authorizing the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
21-  6-16-    anticipation notes of the City in a maximum principal amount equal to the
16   2021     aggregate of the amounts appropriated in the City's Capital Budget ordinance for
              the Fiscal Year ending June 30, 2022, and specified therein to be financed from
              the proceeds of the sale of such bonds (Special)
21-  6-16-    Amends § 10-2.8 (as amended by Ord. 20-32), relating to Hanauma Bay Nature
17   2021     Preserve (increasing the entrance fee to Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve for
              nonresidents of Hawaii) (Eff. 7-1-21)
              Amends Section 11 of Ord. 85-90 (as amended by Ords. 97-44, 99-22, 00-26, 01-29,
21-  6-16-    02-28, and 03-09); amends §§ 6-49.2 and 6-49.3; and amends § 42-7.4, relating to
18   2021     funds (amending the ordinances relating to the Solid Waste Special Fund) (Eff. 7-
              1-21)
21-  6-22-    Appropriations for the FY 2021-2022 Legislative Budget (Eff. 7-1-21) (Special)
19   2021
21-  6-22-    Appropriations for the FY 2021-2022 Executive Operating Budget and Program (Eff.
20   2021     7-1-21) (Special)
21-  6-22-    Appropriations for the FY 2021-2022 Executive Capital Budget and Program (Eff. 7-
21   2021     1-21) (Special)
21-  6-22-    Appropriations for the FY 2021-2022 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
22   2021     Operating Budget (Eff. 7-1-21) (Special)
21-  6-22-    Appropriations for the FY 2021-2022 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
23   2021     Capital Budget (Eff. 7-1-21) (Special)
              Authorizing the issuance and sale of general obligations bonds and bond
              anticipation notes of the City in a maximum principal amount equal to the
21-  6-22-    aggregate of the amounts appropriated for the Honolulu Authority for Rapid
24   2021     Transportation Capital Budget projects in the Honolulu Authority for Rapid
              Transportation Capital Budget and Program ordinance for the fiscal year ending
              June 30, 2022 (Special)
21-  8-25-    Amends a portion of Zoning Map No. 3 (Moiliili-Kaimuki) at Moiliili (applicants
25   2021     Lily Ochoco, Wayne and Ann Okubo) (Special)
21-  8-25-    Adds new Article 66 to Chapter 6, relating to fees (exempting centenarian
26   2021     residents of the City from certain City fees)
              Amends § 25-5.2 (as amended by Ord. 20-18), relating to special management area
21-  8-25-    use permits (requiring an applicant for a special management area use permit to
27   2021     present the proposed project to the applicable neighborhood board or appropriate
              community association prior to submitting an application to the Department of
              Planning and Permitting)
              Amends §§ 43-1.2, 43-1.3, 43-1.8, 43-5.1, 43-5.8, 43-5.11, and 43-5.12, relating
21-  9-20-    to public works infrastructure requirements including fees and services relating
28   2021     to public sewers (amending Articles 1 and 5 of Chapter 43 to comply with required
              modifications to the pretreatment program) (am. to § 43-1.8(g)(14) effective upon
              adoption of certain administrative rules)
              Amends § 16A-10.5, relating to the Housing Code (strengthening the mechanisms for
21-  9-20-    administrative enforcement of the Housing Code to provide for the imposition of
29   2021     an administrative lien on all real property owned by the responsible person for
              unpaid civil fines)
              Amends § 21-4.110, relating to nonconforming uses (amending certain provisions
21-  9-20-    relating to nonconforming uses to provide that the 10 percent of the current
30   2021     replacement cost limitation for ordinary repairs on a nonconforming use portion
              of any structure does not apply to work involving a portion of a structure
              devoted to nonconforming hotel use in the Diamond Head special district)
              Repeals Article 1 of Chapter 20; adds new Article 1 to Chapter 20; and amends
21-  9-20-    Chapter 20, Article 4 (as amended by Ordinance 21-3), relating to the adoption of
31   2021     the 2018 State Fire Code (adopting the 2018 State Fire Code as adopted by the
              State of Hawaii on January 19, 2021, subject to certain amendments that shall
              apply to the City)
21-  12-14-   Amends § 8-10.12, relating to real property taxation (amending the provisions
32   2021     relating to the alternate energy improvements real property tax exemption)
              (applies to tax years beginning July 1, 2022 and thereafter)
              Adds new Chapter 8A; amends Section 3 of Ord. 18-39 (as amended by Ord. 19-25);
21-  12-14-   amends § 6-61.2; and amends § 6-61.3 (as amended by Ord. 20-19), relating to the
33   2021     transient accommodations tax (establishing a City transient accommodations tax,
              providing for its imposition and disposition, and facilitating the receipt and
              deposit of the revenues derived from the tax)
              Amends § 10-1.2 and amends § 10-1.3 (as amended by Ords. 20-42 and 21-8),
21-  12-16-   relating to commercial activities at public parks (prohibiting commercial
34   2021     activities, including recreational stops by commercial tour companies, but
              excluding commercial filming activities and shore water events, at certain North
              Shore beach parks and City-owned or -operated beach rights-of-way and easements)
              Adds new Article 11 to Chapter 40, relating to underground storage tanks
              (protecting the purity of O‘ahu's groundwater by requiring that no person shall
22-1 3-1-2022 operate an underground storage tank or tank system that has a capacity to store
              more than 100,000 gallons of any regulated substance without first obtaining a
              permit from the City)
     3-28-    Amends § 20-1.1 (as amended by Ords. 21-3, 21-14, and 21-31); amends § 20-4.3;
22-2 2022     amends Section 7 of Ord. 19-4, relating to fire safety (updating the City's Fire
              Code) (Eff. retroactively to 2-11-21)
              Amends § 10-1.1; amends § 10-1.2 (as amended by Ord. 21-34); amends § 10-1.3 (as
              amended by Ords. 20-42, 21-8, and 21-34); and amends § 10-3.2, relating to
              commercial activities at public parks (addressing commercial activities at
22-3 4-5-2022 certain beach parks by prohibiting operators of taxicabs, commercial tour
              carriers, and other motor carriers regulated by the State Public Utilities
              Commission who provide transportation of passengers or property from conducting
              commercial activities at certain beach parks)
22-4 3-28-    Amends § 15-16.6, relating to car-sharing vehicles (addressing the parking of
     2022     car-sharing vehicles on public streets)
              Amends §§ 40-7.2 and 40-7.3, relating to the disposal of weeds, garbage, trash,
              and waste from property (expanding the application of the ordinances relating to
22-5 3-28-    the disposal of weeds, garbage, trash, and waste from property by removing the
     2022     15,000 square feet or less limitation on privately owned vacant lots and
              including privately owned lots within a residential zoning district that are
              situated within 200 feet of a developed residential zoning lot)
              Adds new Article 15 to Chapter 34, relating to short-term rentals (requiring an
22-6 3-28-    owner of residential real property to disclose certain information relating to
     2022     the property's eligibility for use as a short-term rental to a potential buyer,
              prior to the sale of the property)
              Amends § 6-41.1 (as amended by Ord. 20-18); amends §§ 21-1.40, 21-2.150-2, 21-
              2A.10, and 21-2A.40; amends Table 21-3 (as amended by Ord. 20-41, Repealed by
              Ord. 25-2); amends §§ 21-4.110-1, 21-4.110-2, and 21-5.730 (Repealed by Ord. 25-
              2); amends Table 21-9.6(A); and amends § 21-10.1, relating to transient
22-7 4-26-    accommodations (protecting the City’s residential neighborhoods and housing stock
     2022     from the negative impacts of short-term rentals [transient vacation units and bed
              and breakfast homes] by providing a more comprehensive approach to the regulation
              of transient accommodations within the City) (Eff. 10-23-22 for annual renewal
              requirement for nonconforming use certificates for bed and breakfast homes and
              transient vacation units and adoption of Administrative Rules by DPP)
              Amends § 18-4.1 (as amended by Ord. 20-28), relating to administrative
              enforcement of certain codes (addressing the administrative enforcement of
22-8 5-17-    certain codes in the ROH 1990 by requiring applications for a building permit to
     2022     contain a notarized signed affidavit stating that the applicant has no
              outstanding fines or liens) (applies to all building permit applications
              submitted pursuant to Chapter 18 after 5-17-22)
     5-17-    Adds new Article 25 to Chapter 1, relating to Mahina ‘Ōlelo Hawai‘i (designating
22-9 2022     the month of February as "Mahina ‘Ōlelo Hawai‘i" (Hawaiian Language Month) to
              celebrate and encourage the use of the Hawaiian language)
22-  6-15-    Amends §§ 42-1.2, 42-1.4, and 42-1.12, relating to recycling (addressing curbside
10   2022     collection of food waste)
              Authorizing the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
22-  6-15-    anticipation notes of the City in a maximum principal amount equal to the
11   2022     aggregate of the amounts appropriated in the City's Capital Budget ordinance for
              the Fiscal Year ending June 30, 2023, and specified therein to be financed from
              the proceeds of the sale of such bonds (Special)
22-  6-20-    Appropriations for the FY 2022-2023 Legislative Budget (Eff. 7-1-22) (Special)
12   2022
22-  6-20-    Appropriations for the FY 2022-2023 Executive Operating Budget and Program (Eff.
13   2022     7-1-22) (Special)
22-  6-20-    Appropriations for the FY 2022-2023 Executive Capital Budget and Program (Eff. 7-
14   2022     1-22) (Special)
22-  6-20-    Appropriations for the FY 2022-2023 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
15   2022     Operating Budget (Eff. 7-1-22) (Special)
22-  6-20-    Appropriations for the FY 2022-2023 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
16   2022     Capital Budget (Eff. 7-1-22) (Special)
22-  7-21-    Adds new Chapter 16C, relating to building benchmarking (establishing a better
17   2022     buildings benchmarking and reporting requirement for energy and water usage of
              covered properties)
22-  7-21-    Amends §§ 15B-3.1 through 15B-3.5, relating to automated external defibrillators
18   2022     (promoting public health, safety, and welfare by enhancing access to automated
              external defibrillators)
22-  7-21-    Adds §§ 13-20.3, 13-20.4, and 38-3.5, relating to public places (authorizing
19   2022     outdoor dining services on certain public places) (repealed on 7-21-25)
22-  7-21-    Amends Article 4 of Chapter 24 to adopt the revised East Honolulu Sustainable
20   2022     Communities Plan
22-  7-21-    Adopts Revised Ordinances of Honolulu 2021, recodifying the Revised Ordinances of
21   2022     Honolulu 1990 (Eff. 11-18-22) (Special)
22-  8-29-    Amends § 14-1.1 and adds § 14-1.3, relating to indigenous plants in public beach
22   2022     parks (prioritizing planting of indigenous plant species along beaches and
              shorelines to help minimize shoreline degradation)
              Amends § 38-7.1, relating to the Department of Enterprise Services (amending
22-  8-29-    rental schedule rates for the Neal S. Blaisdell Center and Tom Moffatt Waikiki
23   2022     Shell to permit adjustments to rental rates and/or substitution of larger
              facilities to allow for required physical distancing to prevent the spread of
              COVID-19)
22-  9-26-    Amends §§ 3-13.4 and 3-13.5, relating to lobbyist notary requirement (removing
24   2022     notary requirement for lobbyist filings with the Honolulu Ethics Commission)
22-  10-24-   Repeals and replaces Chapter 19, relating to the adoption of the State Plumbing
25   2022     Code (adopting the Hawaii State Plumbing Code)
22-  10-24-   Amends § 18-7.4, relating to administrative enforcement of the building,
26   2022     electrical, plumbing, and sidewalk codes (addressing the administrative
              enforcement of the building, electrical, plumbing, and sidewalk codes)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
22-  10-24-   Amends § 2-15.2, relating to performance fees of the Royal Hawaiian Band
27   2022     (updating fees which have no been updated in 20 years or longer)
              Amends §§ 21-4.60, 21-4.100, and 21-10.1, relating to height limits for rooftop
22-  10-24-   structures (encouraging rooftop solar panels by allowing such panels to be
28   2022     placed above rooftop equipment and allowing the creation of new rooftop
              gathering spaces underneath rooftop solar panels)
              Amends §§ 21-2.110-2, 21-9.100, 21-9.100-2, 21-9.100-5, 21-9.100-8, 21-9.100-10,
              21-9.100-11, 21-9.100-12; amends Chapter 21, Article 9 by replacing Exhibits 21-
              9.19, 21-9.20, 21-9.21, 21- 9.22, and 21-9.23 with new Exhibits 21-9.19, 21-
22-  10-24-   9.20, 21-9.21, 21- 9.22, and 21-9.23, relating to the transit-oriented
29   2022     development (“TOD”) special district (expanding the TOD special district to
              include three additional Honolulu Rail Transit Project station areas and to
              incorporate land use standards and guidelines for those areas based on the Aiea-
              Pearl City Neighborhood TOD Plan)
22-  10-24-   Amends a portion of Zoning Maps No. 7 (Halawa - Pearl City) and 8 (Waipahu)
30   2022     (zoning maps amended to reflect TOD plans approved in Ord. 22-29) (Special)
22-  11-18-   Amends §§ 2-19.1 through 2-19.5, and adds new sections to Article 19 of Chapter
31   2022     2, relating to open data requirements (amending Article 19 of Chapter 2,
              expanding and clarifying the City’s Executive Branch open data requirements)
22-  11-18-   Amends § 18-4.1, relating to building permit applications (addressing the
32   2022     requirements of a building permit application)
              Amends §§ 3-10.2, 3-10.3, 3-10.5, 3-10.7, and 3-10.10, repeals §§ 3-10.8 and 3-
22-  11-22-   10.9, relating to the Oahu Historic Preservation Commission (amending the Oahu
33   2022     Historic Preservation Commission and repealing provisions relating to the Oahu
              register of historic places)
22-  12-21-   Amends § 10-1.2, relating to commercial activities at public parks (addressing
34   2022     commercial activities at certain beach parks)
22-  12-21-   Amends §§ 15B-1.1, 15B-2.1, 15B-2.10, 15B-2.12, and 15B-4.5, relating to public
35   2022     transit (amending the island-wide public transit fare structure, including
              paratransit fees)
23-1 2-10-    Adds new Article 44 of Chapter 2, relating to bullying of youth (preventing the
     2023     bullying of youths in City programs and on City property)
23-2 3-9-2023 Adds new Article 26 of Chapter 1, relating to an anti-bias and inclusion policy
              (promoting an environment that embraces diversity and safety for the citizenry)
23-3 3-9-2023 Amends Article 1 of Chapter 26, relating to shoreline setbacks (incorporating
              amendments made by Act 16, Session Laws of Hawaii 2020, to HRS Chapter 205A)
              Amends Chapter 25, relating to the special management area (relating to the
23-4 3-9-2023 special management area, and incorporating amendments made by Act 16, Session
              Laws of Hawaii 2020, to HRS Chapter 205A)
     3-31-    Amends §§8-7.1, 8-11.1 relating to real property taxation (addressing the
23-5 2023     taxation of real property, particularly real property used as a transient
              accommodation)
     3-31-    Adds new Article 31 of Chapter 41 relating to the public carry of firearms
23-6 2023     (defining those sensitive locations within the City and County of Honolulu where
              carrying of firearms is prohibited)
     3-31-    Directs the Office of Council Services to prepare and keep current a
23-7 2023     consolidated table of reporting requirements found in the Revised Ordinances of
              Honolulu 2021 (Special)
              Amends § 13-15A.2 and repeals and replaces Exhibit 15 of Chapter 13, Article
23-8 5-4-2023 15A, relating to public sidewalks (expanding the commercial areas subject to the
              City’s current restrictions on persons sitting or lying on public sidewalks in
              Kapalama)
23-9 5-4-2023 Adds new Article 45 to Chapter 2, and § 4-3.5, relating to reporting
              requirements (adding provisions relating to reporting requirements)
23-  6-1-2023 Amends §§ 10-4.8, 10-4.9, relating to fees for use of municipal golf courses
10            (amending fees for a golf identification card)
23-  6-1-2023 Amends § 10-2.1, relating to admission fees for the Honolulu Zoo (amending
11            resident admission fees for the Honolulu Zoo)
              Amends Section 10 of Ord. 19-8, relating to affordable housing (delaying the
23-           automatic repeal date of Ord. 19-8, and adding a date by which the Director of
12   6-1-2023 Planning and Permitting is directed to provide an updated report to the City
              Council with recommendations on whether the program established by Ord. 19-
              8 should be repealed, modified, or extended) (Special)
23-  6-21-    Amends § 18-3.1, relating to permits required (addressing exemptions from the
13   2023     requirement to obtain a building permit)
23-  6-21-    Appropriations for the FY 2023-2024 Legislative Budget (Eff. 7-1-23) (Special)
14   2023
23-  6-21-    Appropriations for the FY 2023-2024 Executive Operating Budget and Program (Eff.
15   2023     7-1-23) (Special)
23-  6-21-    Appropriations for the FY 2023-2024 Executive Capital Budget and Program (Eff.
16   2023     7-1-23) (Special)
              Authorizing the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
23-  6-21-    anticipation notes of the City in a maximum principal amount equal to the
17   2023     aggregate of the amounts appropriated in the City’s Capital Budget ordinance for
              the Fiscal Year ending June 30, 2024, and specified therein to be financed from
              the proceeds of the sale of such bonds (Special)
23-  6-21-    Provides a one-time real property tax credit of $350 to eligible owners of real
18   2023     property (shall apply to the tax year July 1, 2023 to June 30, 2024) (Special)
23-  6-21-    Appropriations for FY 2023-2024 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
19   2023     Operating Budget (Eff. 7-1-23) (Special)
23-  6-21-    Appropriations for FY 2023-2024 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
20   2023     Capital Budget (Eff. 7-1-23) (Special)
              Amends §§ 15B-1.1, 15B-2.10, 15B-3.1 through 15B-3.3, 15B-3.5, adds new Articles
23-  6-21-    14, 15 to Chapter 15B, and repeals §§ 15B-2.8, 15B-3.4, 15B-6.3 through 15B-6.7,
21   2023     Articles 7, 9, 10, and 11 of Chapter 15B, relating to public transit
              (incorporating rail service, updating general provisions, and repealing outdated
              provisions)
23-  7-19-    Amends § 8-13.2, relating to real property taxation (addressing the real
22   2023     property tax credit)
23-  7-19-    Amends §§ 8-10.3, 8-10.4, relating to real property taxation (addressing real
23   2023     property tax home exemption)
23-  7-25-    Adds Article 16 to Chapter 34, relating to naloxone (promoting public health,
24   2023     safety and welfare by enhancing access to naloxone hydrochloride (naloxone)
23-  8-25-    Repeals and replaces Chapter 16B, Article 1, relating to the adoption of the
25   2023     State Energy Conservation Code (adopting the Hawaii State Energy Code)
23-  9-13-    Amends §§ 38-3.2, 38-8.1, relating to concessions (amending Chapter 38 to be
26   2023     consistent with Chapter 102, Hawaii Revised Statutes)
              Amends §§ 15-13.3, 15-13.9, 15-30.1 through 15-30.3, 15-30.5, repeals and
23-  10-20-   replaces § 15-30.4, adds new §§ 15-30.6 and 15-30.7, relating to parking
27   2023     (addressing parking in the City and County of Honolulu, including the City’s
              restricted parking zone program)
              Adds new Article 32 to Chapter 41, relating to flavored tobacco products
23-  10-20-   (defining and prohibiting the sale of flavored tobacco products within the City)
28   2023     (Eff. 42 days after the day on which the State of Hawaii preemption of county
              ordinances on the sale of tobacco products is officially repealed or suspended
              (Special)
              Temporarily alleviates the backlog of building permit applications by providing
              the Building Official the authority to allow for alternative means to review
23-  11-16-   building permit applications for compliance with pertinent codes through the
29   2023     establishment of a temporary self-certification program to expedite the review
              and processing of certain building permit applications (to be repealed 12-16-
              2027) (Special)
23-  11-16-   Amends §§ 42-1.2, 42-1.12, relating to recycling (addressing curbside recycling,
30   2023     including the collection of manufactured compostable materials)
23-  12-13-   Amends §§ 2-6.1, 2-18.7, relating to human resources (addressing the powers,
31   2023     duties, and functions of the Director of Human Resources)
              Amends §§ 21-9.100-2, 21-9.100-8, 21-9.100-11, 21-9.100-12, adds new Exhibit 21-
23-  12-13-   9.24, relating to the transit-oriented development special district (expanding
32   2023     the transit-oriented development special district to include one additional
              station area and incorporate land use standards and guidelines)
23-  12-13-   Amends a portion of Zoning Map No. 7 (Halawa - Pearl City) (zoning map amended
33   2023     to reflect TOD plan approved in Ord. 23-32) [Department of Planning and
              Permitting] (Special)
23-  12-13-   Adds new Article 46 to Chapter 2, relating to a commercial property assessed
34   2023     financing program (authorizing a commercial property assessed financing program
              for financing certain qualifying improvements)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
              Amends §§ 6-55.2, 6-55.4, repeals and replaces § 6-55.5, adds §§ 6-55.6, 6-55.7,
24-1 2-8-2024 relating to the transit construction mitigation fund (establishing additional
              requirements for the transit construction mitigation fund)
24-2 2-8-2024 Amends § 40-8.7, relating to exceptional trees (amending the register of
              exceptional trees)
     3-14-    Amends §§ 18-1.1, 18-2.1, 18-6.1, 18-6.2, 18-7.1, 18-7.2, 18-7.4, adds §§ 18-2.2,
24-3 2024     18-4.7, 18-5.11, relating to false statements (deterring persons from making
              false statements to the building official)
24-4 3-14-    Amends § 38-3.2, relating to concessions (amending the bidding requirements for
     2024     concessions)
24-5 3-14-    Amends §§ 41-16.2, 41-16.3, relating to herbal cigarettes (raising the age of
     2024     individuals allowed to purchase herbal cigarettes to 21)
              Amends § 15B-2.1, Reporting Requirements Table, adds § 15B-2.13, relating to
24-6 5-3-2024 public transit (updating and amending the sections of Chapter 15B, Article 2,
              Islandwide Fare Structure and Reporting Requirements Table)
24-7 5-3-2024 Adds new Article 27 to Chapter 1, relating to declaring the City a Purple Heart
              City (declaring the City of Honolulu a Purple Heart City)
24-8 6-21-    Appropriations for the FY 2024-2025 Legislative Budget (Eff. 7-1-24) (Special)
     2024
24-9 6-21-    Appropriations for the FY 2024-2025 Executive Operating Budget and Program (Eff.
     2024     7-1-24) (Special)
24-  6-21-    Appropriations for the FY 2024-2025 Executive Capital Budget and Program (Eff. 7-
10   2024     1-24) (Special)
24-  6-21-    Appropriations for FY 2024-2025 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
11   2024     Operating Budget (Eff. 7-1-24) (Special)
24-  6-21-    Appropriations for FY 2024-2025 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
12   2024     Capital Budget (Eff. 7-1-24) (Special)
              Amends § 21-2.150-2, relating to large dwellings (providing a more effective
24-  6-25-    deterrent by increasing the penalty for persons that construct or convert a
13   2024     structure in violation of the Land Use Ordinance development standards and
              requirements for large detached dwellings)
              Amends §§ 6-41, 21-5.730 (Repealed by Ord. 25-2), relating to registration
24-  6-25-    requirements for bed and breakfast homes and transient vacation unit (addressing
14   2024     standards and requirements for operating bed and breakfast homes and transient
              vacation units)
              Amends §§ 16-1.1, 16-1.2, 16-9.1, 16-13.1 through 16-13.10, 16-14.1 through 16-
              14.9, repealing §§ 16-13.9, 16-13.11 and renumbering sections accordingly,
24-  6-25-    relating to the adoption of the state building code (adopting the Hawaii State
15   2024     Building Code, the State Residential Code, the State Existing Building Code,
              updating Hawaii Residential Safe Room, and State- and City-Owned High Occupancy
              Buildings—Design Criteria for Enhanced Hurricane Protection Areas)
              Amends Section 1 of Ord. 01-28, as amended by Ords. 04-36, 10-15, 15-46, and 18-
24-  6-25-    39, to amend the authorization for the City to issue general obligation
16   2024     commercial paper in order to clarify and facilitate the use of such debt
              (Special)
              Amends §§ 16-10.1, 16-10.2, 16-10.4, 18-2.1, 18-5.1, 18-5.4, 18-7.1, 18-7.2, 18-
24-  6-25-    7.4, 18-7.5, Reporting Requirements Table, relating to permits (improving public
17   2024     notification regarding the authorization, or lack thereof, for work performed on
              a property in the City and to amend provisions related to the administration and
              enforcement of certain codes)
24-  6-25-    Amends § 2-42.1, relating to community workforce agreements (addressing community
18   2024     workforce agreements)
              Authorizing the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
24-  6-25-    anticipation notes of the City in a maximum principal amount equal to the
19   2024     aggregate of the amounts appropriated in the City’s Capital Budget ordinance for
              the Fiscal Year ending June 30, 2025, and specified therein to be financed from
              the proceeds of the sale of such bonds (Special)
24-  6-25-    Amends § 3-15.3, repeals §§ 3-3.1 and 11-1.3, relating to boards and commissions
20   2024     (amending schedule of review for boards and commissions and repealing the Oahu
              committee on children and youth and the child care advisory board)
24-  6-25-    Amends § 1-19.7, repeals § 1-19.8, relating to gifts to city officers and
21   2024     employees (clarifying which gifts to City officers and employees may be solicited
              or accepted)
24-  7-31-    Repeals Articles 2 and 3 of Chapter 36, relating to transportation (repealing
22   2024     obsolete provisions regarding u-drive motor vehicles and tour services)
24-  8-28-    Amends §§ 32-4.2, 32-4.3 and Table 3 Reporting Requirements, adds § 32-4.4,
23   2024     relating to incentives for the construction of affordable rental housing
              (amending financial incentives for affordable rental housing projects)
24-  8-28-    Repeals Article 35 of Chapter 6, relating to hotel and boardinghouse license fees
24   2024     (repealing outdated license fee provisions)
24-  8-28-    Adds § 1-25.2, relating to Honor Our Kpuna Month, (designating May as Honor Our
25   2024     Kpuna Month)
24-  9-20-    Authorizing the issuance and sale and specifying certain terms of wastewater
26   2024     system revenue commercial paper in an aggregate outstanding principal amount not
              to exceed $400,000,000 (Special)
24-  9-20-    Amends § 18-4.1, relating to building permit applications (removing affidavit
27   2024     requirements for building permit applications)
24-  10-25-   Amends §§ 1-11.1 and 1-11.2, relating to nondiscrimination policy (making
28   2024     revisions to the City and County of Honolulu’s nondiscrimination policy
              applicable to employment and provision of services)
24-  10-25-   Adds Article 2E to Chapter 30, relating to watershed management (adopting the
29   2024     East Honolulu Watershed Management Plan)
24-  10-25-   Amends Section 2 of Ord. 23-29, to amend the definitions of “eligible project”
30   2024     and “relevant code” (Special)
24-  10-25-   Amends § 12-5.1, adds § 12-5.2, relating to the public spay and neuter clinic for
31   2024     dogs and cats (addressing the administration of the public spay and neuter clinic
              for dogs and cats)
24-  11-25-   Amends §§ 15-7.1, 15-7.2, 15-12.3, 15-14.4, 15-19.39, repeals §§ 15-19.34, 15-
32   2024     21.9 and 15-21.14, relating to traffic safety (promoting public safety on
              roadways by establishing more appropriate speed limits on certain streets)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
25-1 1-3-2025 Adds §§ 8-10.35, 8-10.36, relating to incentives for film studio facilities
              (providing incentives for eligible film studio facilities)
              Amends §§ 6-41.1, 8-7.5, 8-10.19, 10-1.7, 15-30.1, 16-15.1, 18-3.1, 18-6.4, 18-
              7.4, 20-2.2, 21-2.40-1, 21-2.90-1, 21-2.90-2, 21-2.120-1, 21-2.130, 21-2.140-1,
              21-2.150-2, 21-3.50, 21-3.50-2, 21-3.60-2, 21-3.60-4 through 21-3.80, 21-3.90-1,
              21-3.100, 21-3.120-2, 21-3.130, 21-4.60 through 21-4.80, 21-4.100 through 21-
              4.110-2, 21-6.20 through 21-6.50, 21-6.70, 21-6.80, 21-6.110, 21-7.40, 21-7.50,
              21-8.20A through 21-8.40, 21-8.50-1, 21-8.50-2, 21-8.50-4, 21-8.50-6, 21-9.10,
25-2 1-3-2025 21-9.30-5, 21-9.40-5, 21-9.40-6, 21-9.50-5, 21-9.50-6, 21-9.60-8, 21-9.60-9, 21-
              9.60-13, 21-9.70-5, 21-9.80-4 through 21-9.80-6, 21-9.80-8, 21-9.80-9, 21-9.90-
              5 through 21-9.100, 21-9.100-5, 21-9.100-7, 21-10.1, 22-7.5, 25-5.3, 29-1.2, 29-
              1.3, 30-4.1, 33A-1.10, 37-1.5, 39-1.1, 41-14.1 through 41-14.3, 41-19.2, 42-3.5,
              43-6.2, Appendix 43-A, 43-B, 43-10.3, repeals §§ 21-2.110-3, Table 21-3, 21-8.20,
              21-8.20-1, repeals and replaces Article 5 of Chapter 21, relating to use
              regulations (addressing the regulation of uses throughout the Land Use Ordinance
              and for consistency purposes)
              Amends §§ 16A-2.1, 16A-4.4, relating to adaptive reuse (safely and sustainably
25-3 1-3-2025 increasing the supply of housing to allow for the adaptive reuse of existing
              commercial buildings)
25-4 1-3-2025 Amends § 20-1.1, relating to the adoption of the 2021 state fire code (adopting
              the 2021 state fire code subject to certain amendments)
25-5 2-12-    Adds Article 28 to Chapter 1, relating to housing (addressing housing in the City
     2025     by establishing a resident preference in the City’s housing programs)
25-6 2-12-    Amends § 15-2.33, adds §§ 15-18.13, 15-18.14, relating to electric bicycles
     2025     (regulating the possession and use of bicycles and electric bicycles)
     2-12-    Adds Article 67 to Chapter 6, relating to the taxable general improvement bond
25-7 2025     fund (creating a fund to receive and expend moneys from proceeds of the sale of
              taxable general obligation bonds)
25-8 2-12-    Amends §§ 13-4.1, 13-10.1, 13-10.2, relating to the use of malls (addressing the
     2025     use of pedestrian malls)
25-9 3-11-    Amends §§ 1-7.4, 1-9.2, 1-23.2, 1-24.1, relating to general provisions (repealing
     2025     or amending certain obsolete or unnecessary provisions of Chapter 1)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
25-  3-11-    Amends §§ 15-2.15, 15-24.20, relating to parade, street festivals, and other
10   2025     activities (reducing the strain caused by closure of main public thoroughfares)
25-  3-11-    Amends §§ 16-1.1, 16-1.2, 16-9.1, 16-14.6, relating to the building code
11   2025     (amending the building code)
25-  3-11-    Amends the provisions relating to accessory dwelling units, including but not
12   2025     limited to any incentives to stimulate the creation of such units (Special)
25-  4-4-2025 Adds § 15-24.24, relating to wheelies (promoting public safety for drivers and
13            pedestrians by addressing the performance of stunts on public roadways)
25-  4-4-2025 Adds §§ 13-20.3, 13-20.4, 38-3.5, Reporting Requirements Table III, relating to
14            public places (authorizing outdoor dining services on certain public places)
25-  4-4-2025 Repeals Chapter 35, relating to incentives for businesses (addressing certain
15            obsolete or unnecessary provisions)
25-           Repeals and replaces Article 2 of Chapter 24, amends Reporting Requirements
16   5-2-2025 Table I, adopting the revised Primary Urban Center Development Plan
              (incorporating the revised Primary Urban Center Development Plan)
25-           Repeals Article 33 of Chapter 2, amends Reporting Requirements Table I,
17   5-2-2025 relating to the first source program (addressing certain obsolete or
              unnecessary provisions of Chapter 2)
25-  5-2-2025 Adds Article 17 to Chapter 34, relating to plastic (addressing certain single-
18            use plastic containers)
25-  5-28-    Adds Article 5 to Chapter 32, amends Reporting Requirements Table I, relating
19   2025     to pre-construction financing for affordable rental housing (addressing
              affordable rental housing)
25-  5-28-    Repeals Articles 9 and 38 of Chapter 6, relating to funds (repealing certain
20   2025     special funds)
25-  5-28-    Amends § 1-8.1, adds Article 47 to Chapter 2, relating to sponsorships
21   2025     (reestablishing a process to obtain sponsorships for City facilities, parks,
              programs, and tangible property within set guidelines and procedures)
25-  5-28-    Amends §§ 13-1.1, 13-6A.2, 13-8.1, 13-8.4, 13-8.11, 13-10.3, Reporting
22   2025     Requirements Table I, repeals §§ 13-8.3, 13-8.5, relating to structures
              (addressing structures on, above, or below public sidewalks or malls)
25-  5-28-    Adds Article 68 to Chapter 6, Reporting Requirements Table I, relating to the
23   2025     climate resiliency fund (creating a fund to receive and expend moneys to
              support climate resiliency)
 
Ord. No. Approval Date Description
Ord. Approval Description
No.  Date
25-  5-28-    Amends § 42-1.12, relating to the collection and disposal of refuse (amending
24   2025     provisions related to the collection and disposal of refuse)
25-  5-28-    Amends § 8-10.33, relating to affordable housing (amending provisions related to
25   2025     affordable housing)
25-  6-24-    Repeals Article 4 of Chapter 3, relating to poundmasters (office of poundmaster
26   2025     was effectively discontinued)
              Amends §§ 43-6.2, Appendix 43-A, 43-10.3, 43-10.4, Appendix 43-C, repeals and
25-  6-24-    replaces § 43-6.6, relating to sewers, drainage, and cesspools (including
27   2025     accessory dwelling units in residential sewer service charge customer
              classification and updating surcharges)
25-  6-24-    Adds Article 18 to Chapter 34, relating to electronic amusement devices
28   2025     (providing strict regulation of electronic amusement devices to protect public
              health, safety, and welfare)
25-  6-24-    Amends §§ 18-4.7, 15-5.4, adds Article 33 to Chapter 41, relating to gambling
29   2025     (addressing public nuisances relating to gambling activities)
25-  6-24-    Adds Article 34 to Chapter 41, amends Reporting Requirements Table I, relating
30   2025     to real property (addressing private real property subject to a lease, rental
              agreement, relating to the residential landlord-tenant code)
25-  6-24-    Appropriations for the FY 2025-2026 Legislative Budget (Eff. 7-1-25) (Special)
31   2025
              Authorizing the issuance and sale of general obligation bonds and bond
25-  6-24-    anticipation notes of the City in a maximum principal amount equal to the
32   2025     aggregate of the amounts appropriated in the City’s Capital Budget ordinance for
              the Fiscal Year ending June 30, 2026, and specified therein to be financed from
              the proceeds of the sale of such bonds (Special)
25-  6-24-    Appropriations for FY 2025-2026 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
33   2025     Operating Budget (Eff. 7-1-25) (Special)
25-  6-24-    Appropriations for FY 2025-2026 Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
34   2025     Capital Budget (Eff. 7-1-25) (Special)
25-  6-24-    Amends § 6-55.5, relating to the transit construction mitigation fund
35   2025     (addressing the transit construction mitigation fund)
25-  6-24-    Amends §§ 2-9.1, 2-9.2, 2-41.2, 2-41.3, relating to ocean safety (reflecting the
36   2025     transfer of the extended lifeguard services program from the department of
              emergency services to the department of ocean safety)
25-  6-24-    Amends §§ 2-24.17, 6-10.1, 6-11.1, 6-20.1 through 6-20.4, 6-21.2, 6-44.3, 10-
37   2025     2.4, 10-2.10, 13-4.5, 13-6.1, 13-8.2, 13-8.4, 13-8.10, 13-11.6, 13-14.3,
              relating to fees, charges, and fines (addressing fees, charges, and fines)
25-  6-24-    Appropriations for the FY 2025-2026 Executive Operating Budget and Program (Eff.
38   2025     7-1-25) (Special)
25-  6-24-    Appropriations for the FY 2025-2026 Executive Capital Budget and Program (Eff.
39   2025     7-1-25) (Special)
 
 
 
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
I. Reporting Requirements for Executive Agencies
Reporting Body Report Subject Report Recipient Frequency/Due ROH Citation(s)
                                               Date
I. Reporting Requirements for Executive Agencies
Reporting Body                                         Report Subject                                                                Report Recipient     Frequency/Due Date                                                            ROH Citation(s)
Applicable Agency                                      Intergovernmental Agreements and Private Grant Agreements Placing Obligations Council              Annually, by September 30                                                     §
                                                       Upon the Agency                                                                                                                                                                  1-8.2(a)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                     Inspection limited                                                                                 1-17.4(c)
Applicable Agency                                      Sexual Harassment Investigation Findings and Results                          to certain parties   Upon receipt of an informal or formal complaint                               and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1-17.4(d)
Applicable Agency                                      Transfer of Funds Between Activities Under a Certain Threshold                City Clerk           Monthly, within 15 days after the end of the month                            §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-17.2(c)(1)
Applicable Agency                                      Transfers Between Characters of Expenditure Within the Same Activity Under a  City Clerk           Monthly, within 15 days after the end of the month                            §
                                                       Certain Threshold                                                                                                                                                                2-17.2(c)(2)
Applicable Agency                                      Transfers Between Characters of Expenditure Within the Same Activity for      City Clerk and       Monthly, within 15 days after the end of the month                            §
                                                       Transit Management Services                                                   Council                                                                                            2-17.2(c)(4)
Applicable Agency                                      Notice of Bid Results                                                         Council              Upon the agency’s decision not to proceed with a project after receipt of   §
                                                                                                                                                          bids that exceed project estimates                                            2-17.4(a)
Applicable Agency (Director)                           Age-Friendly City Program Compliance                                          Council              Annually; may be part of agency’s annual report required by Charter         §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-22.4(a)
Applicable Agency                                      Seals and Logotypes                                                           City Clerk           Within 30 days of adoption                                                    §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-31.1(a)
Applicable Agency (Responsible City Official)          Overt Video Monitoring of Public Activity                                     Council              Annually, no later than January 15                                            §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-32.3(b)(8)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
Applicable Agency                                      Bullying of Youth                                                             Mayor                Annually, no later than January 1                                             2-44.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (as enacted by Ord. 23-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1)
Applicable Agency                                      Periodic Review of Reporting Requirements                                     Council              Every five years, no later than January 31                                    §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-45.1
Applicable Agency (Appointing Authority)               Actions Related to Violations of Ethics Standards of Conduct                  Ethics Commission    Within 15 days after receiving an Ethics Commission advisory opinion and      §
                                                                                                                                                          recommendations                                                               3-6.4(e)
                                                       Pertinent and Necessary Reports Related to the Preparation of the Oahu        Oahu Metropolitan                                                                                  §
Applicable Agency (Officers and Department Heads)      Regional Transportation Plan or Other Planning Documents                      Planning             Upon request, in a timely and satisfactory manner                             4-2.2(a)
                                                                                                                                     Organization
                                                                                                                                     Council, applicable                                                                                §
Applicable Agency (Director)                           Preliminary Report on Proposed Improvement District                           neighborhood board   Upon request by Council resolution                                            14-10.1(a)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        and (b)
Applicable Agency (Director)                           Final Report on Proposed Improvement District                                 Council              Upon request by Council resolution                                            §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14-10.4(a)(9)
Applicable Agency (Director)                           Report on Improvement District Refunding                                      Council              Upon request by Council resolution                                            §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14-13.2(a)(1)
Applicable Agency (Law Enforcement Officer)            Motor Vehicle Accident                                                        Police Department    Within 24 hours after completing the accident investigation                   §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15-5.1(c)
                                                                                                                                     Emergency Services
Applicable Agency (to be Designated by the Mayor)      Automated External Defibrillators in City Buildings and Newly Constructed     Department,          Not specified                                                                 §
                                                       Buildings                                                                     Emergency Medical                                                                                  16-16.4
                                                                                                                                     Services Division
                                                                                                                                     Department of        Within three days after the start of the repair project and upon its          §
Applicable Agency                                      Emergency Repair Projects to Existing Public Utilities                        Planning and         completion                                                                    25-7.1(a)
                                                                                                                                     Permitting
Applicable Agency                                      Surplus Real Property                                                         Director of Budget   Upon determination that the real property is no longer desired or needed by   §
                                                                                                                                     and Fiscal Services  the agency for its own use                                                    37-1.2(a)
Applicable Agency                                      Leases to Providers of Housing or Human Services                              City Clerk           Following selection of a proposal                                             §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        38-3.4(d)
Budget and Fiscal Services (Director)                  Change Orders Exceeding a Certain Threshold                                   Council              Within 30 days of the approval of the change order or orders                  §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-4.2(c)(1)
Budget and Fiscal Services (Director)                  City-Financed Construction Project Delays                                     Council              Within 30 days of the completion of a project that was overdue by 90 days or  §
                                                                                                                                                          more                                                                          2-4.2(c)(2)
Budget and Fiscal Services (Director)                  City Fees and Charges Review with Recommendations                             Council              Annually, at the same time the annual executive operating and capital budgets §
                                                                                                                                                          are submitted                                                                 2-4.2(d)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
Budget and Fiscal Services (Director)                  Employer-Employee Contracts (Forwarded from Individual Agencies)              Council and City     Annually, within 30 days following the end of the fiscal year                 2-30.4(a) and
                                                                                                                                     Clerk                                                                                              §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-30.4(b)
Budget and Fiscal Services (Director)                  Seals and Logotypes                                                           Council              Annually, on or before January 1                                              §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-31.1(f)
Budget and Fiscal Services                             Special Duty Police Officer Fees                                              City Clerk           Annually, within 30 days after the first day of each fiscal year              §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6-44.3(c)
Budget and Fiscal Services (Director)                  Reserve for Fiscal Stability Fund Expenditures                                Council              Within 30 days of the expenditure of any Reserve for Fiscal Stability Fund    §
                                                                                                                                                          moneys                                                                        6-56.4(b)
Budget and Fiscal Services (Director)                  Acts and Doings of the Department, Other Matters or Information Regarding     Mayor                Annually, and at such other times as the Mayor may require                    §
                                                       Real Property Taxation                                                                                                                                                           8-1.3(10)
Budget and Fiscal Services (Director)                  Real Property Tax Assessment List                                             City Clerk           Annually, on or before January 31 preceding the tax year                      §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8-2.2
Budget and Fiscal Services (Director)                  Net Taxable Real Property Within the City                                     Council              Annually, on or before February 1 preceding the tax year                      §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8-11.1(e)
Budget and Fiscal Services (Director)                  Real Property Tax Settlements                                                 City Clerk           Annually, no later than 90 days following the close of the tax year           §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8-12.14(c)
Budget and Fiscal Services (Director)                  Suspension of Newsstand Permit Due to Hazardous Conditions                    Council              Upon suspension of the permit                                                 §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13-8.2(g)(3)
Budget and Fiscal Services                             Contracts Relating to the Use of the Ferry System Logo (Requested by the      City Clerk           Within 30 days of execution of the contract                                   §
                                                       Department of Transportation Services)                                                                                                                                           15B-10.6(b)
                                                                                                                                     The Special          By a date set in the ordinance establishing the district or in the written    §
Budget and Fiscal Services (Director)                  Special Improvement District Assessment Collection                            Improvement District agreement between the district board and the City                             28-3.4(f)
                                                                                                                                     Board
Budget and Fiscal Services (and Planning and           Affordable Rental Housing                                                     Council              Every three years, no later than September 30 of each third year              §
Permitting) (Directors)                                                                                                                                                                                                                 32-4.3
Budget and Fiscal Services (and Planning and           Post-Construction Grants and Applications                                     Council              Every three years, no later than September 30 of each third year              §
Permitting) (Directors)                                                                                                                                                                                                                 32-4.3
Budget and Fiscal Services (with Planning and          Pre-Construction Subsidies                                                    Council              Every three years, by September 30 of each year                               §
Permitting) (Directors)                                                                                                                                                                                                                 32-5.3
                                                                                                                                     Such agencies as the
Budget and Fiscal Services (Director)                  Inventory of Surplus Real Property                                            Director of Budget   As necessary, upon notification of surplus property from City agencies        §
                                                                                                                                     and Fiscal Services                                                                                37-1.2(b)
                                                                                                                                     shall determine
                                                                                                                                     Mayor, the
                                                                                                                                     neighborhood board
                                                                                                                                     of the district in
Budget and Fiscal Services (Director)                  Proposed Transfer of Surplus Real Property                                    which the subject    Per proposal, and at least 10 days before the transfer                        §
                                                                                                                                     property is                                                                                        37-1.2(c)
                                                                                                                                     situated, and any
                                                                                                                                     abutting property
                                                                                                                                     owners
Budget and Fiscal Services (Director)                  Bid to Lease or Rent City Property                                            City Clerk           Upon completion of the evaluation and selection process                       §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        38-2.6
Budget and Fiscal Services (Director)                  Leases of City Property to Private Developers                                 City Clerk           Upon completion of the evaluation and selection process                       §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        38-3.3(c)(2)
Community Services (Director)                          Grants in Aid Projects                                                        Council              Annually, within one month of the end of the fiscal year                      §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6-52.6
Community Services (Director)                          Enterprise Zones Status                                                       Council              Annually, by June 30                                                          §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        31-1.3(b)(2)
Corporation Counsel                                    Settlements Requiring Payments of $5,000 or Less                              Council              Quarterly, within 15 days after the end of each quarter                       §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-3.1(4)(A)
Corporation Counsel                                    Report of Decisions/Outcomes of Litigation                                    Mayor and Council    Upon the conclusion of the litigation                                         §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-3.1(5)(A)
Corporation Counsel                                    Pending City Litigation                                                       Mayor and Council    Annually, by January 15                                                       §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-3.1(5)(B)
Corporation Counsel                                    Settlement of Land Acquisitions and Eminent Domain Actions                    Council              Quarterly, within 15 days after the end of each quarter                       §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-3.1(8)
Corporation Counsel                                    Billings of Fees to Private Attorneys                                         Council              Prior to making payment                                                       §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-26.4(b)
Corporation Counsel                                    Cases Requiring Private Attorneys as Special Counsel under Charter §5-204.3  Council              Quarterly                                                                     §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-26.5
Customer Services (Officer or Employee)                Removal of Vehicle with Unknown Ownership                                     Director of Customer Immediately, if vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three §
                                                                                                                                     Services             days after the removal of the vehicle                                         15-13.9(c)
Department of Transportation Services (Director)       Outdoor Dining Services Program                                               Council              Annually, no later than September 1, 2026, and by September 1 of each year    §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13-20.3
Design and Construction (and Facility Maintenance,     Complete Streets—Compliance with Complete Streets Policy and Principles;                         Annually, by December 31; may be part of agency’s annual report required by §
Planning and Permitting, and Transportation Services)  Report of Agency’s Performance Under Measurable Performance Standards       Council              Charter                                                                       14-18.5
(Directors)
Enterprise Services (Director)                         Events Co-Promoted by the Department and/or Promoter                          Council              Annually, within 30 days of end of the fiscal year just ended                 §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        38-6.13
                                                       Revised 10-Year Integrated Solid Waste Management Plan and Interim Status     Council, State       Once every 10 years; an interim status report on the implementation of a      §
Environmental Services                                 Report                                                                        Department of Health revised plan shall be submitted five years after every submission of a        42-1.13
                                                                                                                                                          revised plan
Environmental Services                                 Sewer Service Charge Rate                                                     All Users of the     Annually                                                                      §
                                                                                                                                     Public Sewer System                                                                                43-6.3(c)
                                                                                                                                     Appropriate
                                                                                                                                     Department of
                                                                                                                                     Facility Maintenance
Facility Maintenance (Automotive Equipment Service                                                                                   Division Chief,                                                                                    §
Division)                                              Automotive Equipment, Stock Accidents or Apparent Abuse                       Chief Engineer of    As necessary                                                                  2-8.1(a)(5)
                                                                                                                                     the Department of
                                                                                                                                     Facility
                                                                                                                                     Maintenance, and
                                                                                                                                     Mayor
                                                                                                                                     Chief Engineer of
Facility Maintenance (Automotive Equipment Service     Affairs of the Division, Including Automotive Equipment Work Done, Equipment  the Department of    Quarterly, not later than the 15th day following close of each quarter        §
Division)                                              and Stock, Purchases and Disposal of Equipment                                Facility Maintenance                                                                               2-8.1(a)(9)
                                                                                                                                     and Council
Facility Maintenance (Chief Engineer)                  Levy of Annual Assessments for Maintenance Districts                          Council              At least 90 days before the end of the preceding assessment year              §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14-16.9(a)
Facility Maintenance (and Design and Construction,     Complete Streets—Compliance with Complete Streets Policy and Principles;                         Annually, by December 31; may be part of agency’s annual report required by §
Planning and Permitting, and Transportation Services)  Report of Agency’s Performance Under Measurable Performance Standards       Council              Charter                                                                       14-18.5
(Directors)
Facility Maintenance (Chief Engineer)                  Proposed Community Facilities District Evaluation                             Council              Upon request, at least 10 days before the public hearing on the proposed      §
                                                                                                                                                          district                                                                      27-2.4
Facility Maintenance (Chief Engineer)                  Status of City-Owned Stream Inspections                                       Public (Post on the  Annually                                                                      §
                                                                                                                                     Department Website)                                                                                40-2.3(c)
Fire (Chief)                                           Fire Losses                                                                   Mayor                Periodically                                                                  §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-11.1(1)
Fire (Chief, as the Head of the Authority Having       Appeals Filed for Final Building Fire and Life Safety Evaluation Score and    Council              Annually                                                                      §
Jurisdiction)                                          the Resulting Fire Safety Requirements for the Building                                                                                                                          20-1.1(15)
Managing Director                                      Age-Friendly City Program Efforts                                             Public               Not specified                                                                 §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-22.4(b)
Mayor                                                  Absence of the Mayor                                                          Council and City     Before any anticipated absence and as soon as is practicable due to an        §
                                                                                                                                     Clerk                unanticipated emergency                                                       1-7.10
Mayor                                                  Creation of Temporary Positions                                               Council              As position is needed due to an unforeseen or emergency circumstance          §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-17.2(a)
Mayor                                                  Temporary Transfers of Positions                                              City Clerk           Quarterly                                                                     §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-17.2(b)(1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
Mayor                                                  Line-Item Budget Details                                                      Council              Annually, at the same time as submittal of annual executive budget to the     2-18.6(a) and
                                                                                                                                                          Council                                                                       §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-18.6(b)
Mayor                                                  Vacant Positions in the Executive Branch                                      Council              Annually, within five days of submittal of annual executive budget to the     §
                                                                                                                                                          Council                                                                       2-18.7
Mayor (Mayor’s Designated Volunteer Services Program Volunteer Services Program                                                    Council              Annually                                                                      §
Coordinator)                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2-27.3(c)(7)
Mayor (Mayor’s Designated Arts Coordinator)          City Art Inspections and Inventories Conducted                                City Clerk           Biennially                                                                    §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3-2.8(a)(3)
Mayor (Mayor’s Designated Arts Coordinator)          City Art Inspection, Inventory, and Maintenance Program and Funding           Mayor and Council    Annually, by March 1                                                          §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3-2.8(b)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                     Member, Chair of the                                                                               3-9.6(f),
Mayor                                                  Notice of Removal or Conditional Retention of a Board, Commission, or         Board, Commission,   Upon decision not to retain the member unconditionally                        §
                                                       Committee Member                                                              or Committee, and                                                                                  3-9.6g), and
                                                                                                                                     Council                                                                                            §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3-9.6(j)
                                                       Recommendations Related to Hawaii or National Registers of Historic Places    State Historic       Within 15 days after receiving evaluation report from the Oahu Historic       §
Mayor                                                  Nominations                                                                   Preservation Officer Preservation Commission related to nominations to Hawaii or National Register 3-10.9(e)
                                                                                                                                                          of Historic Places
Mayor                                                  Clean Water and Natural Lands Fund                                            Council              Annually, within 15 days of submittal of annual executive budget documents to §
                                                                                                                                                          the Council                                                                   6-62.4
Mayor                                                  Affordable Housing Fund                                                       Council              Annually, within 15 days of submittal of annual executive budget documents to §
                                                                                                                                                          the Council                                                                   6-63.4
Mayor                                                  Climate Resiliency Fund                                                       Council              Annually, within 15 calendar days after submittal of the annual executive     §
                                                                                                                                                          budget documents to the Council                                               6-68.4
Mayor                                                  Acts, Doings, and Administration of the Department of Budget and Fiscal       Council              Annually, within 30 days of receipt from the Department of Budget and Fiscal  §
                                                       Services, Other Matters or Information Regarding Real Property Taxation                            Services                                                                      8-1.3(10)
Mayor                                                  Activities of the City in Promoting the Expansion of Child Care Services      City Clerk           Annually, no later than 180 days after the close of the fiscal year; part of  §
                                                                                                                                                          the annual report required by Charter §13-104                                11-1.1(13)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
Mayor                                                  Planning Commission’s Recommendations Re Applications for Establishing or   Council              Per proposal, within 30 days of receipt from the Planning Commission          21-2.70(b)(1)(A) and
                                                       Amending Special District, Amending LUO, or Zone Changes                                                                                                                         §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        21-2.70(b)(1)(C)
Mayor                                                  Inventory of Official Names of Parks, Sites, Facilities, and Memorials        Municipal Reference  Updated annually                                                              §
                                                       (including statues and busts)                                                 and Records Center                                                                                 22-9.6
Office of Climate Change, Sustainability and           Long-Term Disaster Recovery Plan                                              Mayor and Council    Within 60 days following the end of the fiscal year ending June 30, 2022;     §
Resiliency                                                                                                                                                must be reviewed annually and updated every five years thereafter             2-10.11
Office of Climate Change, Sustainability and           Progress in Meeting Emissions Reductions Targets and Implementing Strategies                                                                                                     §
Resiliency                                             Identified in the Climate Action Plan                                         Council              Annually; may be included in the annual sustainability report                 2-10.12(c)(1)
                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
Office of Climate Change, Sustainability and                                                                                                              Within 120 days following the end of the year the climate action plan is      2-10.12(c)(2)
Resiliency                                             Climate Action Plan Update                                                    Council              updated (updated every five years, starting no later than 2025)               and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-10.12(c)(3)
Office of Climate Change, Sustainability and           Compliance with the One Water Climate Resiliency Policy                       Council              Annually, within 120 days following the end of each calendar year; may be     §
Resiliency                                                                                                                                                included in the annual sustainability report                                  2-10.13(b)(7)
Office of Climate Change, Sustainability and           Visitor Industry Sustainability Progress                                      Not Specified        Annually, within 120 days following the end of each calendar year; may be     §
Resiliency                                                                                                                                                included in the annual sustainability report                                  2-10.14(a)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-10.15 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (and §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-10.3,
Office of Climate Change, Sustainability and           Sustainability Report (Energy Usage, City Facilities’ Benchmarked Data, WateMayor and Council    Annually                                                                      §
Resiliency                                             Usage, etc.)                                                                                                                                                                     2-10.4(c),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-10.6, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-10.10(b)(6))
Parks and Recreation (Director)                        Park Land Acquisitions                                                        Council              Prior to inclusion of funding for acquisition in the executive capital budget §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-18.8(a)
                                                                                                                                     All Duly Constituted                                                                               §
Parks and Recreation (Director)                        Proposed Fees at Recreational Facilities                                      Park Advisory        Before establishing the fees                                                  10-2.9(a)
                                                                                                                                     Organizations
Planning and Permitting (Director)                     Council-Initiated Proposals to Revise or Amend the General Plan, Development  Planning Commission  Per proposal, within 270 days of the adoption of the Council resolution       §
                                                       Plan, or Zoning Ordinances                                                                         initiating the proposal                                                       2-24.4(a)
Planning and Permitting (Director)                     Council-Initiated Proposals to Revise or Amend the Subdivision Ordinance      Council              Per proposal, within 270 days of the adoption of the Council resolution       §
                                                                                                                                                          initiating the proposal                                                       2-24.4(b)
Planning and Permitting (Director)                     Work of the Department, Including a Summary of Recommended Amendments to the  Mayor                Annually                                                                      §
                                                       Building Code and Other Related Ordinances During Preceding Year                                                                                                                 2-24.16(b)(1)
Planning and Permitting (Director)                     Any Subject                                                                   Mayor                Upon request                                                                  §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-24.16(b)(1)
Planning and Permitting                                Administrative Deletion of any Public Infrastructure Map Symbol               Council              Upon deletion                                                                 §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4-8.2(b)
Planning and Permitting                                Recommendations Related to Council-Initiated Proposed Revisions to the Public Council              Within 75 days following introduction of the Council- proposed resolution     §
                                                       Infrastructure Map                                                                                                                                                               4-8.2(d)
                                                                                                                                     Council and
                                                                                                                                     Neighborhood Board                                                                                 §
Planning and Permitting (or Design and Construction)   Preliminary Report on Proposed Improvement District                           (s) for the area     Upon request by Council resolution                                            14-10.1(a) and
(Director)                                                                                                                           included within the                                                                                §
                                                                                                                                     proposed improvement                                                                               14-10.1(b)
                                                                                                                                     district
Planning and Permitting (or Design and Construction)   Final Report on Proposed Improvement District                                 Council              Upon request by Council resolution                                            §
(Director)                                                                                                                                                                                                                              14-10.4(a)
Planning and Permitting (or Design and Construction)   Report on Improvement District Refunding                                      Council              Upon request by Council resolution                                            §
(Director)                                                                                                                                                                                                                              14-13.2
Planning and Permitting (and Design and Construction,  Complete Streets- Compliance with Complete Streets Policy and Principles;                          Annually, by December 31; may be part of agency’s annual report required by §
Facility Maintenance, and Transportation Services)     Annual Reports of Agency’s Performance Under Measurable Performance StandardCouncil              Charter                                                                       14-18.5
(Directors)
                                                                                                                                     State Department of                                                                                §
Planning and Permitting (Building Official)            Notice of Order Issued to Contractors                                         Commerce and         Upon issuance of a Notice of Order                                            16-10.4(d)
                                                                                                                                     Consumer Affairs
Planning and Permitting (Director)                     Notice of Violation with an Order to Stop Work                                Chief of Police      Concurrently with the issuance of the notice to the responsible person, firm, §
                                                                                                                                                          or corporation                                                                18A-4.2(c)
Planning and Permitting (Director)                     Application for a Plan Review Use                                             Council              Within 90 days after Director’s acceptance of completed application         §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        21-2.40-2(c)(7)
                                                       Application for Establishment of or Amendment to a Special District (Major),                       Within 90 days after Director’s acceptance of completed application, if not §
Planning and Permitting (Director)                     a Zone Change, or a Major Permit Regarding Downtown Heights in excess of 350  Planning Commission  denied                                                                        21-2.40-2(c)(8)
                                                       ft.
                                                       Status of Compliance with Unilateral Agreement Conditions— Conditional Zoning                                                                                                  §
Planning and Permitting (Director)                     Agreements                                                                    Council              Annually                                                                      21-2.80(e)(3)
                                                        
Planning and Permitting (Director)                     Planned Development- Resort, -Apartment, -Transit, and Interim Transit        Council              Per proposal, upon conclusion of the public hearing and not more than 80 days §
                                                       Projects.                                                                                          after acceptance of the application                                           21-2.110-2(e)
Planning and Permitting (Director)                     Design Guidebook for the Waikiki Special District                             Council              Before making the guidebook or any revisions thereof available to the public  §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        21-9.80-4
Planning and Permitting (Director)                     Proposed Extensions for a Planned Development-Resort or Planned Development-  Council              Per proposal, upon request by the applicant                                   §
                                                       Apartment Project                                                                                                                                                                21-9.80-4(d)(4)(E)(ii)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
Planning and Permitting (Director)                     Proposed Extensions for an Interim Planned Development-Transit Project        Council              Per proposal, upon request by the applicant                                   21-9.100-5(i)(2)(B) and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        21-9.100-5(i)(4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        21-9.100-10(h)(2)(B)
Planning and Permitting (Director)                     Proposed Extensions for a Planned Development- Transit Project                Council              Per proposal, upon request by the applicant                                   and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        21-9.100-10(h)(2)(E)
                                                                                                                                     State Land Use
                                                                                                                                     Commission and State
Planning and Permitting (Director)                     State Land Use District Boundary Amendment Petition and Public Hearing Notice Department of        Per petition                                                                  §
                                                                                                                                     Business, Economic                                                                                 23-1.4(a)
                                                                                                                                     Development, and
                                                                                                                                     Tourism
                                                                                                                                     State Land Use
                                                                                                                                     Commission and State
Planning and Permitting (Director)                     State Land Use District Boundary Amendment Approvals                          Department of        Within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance enacting the boundary   §
                                                                                                                                     Business, Economic   amendment                                                                     23-1.9
                                                                                                                                     Development, and
                                                                                                                                     Tourism
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-1.2(d) (Chapter 24,
Planning and Permitting                                Consistency of Proposed Development Plan Amendment with the General Plan and  Council (through the Per proposal                                                                  Article 1, applies only
                                                       the applicable Development Plan                                               Planning Commission)                                                                               to the Northwest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Hawaiian Islands
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Development Plan Area)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-1.2(e)
                                                       Consistency of Proposed Amendment to Development Plan Common Provisions or    Council (through the                                                                               (Chapter 24, Article 1,
Planning and Permitting                                Special Provisions of any Development Plan with the General Plan and Other    Planning Commission) Per proposal                                                                  applies only to the
                                                       Development Plan Provisions                                                                                                                                                      Northwest Hawaiian
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Islands Development
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Plan Area)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-1.9(c)(1)
                                                                                                                                     Line Departments and                                                                               (Chapter 24, Article 1,
Planning and Permitting                                Public Facility Proposal Sequencing Guidelines                                Council              Annually, by July 15 (for following year’s CIP budget)                      applies only to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Northwest Hawaiian
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Islands Development
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Plan Area)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-1.12(c)(5)(C)
                                                       Proposed Amendments to Development Plans and Approvals of Amendment                                                                                                              (Chapter 24, Article 1,
Planning and Permitting (Director)                     Withdrawals                                                                   Council              Annually, not later than July 1                                               applies only to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Northwest Hawaiian
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Islands Development
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Plan Area)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-1.12(c)(6)(A)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (Chapter 24, Article 1,
Planning and Permitting (Director)                     Development Plan Amendment Recommendations (Independent Consideration)        Planning Commission  Per proposal, within 90 days of the date of filing of a completed application applies only to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Northwest Hawaiian
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Islands Development
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Plan Area)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-1.13(a)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (Chapter 24, Article 1,
Planning and Permitting (Director)                     Status of Development Plans                                                   Council              Annually, by September 1                                                      applies only to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Northwest Hawaiian
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Islands Development
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Plan Area)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-1.13(b)
                                                       Conditions of the City and the City’s Regulatory System and Capital                                                                                                            (Chapter 24, Article 1,
Planning and Permitting (Director)                     Improvement Program                                                           Council              Biennially (oddyears), byDecember31                                           applies only to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Northwest Hawaiian
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Islands Development
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Plan Area)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-2.8,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-3.8,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-4.9,
                                                       Review of Capital Improvement Program Projects for Compliance with the                                                                                                           §
Planning and Permitting (with Budget and Fiscal        General Plan, Development Plans, Special Area Plan Provisions, and Functional Council              Annually                                                                      24-5.9,
Services) (Directors)                                  Plans                                                                                                                                                                            §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-6.8,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-7.9,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-8.8, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-9.8
Planning and Permitting                                Comprehensive Review of the Primary Urban Center Development Plan             Council              Every 10 years after May 2, 2025                                              §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-2.9(a)
Planning and Permitting                                City’s Achievements and Progress in Fulfilling the Vision of the Primary    Council              Biennially; as part of the biennial report required by Charter § 6-1510.4    §
                                                       Urban Center Development Plan                                                                                                                                                    24-2.11
Planning and Permitting                                Comprehensive Review of the Ewa Development Plan                              Council              Every five years after the plan’s adoption                                  §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-3.9(a)
Planning and Permitting                                Comprehensive Review of the East Honolulu Development Plan                    Council              Every five years after July 27, 1999                                          §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-4.10(a)
Planning and Permitting                                City’s Achievements and Progress in Fulfilling the Vision of the East       Council              Biennially; as part of the biennial report required by Charter § 6-1510.4    §
                                                       Honolulu Development Plan                                                                                                                                                        24-4.11
Planning and Permitting                                Comprehensive Review of the Central Oahu Sustainable Communities Plan         Council              Every five years after February 18, 2003                                      §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-5.10(a)
Planning and Permitting                                City’s Achievements and Progress in Fulfilling the Vision of the Central OahCouncil              Biennially; as part of the biennial report required by Charter § 6-1510.4    §
                                                       Sustainable Communities Plan                                                                                                                                                     24-5.11
Planning and Permitting                                Comprehensive Review of the Koolau Poko Sustainable Communities Plan          Council              Every five years after the plan’s adoption                                  §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-6.9(a)
Planning and Permitting                                Comprehensive Review of the Koolau Loa Sustainable Communities Plan           Council              Every five years after February 14, 2000                                      §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-7.10(a)
Planning and Permitting                                City’s Achievements and Progress in Fulfilling the Vision of the Koolau Loa Council              Biennially; as part of the biennial report required by Charter § 6-1510.4    §
                                                       Sustainable Communities Plan                                                                                                                                                     24-7.11
Planning and Permitting                                Comprehensive Review of the North Shore Sustainable Communities Plan          Council              Every five years after the plan’s adoption                                  §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-8.9(a)
Planning and Permitting                                Comprehensive Review of the Waianae Sustainable Communities Plan              Council              Every five years after the plan’s adoption                                  §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24-9.9
                                                                                                                                                          Per special management area use permit application, within 20 working days of
Planning and Permitting                                Special Management Area Use Permit Findings and Recommendations               Council              the close of the public hearing or within 10 working days of either the       §
                                                                                                                                                          issuance of the finding of no significant impact or the acceptance of a final 25-5.4
                                                                                                                                                          environmental impact statement
Planning and Permitting                                Involuntary Revocation or Modification of a Special Management Area Use       Council              Within 30 calendar days of the close of the public hearing                    §
                                                       Permit Initiated by the Department                                                                                                                                               25-9.6(c)(6)
Planning and Permitting                                Council-Initiated Revocation or Modification of a Special Management Area Use Council              Within 30 calendar days of the close of the public hearing                    §
                                                       Permit                                                                                                                                                                           25-9.6(d)(6)
Planning and Permitting (and Budget and Fiscal         Post-Construction Grants and Applications                                     Council              Every three years, no later than September 30 of each third year              §
Services) (Directors)                                                                                                                                                                                                                   32-4.3
Planning and Permitting (with Budget and Fiscal        Pre-Construction Subsidies                                                    Council              Every three years, by September 30 of each third year                         §
Services) (Directors)                                                                                                                                                                                                                   32-5.3
Police                                                 Dog Bite Incidents (Forwarded From Medical Service Providers and              Animal Control       Per incident                                                                  §
                                                       Veterinarians)                                                                Contractor                                                                                         12-7.8(c)
Police                                                 Statistical Information on the Number and Circumstances of Traffic Accidents  Not specified (HPD   Annually or at more frequent intervals                                        §
                                                                                                                                     “shall publish”)                                                                               15-5.4
                                                                                                                                     Department of                                                                                      §
Police (Chief)                                         Accident Reports                                                              Transportation       Within 48 hours of filing accident reports                                    15-5.5
                                                                                                                                     Services
Police (Officer)                                       Dangerous Vehicles Near a Preschool, Kindergarten, Elementary, Intermediate,  Department of        Upon determination of the dangerous vehicle in the prohibited location        §
                                                       Middle, Secondary, or High School                                             Customer Services                                                                                  15-13.15(b)
Police                                                 Vehicles with Unknown Owners Removed from Property                            Department of Budget In the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of      §
                                                                                                                                     and Fiscal Services  three days                                                                    15A-5.6(e)
Police (Officer Assigned to Provide Escort Service for Damage Sustained During Building Relocation                                   The Building         Upon any damage to property resulting from the moving of any building or      §
Building Relocation)                                                                                                                 Official             structure                                                                     16-2.6(b)
Police (Officer at the Scene)                          False Alarm                                                                   Permittee or alarm   Upon the determination that the activated alarm system was a false alarm      §
                                                                                                                                     user                                                                                               40-9.4(b)
Police (Chief)                                         Agent’s inspection of private real property for nuisance                    Council              Annually by January _ of each year                                            §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        41-34.5
Prosecuting Attorney                                   Copy of the Adopted Seal and Motto                                            City Clerk           Upon adoption of seal and motto                                               §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1-13.2
Transportation Services (Director)                     Revisions to the Bikeway System and Master Plan                               Council              At least every five years                                                     §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2-12.1(4)
Transportation Services (and Design and Construction,  Complete Streets—Compliance with Complete Streets Policy and Principles;                         Annually, by December 31; may be part of agency’s annual report required by §
Facility Maintenance, and Planning and Permitting)     Annual Reports of Agency’s Performance Under Measurable Performance StandardCouncil              Charter                                                                       14-18.5
(Directors)
                                                                                                                                     City Clerk and       Upon the amendment of an existing schedule or adoption of an additional       §
Transportation Services (Director)                     Traffic Control Devices Schedule                                              Publish in a Daily   schedule                                                                      15-3.1(a)(2)(C) and §
                                                                                                                                     Newspaper                                                                                          15-3.1(c)
                                                                                                                                                          No less than 30 days before the assignment of the first stall in a City-
Transportation Services (Director)                     Car-Sharing Report on Department’s Efforts Demonstrating Interaction and    Council              controlled public off-street parking facility reserved for a car-sharing      §
                                                       Solicitation of Community Input                                                                    organization or the assignment of the first on-street parking stall reserved  15-28.1(c)
                                                                                                                                                          for such organization, whichever occurs first
Transportation Services (Director)                     Car-Sharing Program                                                           Council              Annually, no later than 120 days after the end of the calendar year           §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15-28.4(d)
Transportation Services (Director)                     Restricted Parking Zone (RPZ) Program                                         Council              Upon the establishment, expansion, reduction, modification, or dissolution of §
                                                                                                                                                          an existing RPZ                                                               15-30.3(d)(2)(A)
Transportation Services                                Public Transit Promotional or Demonstration Project                           Council              Within 60 days of the completion of the promotional or demonstration project  §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15B-2.6(c)
Transportation Services                                Student Transit Pass Program                                                  Council              Annually, no later than 60 days after the scheduled end of the academic       §
                                                                                                                                                          program year                                                                  15B-2.13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
(Added by Ord. 23-7; Am. Ords. 24-6, 24-17, 24-23, 25-16, 25-17, 25-19, 25-22,
25-23, 25-30)
 
II. Reporting Requirements for Legislative Agencies
Reporting Body Report Subject Report          Frequency/Due   ROH Citation(s)
                              Recipient       Date
                                              Within 10
               Sexual                         working days of
               Harassment     Inspection      receipt of an   §
Council        Investigation  Limited to      informal or     1-17.5(c) and §
               Findings and   Certain Parties formal          1-17.5(d)
               Results                        complaint,
                                              unless extended
               Actions                        Within 15 days
               Related to                     after receiving
               Violations of  Ethics          an Ethics       §
Council        Ethics         Commission      Commission      3-6.4(e)
               Standards of                   advisory
               Conduct                        opinion and
                                              recommendations
               Tax Rate or    Director of     Before the      §
Council        Rates Set for  Budget and      commencement of 8-11.1(d)
               a Tax Year     Fiscal Services the tax year
                                              Upon
                                              determination
                                              that real
                                              property under
               Surplus Real   Director of     Council         §
Council        Property       Budget and      jurisdiction or 37-1.2(a)
                              Fiscal Services control is no
                                              longer desired
                                              or needed by
                                              the agency for
                                              its own use
Office of      New Reporting                  Annually, no    §
Council        Requirements   Council         later than May  4-3.5
Services       Added                          1
 
(Added by Ord. 23-7; Am. Ord. 24-23)
III. Reporting Requirements for Boards, Commissions, and Committees
Reporting Body Report Subject Report Recipient Frequency/Due ROH Citation(s)
                                               Date
III. Reporting Requirements for Boards, Commissions, and Committees
Reporting                                           Report                                                                               ROH
Body         Report Subject                         Recipient   Frequency/Due Date                                                       Citation
                                                                                                                                         (s)
Applicable                                                                                                                               §
Board,       Expiration of a Member’s Appointed   Mayor and   No later than 90 days before the expiration of a member’s appointed ter3-9.2(b)
Commission,  Term                                   Council                                                                              (1)
or Committee
                                                    Mayor; may
                                                    also be
                                                    provided to                                                                          §
                                                    director or                                                                          3-9.6
Applicable                                          agency head                                                                          (a);
Board,       Notice of Member’s Failure to Attend of the      Upon board member’s failure to attend scheduled meetings or failure to §
Commission,  Meetings                               agency to   provide to the chair a certification of participation in Sunshine Law    3-9.6
or Committee                                        which the   training                                                                 (b); and
(Chair)                                             Board,                                                                               §
                                                    Commission,                                                                          3-9.6(h)
                                                    or
                                                    Committee
                                                    is Attached
Applicable                                                      No later than January 31 of each calendar year the board or commission   §
Board or     Review of City Boards and Commissions  Council     is scheduled for review pursuant to §                                   3-15.4
Commission                                                      3-15.3                                                                   (a)
                                                    Appropriate                                                                          §
Ethics       Suspected Violations of Law            Law         As appropriate                                                           3-13.7
Commission                                          Enforcement                                                                          (5)
                                                    Authorities
Grants in                                                                                                                                §
Aid Advisory Grants in Aid Funding Recommendations  Council     Annually, by March4                                                      6-52.4
Commission                                                                                                                               (c)
Oahu                                                                                                                                     §
Historic     State of Historic Preservation in the  Not         Annually                                                                 3-10.7
Preservation City                                   Specified                                                                            (16)
Commission
Oahu         Evaluation of Hawaii or National                                                                                            §
Historic     Registers of Historic Places           Mayor       Within 45 days after receiving notice from the State historic            3-10.9
Preservation Nominations                                        preservation officer                                                     (e)
Commission
             Recommendations forCouncil-Initiated   Council     Per proposal, within 30 days of the close of the public hearing; Mayor   §
Planning     Proposals to Revise or Amend the       (through    to submit to the Council within 30 days of receipt from the Planning     2-24.5
Commission   General Plan, Any Development Plan, or the Mayor)  Commission                                                               (b)
             a Zoning Ordinance
                                                                                                                                         §
                                                                                                                                         21-2.70
             Recommendations forApplications for    Council                                                                              (b)(1)
Planning     Establishing or Amending a Special     (through    Per proposal; Mayor to submit to the Council within 30 days of receipt   (A) and
Commission   District, amending the Land Use        the Mayor)  from the Planning Commission                                             §
             Ordinance, or a Zone Change                                                                                                 21-2.70
                                                                                                                                         (b)(1)
                                                                                                                                         (C)
             Findings and Recommendations for       Council     Per proposal; annual amendment review to be transmitted in time to be    §
Planning     Proposed Amendments to Development     (through    reviewed by the Council by October 1 of the year covered by that annual  24-1.12
Commission   Plans                                  the Mayor)  amendment review. (Chapter 24, Article 1, applies only to the Northwest  (c)(5)
                                                                Hawaiian Islands Development Plan Area.)                                 (D)
Rate                                                Appointing  When the commission finds that a member cannot serve temporarily because §
Commission   Member’s Temporary Inability to ServeAuthority   of illness, incapacity, or absence                                       3-11.4
                                                                                                                                         (a)
                                                    Mayor,
Real                                                Council,
Property Tax                                        and                                                                                  §
Boards of    Work of the Boards of Review           Director of Annually, after completion of tax appeals for the current year           8-12.7
Review                                              Budget and                                                                           (f)
                                                    Fiscal
                                                    Services
Salary       Recommended Salaries and Findings of   Mayor and   Annually (per Charter § 3-122), no later than the first day of May      §
Commission   Fact                                   Council                                                                              5-3.2
Special
Assessment   Anticipated Surplus or Deficit from                                                                                         §
District     Previous Special Assessment Year and   Council     Annually per date set in ordinance, or if none set, 30 days prior to     28-3.2
Association  Any Proposed New Rate or Method of                 start of new assessment year.                                            (a)
Board of     Special Assessment
Directors
 
(Added by Ord. 23-7; Am. Ord. 25-14)
 
IV. Reporting Requirements for Semi-Autonomous Agencies
               Report        Report                                               ROH
Reporting Body Subject       Recipient Frequency/Due Date                         Citation
                                                                                  (s)
Honolulu       HART Costs,
Authority for  Accounting,                                                        §
Rapid          Capital       Mayor and Annually, as required by Charter § 17-104 6-60.2
Transportation Improvements, Council   (k)                                        (c)
(Board of      and Invoices.
Directors)
Honolulu                     Director
Authority for  Surplus Real  of Budget Upon determination that the real property  §
Rapid          Property      and       is no longer desired or needed by the      37-1.2
Transportation               Fiscal    agency for its own use                     (a)
                             Services
 
(Added by Ord. 23-7)
 
V. Reporting Requirements for City Contractors
Reporting Body Report Subject  Report        Frequency/Due    ROH Citation(s)
                               Recipient     Date
               Activities and
               Operations      Department of Annually, within
Animal Control Relating to the Customer      one month after  §
Contractor     Impounding of   Services and  the end of the   3-5.4
               Stray Dogs and  Council       fiscal year
               Cats
               Activities and
               Operations                    Annually, within
Animal Control Relating to the Mayor and     one month after  §
Contractor     Enforcement of  Council       the end of the   12-2.11
               Animal                        fiscal year
               Nuisances
Animal Control Dangerous Dog   Not specified Per incident     §
Contractor     Determination                                  12-7.8(c)
 
(Added by Ord. 23-7)
